Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, Transmitted to Congress, With the Annual Message of the President, December 6, 1880 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1880)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1880).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

(Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1880)

Title pagePapers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1880,

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 28, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

(Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1880)Contents

Message of the President of the United States

Foreign relations

List of papers, with their subjects

Circulars (Documents 1-5)

Correspondence Argentine Republic (Documents 6-26)

Austria-Hungary (Documents 27-48)

Belgium (Documents 49-56)Correspondence with the Belgian Legation in Washington. (Documents 57-60)

Bolivia (Documents 61-69)

Brazil (Documents 70-83)Correspondence with the Brazilian Legation in Washington. (Documents 84-95)

Central America (Documents 96-106)

Chili (Documents 107-122)Correspondence with the Chilian Legation in Washington. (Documents 123-126)

China (Documents 127-183)Correspondence with the Chinese Legation in Washington. (Documents 184-193)

Colombia (Documents 194-212)Correspondence with the Colombian Legation in Washington. (Documents 213-218)

Denmark (Documents 219-224)

France (Documents 225-242)Correspondence with the French Legation in Washington. (Documents 243-254)

Germany (Documents 255-292)Correspondence with the German Legation in Washington. (Documents 293-296)

Great Britain (Documents 297-311)Correspondence with the British Legation in Washington. (Documents 312-360)

Correspondence with the Government of Great Britain in regard to the Alleged Outrage upon American Fishermen at Fortune Bay, Newfoundland. (Documents 361-376)

Hawaii (Documents 377-390)

Hayti (Documents 391-410)

Italy (Documents 411-418)

Japan (Documents 419-438)

Liberia (Documents 439-448)

Mexico (Documents 449-489)Correspondence with the Mexican Legation in Washington. (Documents 490-503)

Morocco (Documents 504-512)

The Netherlands (Documents 513-517)Correspondence with the legation of the Netherlands in Washington. (Documents 518-521)

Peru (Documents 522-537)Correspondence with the Peruvian Legation in the United States. (Documents 538-538)

Portugal (Documents 539-546)

Russia (Documents 547-568)Correspondence with the Russian Legation in Washington. (Documents 569-572)

Spain (Documents 573-584)Correspondence with the Spanish Legation in Washington. (Documents 585-588)

Sweden and Norway (Documents 589-594)Correspondence with the Swedish Legation in Washington. (Documents 595-596)

Switzerland (Documents 597-605)

Turkish EmpireI—Turkey. (Documents 606-628)

II.—Egypt. (Documents 629-653)

III—Tunis. (Documents 654-654)

Uruguay (Documents 655-655)

Venezuela (Documents 656-667)

Alphabetical Index

Message of the President of the United States Message of the President of the United States

Fellow-Citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives:

I congratulate you on the continued and increasing prosperity of our country. By the favor of Divine Providence we have been blessed, during the past year, with health, with abundant harvests, with profitable employment for all our people, and with contentment at home, and with peace and friendship with other nations. The occurrence of the twenty-fourth election of Chief Magistrate has afforded another opportunity to the people of the United States to exhibit to the world a significant example of the peaceful and safe transmission of the power and authority of government from the public servants whose terms of office are about to expire, to their newly chosen successors. This example cannot fail to impress profoundly thoughtful people of other countries with the advantages which republican institutions afford. The immediate, general, and cheerful acquiescence of all good citizens in the result of the election, gives gratifying assurance to our country, and to its Mends throughout the world, that a government based on the free consent of an intelligent and patriotic people possesses elements of strength, stability, and permanency not found in any other form of government.

Continued opposition to the full and tree enjoyment of the rights of citizenship, conferred upon the colored people by the recent amendments to the Constitution, still prevails in several of the late slave-holding States. It has, perhaps, not been manifested in the recent election to any large extent in acts of violence or intimidation. It has, however, by fraudulent practices in connection with the ballots, with the regulations as to the places and manner of voting, and with counting, returning, and canvassing the votes cast, been successful in defeating the exercise of the right preservative of all rights—the right of suffrage—which the Constitution expressly confers upon our enfranchised citizens.

It is the desire of the good people of the whole country that sectionalism as a factor in our politics should disappear. They prefer that no section of the country should be united in solid opposition to any other section. The disposition to refuse a prompt and hearty obedience to the equal-rights amendments to the Constitution is all that now stands in the way of a complete obliteration of sectional lines in our political contests. As long as either of these amendments is flagrantly violated or disregarded, it is safe to assume that the people who placed them in the Constitution, as embodying the legitimate results of the war for the Union, and who believe them to be wise and necessary, will continue to act together, and to insist that they shall be obeyed. The paramount question still is as to the enjoyment of the right by every American citizen who has the requisite qualifications to freely cast his vote and to have it honestly counted. With this question rightly settled, the country will be relieved of the contentions of the past; bygones will indeed be bygones; and political and party issues, with respect to economy and efficiency of administration, internal improvements, the tariff, domestic taxation, education, finance, and other important subjects, will then receive their full share of attention; but resistance to and nullification of the results of the war will unite together in resolute purpose for their support all, who maintain the authority of the government and the perpetuity of the Union, and who adequately appreciate the value of the victory achieved. This determination proceeds from no hostile sentiment or feeling to any part of the people of our country or to any of their interests. The inviolability of the amendments rests upon the fundamental principle of our government. They are the solemn expression of the will of the people of the United States.

The sentiment that the constitutional rights of all our citizens must be maintained, does not grow weaker. It will continue to control the government of the country. Happily, the history of the late election shows that in many parts of the country where opposition to the fifteenth amendment has heretofore prevailed, it is diminishing, and is likely to cease altogether, if firm and well-considered action is taken by Congress. I trust the House of Representatives and the Senate, which have the right to judge of the elections, returns, and qualifications of their own members, will see to it that every case of violation of the letter or spirit of the fifteenth amendment is thoroughly investigated, and that no benefit from such violation shall accrue to any person or party. It will be the duty of the Executive, with sufficient appropriations for the purpose, to prosecute unsparingly all who have been engaged in depriving citizens of the rights guaranteed to them by the Constitution.

It is not, however, to be forgotten that the best and surest guarantee for the primary rights of citizen ship is to be found in that capacity for self-protection which can belong only to a people whose right to universal suffrage is supported by universal education. The means at the command of the local and State authorities are, in many cases, wholly inadequate to furnish free instruction to all who need it. This is especially true where, before emancipation, the education of the people was neglected or prevented, in the interest of slavery. Firmly convinced that the subject of popular education deserves the earnest attention of the people of the whole country, with a view to wise and comprehensive action by the Government of the United States, I respectfully recommend that Congress, by suitable legislation and with proper safeguards supplement the local educational funds in the several States where the grave duties and responsibilities of citizenship have been devolved on uneducated people, by devoting to the purpose grants of the public lands, and, if necessary, by appropriations from the Treasury of the United States. Whatever government can fairly do to promote free popular education ought to be done. Wherever general education is found, peace, virtue, and social order prevail, and civil and religious liberty are secure.

In my former annual messages, I have asked the attention of Congress to the urgent necessity of a reformation of the civil-service system of the government. My views concerning the dangers of patronage, or appointments for personal or partisan considerations, have been strengthened by my observation and experience in the Executive office, and I believe these dangers threaten the stability of the government. Abuses so serious in their nature cannot be permanently tolerated. They tend to become more alarming with the enlargement of administrative service, as the growth of the country in population increases the number of officers and placemen employed.

The reasons are imperative for the adoption of fixed rules for the regulation of appointments, promotions, and removals, establishing a uniform method, having exclusively in view, in every instance, the attainment of the best qualifications for the position in question. Such a method alone is consistent with the equal rights of all citizens, and the most economical and efficient administration of the public business.

Competitive examinations, in aid of impartial appointments and promotions, have been conducted for some years past in several of the executive departments, and by my direction this system has been adopted in the custom-houses and post-offices of the larger cities of the country. In the city of New York over two thousand positions in the civil service have been subject, in their appointments and tenure of place, to the operation of published rules for this purpose, during the past two years. The results of these practical trials have been very satisfactory, and have confirmed my opinion in favor of this system of selection. All are subjected to the same tests, and the result is free from prejudice by personal favor or partisan influence. It secures for the position applied for, the best qualifications attainable among the competing applicants. It is an effectual protection from the pressure of importunity which, under any other course pursued, largely exacts the time and attention of appointing officers, to their great detriment in the discharge of other official duties, preventing the abuse of the service for the mere furtherance of private or party purposes, and leaving the employ of the government, freed from the obligations imposed by patronage, to depend solely upon merit for retention and advancement, and with this constant incentive to exertion and improvement.

These invaluable results have been attained in a high degree in the offices where the rules for appointment by competitive examination have been applied.

A method which has so approved itself by experimental tests at points where such tests may be fairly considered conclusive, should be extended to all subordinate positions under the government. I believe that a strong and growing public sentiment demands immediate measures for securing and enforcing the highest possible efficiency in the civil service and its protection from recognized abuses, and that the experience referred to has demonstrated the feasibility of such measures.

The examinations in the custom-houses and post-offices have been held under many embarrassments and without provision for compensation for the extra labor performed by the officers who have conducted them, and whose commendable interest in the improvement of the public service has induced this devotion of time and labor without pecuniary reward. A continuance of these labors gratuitously ought not to be expected, and, without an appropriation by Congress for compensation, it is not practicable to extend the system of examinations generally throughout the civil service. It is also highly important that all such examinations should be conducted upon a uniform system and under general supervision. Section 1753 of the Revised Statutes authorizes the President to prescribe the regulations for admission to the civil service of the United States, and for this purpose to employ suitable persons to conduct the requisite inquiries with reference to “the fitness of each candidate, in respect to age, health, character, knowledge, and ability for the branch of service into which he seeks to enter,” but the law is practically inoperative for want of the requisite appropriation.

I therefore recommend an appropriation of $25,000 per annum to meet the expenses of a commission, to be appointed by the President in accordance with the terms of this section, whose duty it shall be to devise a just, uniform, and efficient system of competitive examinations, and to supervise the application of the same throughout the entire civil service of the government. I am persuaded that the facilities which such a commission will afford for testing the fitness of those who apply for office will not only be as welcome a relief to members of Congress as it will be to the President and heads of departments, but that it will also greatly tend to remove the causes of embarrassment which now inevitably and constantly attend the conflicting claims of patronage between the legislative and executive departments. The most effectual check upon the pernicious competition of influence and official favoritism, in the bestowal of office, will be the substitution of an open competition of merit between the applicants, in which every one can make his own record with the assurance that his success will depend upon this alone.

I also recommend such legislation as, while leaving every officer as free as any other citizen to express his political opinions and to use his means for their advancement, shall also enable him to feel as safe as any private citizen in refusing all demands upon his salary for political purposes. A law which should thus guarantee true liberty and justice to all who are engaged in the public service, and likewise contain stringent provisions against the use of official authority to coerce the political action of private citizens or of official subordinates, is greatly to be desired.

The most serious obstacle, however, to an improvement of the civil service, and especially to a reform in the method of appointment and removal, has been found to be the practice, under what is known as the spoils system, by which the appointing power has been so largely encroached upon by members of Congress. The first step in the reform of the civil service must be a complete divorce between Congress and the Executive in the matter of appointments. The corrupting doctrine that “to the victors belong the spoils” is inseparable from Congressional patronage as the established rule and practice of parties in power. It comes to be understood by applicants for office, and by the people generally, that Representatives and Senators are entitled to disburse the patronage of their respective districts and States. It is not necessary to recite at length the evils resulting from this invasion of the Executive functions. The true principles of government on the subject of appointments to office, as stated in the national conventions of the leading parties of the country, have again and again been approved by the American people, and have not been called in question in any quarter. These authentic expressions of public opinion upon this all-important subject are the statement of principles that belong to the constitutional structure of the government.

Under the Constitution the President and heads of departments are to make nonminations for office. The Senate is to advise and consent to appointments, and the House of Representatives is to accuse and prosecute faithless officers. The best interest of the public service demands that these distinctions be respected; that Senators and Representatives, who may be judges and accusers, should not dictate appointments to office.

To this end the co-operation of the legislative department of the government is required, alike by the necessities of the case and by public opinion. Members of Congress will not be relieved from the demands made upon them with reference to appointments to office until, by legislative enactment, the pernicious practice is condemned and forbidden.

It is, therefore, recommended that an act be passed defining the relations of members of Congress with respect to appointment to office by the President, and I also recommend that the provisions of section 1767 and of the sections following of the Revised Statutes, comprising the tenure-of-office act of March 2, 1867, be repealed.

Believing that to reform the system and methods of the civil service in our country is one of the highest and most imperative duties of statesmanship, and that it can be permanently done only by the co-operation of the legislative and executive departments of the government, I again commend the whole subject to your considerate attention.

It is the recognized duty and purpose of the people of the United States to suppress polygamy where it now exists in our Territories, and to prevent its extension. Faithful and zealous efforts have been made by the United States authorities in Utah to enforce the laws against it. Experience has shown that the legislation upon this subject, to be effective, requires extensive modification and amendment. The longer action is delayed, the more difficult it will be to accomplish what is desired. Prompt and decided measures are necessary. The Mormon sectarian organization which upholds polygamy has the whole power of making and executing the local legislation of the Territory. By its control of the grand and petit juries, it possesses large influence over the administration of justice. Exercising, as the heads of this sect do, the local political power of the Territory, they are able to make effective their hostility to the law of Congress on the subject of polygamy, and, in fact, do prevent its enforcement. Polygamy will not be abolished if the enforcement of the law depends on those who practice and uphold the crime. It can only be suppressed by taking away the political power of the sect which encourages and sustains it.

The power of Congress to enact suitable laws to protect the Territories is ample. It is not a case for half-way measures. The political power of the Mormon sect is increasing 5 it controls now one of our wealthiest and most populous Territories. It is extending steadily into other Territories. Wherever it goes it establishes polygamy and sectarian political power. The sanctity of marriage and the family relation are the corner-stone of our American society and civilization. Religious liberty and the separation of church and state are among the elementary ideas of free institutions. To re-establish the interests and principles which polygamy and Mormonism have imperiled, and to fully reopen to intelligent and virtuous immigrants of all creeds that part of our domain which has been, in a great degree, closed to general immigration by intolerant and immoral institutions, it is recommended that the government of the Territory of Utah be reorganized.

I recommend that Congress provide for the government of Utah by a governor and judges, or commissioners, appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate—a government analogous to the provisional government established for the territory northwest of the Ohio by the ordinance of 1787. If, however, it is deemed best to continue the existing form of local government, I recommend that the right to vote, hold office, and sit on juries in the Territory of Utah be confined to those who neither practice nor uphold polygamy. If thorough measures are adopted, it is believed that within a few years the evils which now afflict Utah will be eradicated, and that this Territory will in good time become one of the most prosperous and attractive of the new States of the Union.

Our relations with all foreign countries have been those of undisturbed peace, and have presented no occasion for concern as to their continued maintenance.

My anticipation of an early reply from the British Government to the demand of indemnity to our fishermen for the injuries suffered by that industry at Fortune Bay, in January, 1878, which I expressed in my last annual message, was disappointed. This answer was received only in the latter part of April in the present year, and when received exhibited a failure of accord between the two governments as to the measure of the inshore-fishing privilege secured to our fishermen by the Treaty of Washington of so serious a character that I made it the subject of a communication to Congress, in which I recommended the adoption of the measures which seemed to me proper to be taken by this government in maintenance of the rights accorded to our fishermen under the treaty, and towards securing an indemnity for the injury these interests had suffered. A bill to carry out these recommendations was under consideration by the House of Representatives at the time of the adjournment of Congress in June last.

Within a few weeks I have received a communication from Her Majesty’s Government, renewing the consideration of the subject, both of the indemnity for the injuries at Fortune Bay and of the interpretation of the treaty in which the previous correspondence had shown the two governments to be at variance. Upon both these topics the disposition towards a friendly agreement is manifested by a recognition of our right to an indemnity for the transaction at Fortune Bay, leaving the measure of such indemity to further conference, and by an assent to the view of this government, presented in the previous correspond-once, that the regulation of conflicting interests of the shore fishing of the provincial sea-coasts, and the vessel fishery of our fishermen, should be made the subject of conference and concurrent arrangement between the two governments.

I sincerely hope that the basis may be found for a speedy adjustment of the very serious divergence of views in the interpretation of the fishery clauses of the Treaty of Washington, which, as the correspondence between the two governments stood at the close of the last session of Congress, seemed to be irreconcilable.

In the important exhibition of arts and industries which was held last year at Sydney, New South Wales, as well as in that now in progress at Melbourne, the United States have been efficiently and honorably represented. The exhibitors from this country at the former place received a large number of awards in some of the most considerable departments, and the participation of the United States was recognized by a special mark of distinction. In the exhibition at Melbourne, the share taken by our country is no less notable, and an equal degree of success is confidently expected.

The state of peace and tranquillity now enjoyed by all the nations of the continent of Europe has its favorable influence upon our diplomatic and commercial relations with them. We have concluded and ratified a convention with the French Republic for the settlement of claims of the citizens of either country against the other. Under this convention a commission, presided over by a distinguished publicist, appointed, in pursuance of the request of both nations, by His Majesty the Emperor of Brazil, has been organized and has begun its sessions in this city. A congress to consider means for the protection of industrial property has recently been in session in Paris, to which I have appointed the ministers of the United States in France and in Belgium as delegates. The International Commission upon Weights and Measures also continues its work in Paris. I invite your attention to the necessity of an appropriation to be made in time to enable this government to comply with its obligations under the Metrical Convention.

Our friendly relations with the German Empire continue without interruption. At the recent International Exhibition of Fish and Fisheries at Berlin, the participation of the United States, notwithstanding the haste with which the commission was forced to make its preparations, was extremely successful and meritorious, winning for private exhibitors numerous awards of a high class, and for the country at large the principal prize of honor offered by His Majesty the Emperor. The results of this great success cannot but be advantageous to this important and growing industry. There have been some questions raised between the two governments as to the proper effect and interpretation, of our treaties of naturalization, but recent dispatches from our minister at Berlin show that favorable progress is making toward an understanding, in accordance with the views of this government, which makes and admits no distinction whatever between the rights of a native and a naturalized citizen of the United States. In practice, the complaints of molestation suffered by naturalized citizens abroad have never been fewer than at present.

There is nothing of importance to note in our unbroken friendly relations with the governments of Austria-Hungary, Russia, Portugal, Sweden and Norway, Switzerland, Turkey, and Greece.

During the last summer several vessels belonging to the merchant marine of this country, sailing in neutral waters of the West Indies, were fired at, boarded, and searched by an armed cruiser of the Spanish Government. The circumstances, as reported, involve not only a private injury to the persons concerned, but also seemed too little observant of the friendly relations existing for a century between this country and Spain. The wrong was brought to the attention of the Spanish Government in a serious protest and remonstrance, and the matter is undergoing investigation by the royal authorities with a view to such explanation or reparation as may be called for by the facts.

The commission sitting in this city for the adjudication of claims of our citizens against the Government of Spain is, I hope, approaching the termination of its labors.

The claims against the United States under the Florida Treaty with Spain were submitted to Congress for its action at the late session, and I again invite your attention to this long-standing question, with a view to a final disposition of the matter.

At the invitation of the Spanish Government, a conference has recently been held at the city of Madrid to consider the subject of protection by foreign powers of native Moors in the Empire of Morocco. The minister of the United States in Spain was directed to take part in the deliberations of this conference, the result of which is a convention signed on behalf of all the powers represented. The instrument will be laid before the Senate for its consideration. The Government of the United States has also lost no opportunity to urge upon that of the Emperor of Morocco the necessity, in accordance with the humane and enlightened spirit of the age, of putting an end to the persecutions which have been so prevalent in that country of persons of a faith other than the Moslem, and especially of the Hebrew residents of Morocco.

The consular treaty concluded with Belgium has not yet been officially promulgated, owing to the alteration of a word in the text by the Senate of the United States, which occasioned a delay, during which the time allowed for ratification expired. The Senate will be asked to extend the period for ratification.

The attempt to negotiate a treaty of extradition with Denmark failed on account of the objection of the Danish Government to the usual clause providing that each nation should pay the expense of the arrest of the persons whose extradition it asks.

The provision made by Congress, at its last session, for the expense of the commission which had been appointed to enter upon negotiations, with the Imperial Government of China, on subjects of great interest to the relations of the two countries, enabled the commissioners to proceed at once upon their mission. The Imperial Government was prepared to give prompt and respectful attention to the matters brought under negotiation, and the conferences proceeded with such rapidity and success that, on the 17th of November last, two treaties were signed at Pekin, one relating to the introduction of Chinese into this country, and one relating to commerce. Mr. Trescot, one of the commissioners, is now on his way home bringing the treaties, and it is expected that they will be received in season to be laid before the Senate early in January.

Our minister in Japan has negotiated a convention for the reciprocal relief of shipwrecked seamen. I take occasion to urge once more upon Congress the propriety of making provision for the erection of suitable fire-proof buildings at the Japanese capital for the use of the American legation, and the court-house and jail connected with it. The Japanese Government, with great generosity and courtesy, has offered for this purpose an eligible piece of land.

In my last annual message I invited the attention of Congress to the subject of the indemnity funds received some years ago from China and Japan. I renew the recommendation then made that whatever portions of these funds are due to American citizens should be promptly paid, and the residue returned to the nations, respectively, to which they justly and equitably belong.

The extradition treaty with the Kingdom of the Netherlands, which has been for some time in course of negotiation, has, during the past year, been concluded and duly ratified.

Relations of friendship and amity have been established between the Government of the “United States and that of Roumania. We have sent a diplomatic representative to Bucharest, and have received at this capital the special envoy, who has been charged by His Royal Highness, Prince Charles, to announce the independent sovereignty of Roumania. We hope for a speedy development of commercial relations between the two countries.

In my last annual message I expressed the hope that the prevalence of quiet on the border between this country and Mexico would soon become so assured as to justifiy the modification of the orders, then in force, to our military commanders in regard to crossing the frontier, without encouraging such disturbances as would endanger the peace of the two countries. Events moved in accordance with these expectations, and the orders were accordingly withdrawn, to the entire satisfaction of our own citizens and the Mexican Government. Subsequently the peace of the border was again disturbed by a savage foray, under the command of the Chief Victorio, but, by the combined and harmonious action of the military forces of both countries, his band has been broken up and substantially destroyed.

There is reason to believe that the obstacles which have so long prevented rapid and convenient communication between the United States and Mexico by railways are on the point of disappearing, and that several important enterprises of this character will soon be set on foot, which cannot fail to contribute largely to the prosperity of both countries.

New envoys from Guatemala, Colombia, Bolivia, Venezuela, and Nicaragua have recently arrived at this capital, whose distinction and enlightenment afford the best guarantee of the continuance of friendly relations between ourselves and these sister republics.

The relations between this government and that of the United States of Colombia have engaged public attention during the past year, mainly by reason of the project of an interoceanic canal across the Isthmus of Panama, to be built by private capital under a concession from the Colombian Government for that purpose. The treaty obligations subsisting between the United States and Colombia, by which we guarantee the neutrality of the transit and the sovereignty and property of Colombiain the isthmus, make it necessary that the conditions under which so stupendous a change in the region embraced in this guarantee should be effected—transforming, as it would, this isthmus, from a barrier between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, into a gateway and thoroughfare between them for the navies and the merchant ships of the world—should receive the approval of this government, as being compatible with the discharge of these obligations on our part, and consistent with our interests as the principal commercial power of the Western Hemisphere. The views which I expressed in a special message to Congress in March last, in relation to this project, I deem it my duty again to press upon your attention. Subsequent consideration has but confirmed the opinion “that it is the right and duty of the United States to assert and maintain such supervision and authority over any interoceanic canal across the isthmus that connects North and South America as will protect our national interest.”

The war between the Republic of Chili on the one hand, and the allied Republics of Peru and Bolivia on the other, still continues. This government has not felt called upon to interfere in a contest that is within the belligerent rights of the parties as independent states. We have, however, always held ourselves in readiness to aid in accommodating their difference, and have at different times reminded both belligerents of our willingness to render such service.

Our good offices, in this direction, were recently accepted by all the belligerents, and it was hoped they would prove efficacious; but I regret to announce that the measures which the ministers of the United States at Santiago and Lima were authorized to take, with the view to bring about a peace, were not successful. In the course of the war some questions have arisen affecting neutral rights; in all of these the ministers of the United States have, under their instructions, acted with promptness and energy in protection of American interests.

The relations of the United States with the Empire of Brazil continue to be most cordial, and their commercial intercourse steadily increases, to their mutual advantage.

The internal disorders with which the Argentine Republic has for some time past been afflicted, and which have more or less influenced its external trade, are understood to have been brought to a close. This happy result may be expected to redound to the benefit of the foreign commerce of that republic as well as to the development of its vast interior resources.

In Samoa, the government of King Malietoa, under the support and recognition of the consular representatives of the United States, Great Britain, and Germany, seems to have given peace and tranquillity to the islands. While it does not appear desirable to adopt as a whole the scheme of tripartite local government, which has been proposed, the common interests of the three great treaty powers require harmony in their relations to the native frame of government, and this may be best secured by a simple diplomatic agreement between them. It would be well if the consular jurisdiction of our representative at Apia were increased in extent and importance so as to guard American interests in the surrounding and outlying islands of Oceanica.

The obelisk, generously presented by the Khedive of Egypt to the city of New York, has safely arrived in this country, and will soon be erected in that metropolis. A commission for the liquidation of the Egyptian debt has lately concluded its work, and this government, at the earnest solicitation of the Khedive, has acceded to the provisions adopted by it, which will be laid before Congress for its information. A commission for the revision of the judicial code of the Reform Tribunal of Egypt is now in session in Cairo. Mr. Farman, consul-general, and J. M. Batchelder, esq., have been appointed as commissioners to participate in this work. The organization of the reform tribunals will probably be continued for another period of five years.

In pursuance of the act passed at the last session of Congress, invitations have been extended to foreign maritime states to join in sanitary conference in Washington, beginning the first of January. The acceptance of this invitation by many prominent powers gives promise of success in this important measure, designed to establish a system of international notification by which the spread of infectious or epidemic diseases may be more effectively checked or prevented. The attention of Congress is invited to the necessary appropriations for carrying into effect the provisions of the act referred to.

The efforts of the Department of State to enlarge the trade and commerce of the United States, through the active agency of consular officers, and through the dissemination of information obtained from them, have been unrelaxed. The interest in these efforts, as developed in our commercial communities, and the value of the information secured by this means to the trade and manufactures of the country, were recognized by Congress at its last session, and provision was made for the more frequent publication of consular and other reports by the Department of State. The first issue of this publication has now been prepared, and subsequent issues may regularly be expected. The importance and interest attached to the reports of consular officers are witnessed by the general demand for them by all classes of merchants and manufacturers engaged in our foreign trade. It is believed that the system of such publications is deserving of the approval of Congress, and that the necessary appropriations for its continuance and enlargement will commend itself to your consideration.

The prosperous energies of our domestic industries, and their immense production of the subjects of foreign commerce, invite, and even require, an active development of the wishes and interests of our people in that direction. Especially important is it that our commercial relations with the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of South America, with the West Indies and the Gulf of Mexico should be direct, and not through the circuit of European systems, and should be carried on in our own bottoms. The full appreciation of the opportunities which our front on the Pacific Ocean gives to commerce with Japan, China, and the East Indies, with Australia and the island groups which lie along these routes of navigation, should inspire equal efforts to appropriate to our own shipping, and to administer by our own capital, a due proportion of this trade. Whatever modifications of our regulations of trade and navigation may be necessary or useful to meet and direct these impulses to the enlargement of our exchanges and of our carrying trade I am sure the wisdom of Congress will be ready to supply. One initial measure, however, seems to me so clearly useful and efficient that I venture to press it upon your earnest attention. It seems to be very evident that the provision of regular steam postal communication, by aid from government, has been the forerunner of the commercial predominance of Great Britain on all these coasts and seas, a greater share in whose trade is now the desire and the intent of our people. It is also manifest that the efforts of other European nations to contend with Great Britain for a share of this commerce have been successful in proportion with their adoption of regular steam postal communication with the markets whose trade they sought. Mexico and the States of South America are anxious to receive such postal communications with this country, and to aid in their development. Similar co-operation may be looked for, in due time, from the Eastern nations and from Australia. It is difficult to see how the lead in this movement can be expected from private interests. In respect of foreign commerce, quite as much as in internal trade, postal communication seems necessarily a matter of common and public administration, and thus pertaining to government. I respectfully recommend to your prompt attention such just and efficient measures as may conduce to the development of our foreign commercial exchanges and the building up of our carrying trade.

In this connection I desire also to suggest the very great service which might be expected in enlarging and facilitating our commerce on the Pacific Ocean were a transmarine cable laid from San Francisco to the Sandwich Islands, and thence to Japan at the north and Australia at the south. The great influence of such means of communication on these routes of navigation in developing and securing the due share of our Pacific coast in the commerce of the world needs no illustration or enforcement. It may be that such an enterprise, useful and in the end profitable as it would prove to private investment, may need to be accelerated by prudent legislation by Congress in its aid, and I submit the matter to your careful consideration.

An additional and not unimportant, although secondary, reason for fostering and enlarging the Navy may be found in the unquestionable service to the expansion of our commerce which would be rendered by the frequent circulation of naval ships in the seas and ports of all quarters of the globe. Ships of the proper construction and equipment to be of the greatest efficiency in case of maritime war might be made constant and active agents in time of peace in the advancement and protection of our foreign trade, and in the nurture and discipline of young seamen, who would naturally, in some numbers, mix with and improve the crews of our merchant ships. Our merchants at home and abroad recognize the value to foreign commerce of an active movement of our naval vessels, and the intelligence and patriotic zeal of our naval officers in promoting every interest of their countrymen is a just subject of national pride.

The condition of the financial affairs of the government, as shown by the report of the Secretary of the Treasury, is very satisfactory. It is believed that the present financial situation of the United States, whether considered with respect to trade, currency, credit, growing wealth, or the extent and variety of our resources, is more favorable than that of any other country of our time, and has never been surpassed by that of any country at any period of its history. All our industries are thriving; the rate of interest is low; new railroads are being constructed; a vast immigration is increasing our population, capital, and labor; new enterprises in great number are in progress, and our commercial relations with other countries are improving.

The ordinary revenues from all sources, for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1880, were— From customs $186,522,064 60

From internal revenue 124,009,373 92

From sales of public lands 1,016,506 60

From tax on circulation and deposits of national banks 7,014,971 44

From repayment of interest by Pacific Railway Companies 1,707,367 18

From sinking-fund for Pacific Railway Companies 786,621 22

From customs fees, fines, penalties, &c 1,148,800 16

From fees—consular, letters patent, and lands 2,337,029 00

From proceeds of sales of government property 282,616 50

From profits on coinage, &c 2,792,186 78

From revenues of the District of Columbia 1,809,469 70

From miscellaneous sources 4,099,603 88

Total ordinary receipts 333,526,610 98

The ordinary expenditures for the same period were— For civil expenses $15,693,963 55

For foreign intercourse 1,211,490 58

For Indians 5,945,457 09

For pensions (including $19, 341, 025.20 arrears of pensions) 56,777,174 44

For the military establishment, including river and harbor improvements and arsenals 38,116,916 22

For the naval establishment, including vessels, machinery, and improvements at navy-yards 13,536,984 74

For miscellaneous expenditures, including public buildings, light-houses, and collecting the revenue 34,535,691 00

For expenditures on account of the District of Columbia 3,272,384 63

For interest on the public debt 95,757,575 11

For premium on bonds purchased 2,795,320 42

Total ordinary expenditures 267,642,957 78

Leaving a surplus revenue of 65,883,653 20

Which, with an amount drawn from the cash balance in Treasury of 8,084,434 21

Making 73,968,087 41

Was applied to the redemption— Of bonds for the sinking-fund $73,652,900 00

Of fractional currency 251,717 41

Of the loan of 1858 40,000 00

Of temporary loan 100 00

Of bounty-land scrip 25 00

Of compound-interest notes 16,500 00

Of 7.30 notes of 1864-’5 2,650 00

Of one and two year notes 3,700 00

Of old demand notes 495 00

Total 73,968,087 41

The amount due the sinking-fund for this year was $37,931,643.55. There was applied thereto the sum of $73,904,617.41, being $35,972,973.86 in excess of the actual requirements for the year.

The aggregate of the revenues from all sources during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1880, was $333,526,610.98, an increase over the preceding year of $59,699,426.52. The receipts thus far, of the current year, together with the estimated receipts for the remainder of the year, amount to $350,000,000, which will be sufficient to meet the estimated expenditures of the year, and leave a surplus of $90,000,000.

It is fortunate that this large surplus revenue occurs at a period when it may be directly applied to the payment of the public debt soon to be redeemable. No public duty has been more constantly cherished in the United States than the policy of paying the nation’s debt as rapidly as possible.

The debt of the United States, less cash in the Treasury and exclusive of accruing interest, attained its maximum of $2,756,431,571.43 in August, 1865, and has since that time been reduced to $1,886,019,504.65. Of the principal of the debt, $108,758,100 has been paid since March 1, 1877, effecting an annual saving of interest of $6,107,593. The burden of interest has also been diminished by the sale of bonds bearing a low rate of interest and the application of the proceeds to the redemption of bonds bearing a higher rate. The annual saving thus secured since March 1, 1877, is $14,290,453.50. Within a short period over six hundred millions of five and six per cent, bonds will become redeemable. This presents a very favorable opportunity not only to further reduce the principal of the debt, but also to reduce the rate of interest on that which will remain unpaid. I call the attention of Congress to the views expressed on this subject by the Secretary of the Treasury in his annual report, and recommend prompt legislation to enable the Treasury Department to complete the refunding of the debt which is about to mature.

The continuance of specie payments has not been interrupted or endangered since the date of resumption. It has contributed greatly to the revival of business and to our remarkable prosperity. The fears that preceded and accompanied resumption have proved groundless. No considerable amount of United States notes have been presented for redemption, while very large sums of gold bullion, both domestic and imported, are taken to the mints and exchanged for coin or notes. The increase of coin and bullion in the United States since January 1, 1879, is estimated at $227,399,428.

There are still in existence, uncanceled, $346,681,016 of United States legal-tender notes. These notes were authorized as a war measure, made necessary by the exigencies of the conflict in which the United States was then engaged. The preservation of the nation’s existence required, in the judgment of Congress, an issue of legal-tender paper money. That it served well the purpose for which it was created is not questioned, but the employment of the notes as paper money indefinitely, after the accomplishment of the object for which they were provided, was not contemplated by the framers of the law under which they were issued. These notes long since became—like any other pecuniary obligation of the government—a debt to be paid, and when paid to be canceled as mere evidence of an indebtedness no longer existing. I therefore repeat what was said in the annual message of last year, that the retirement from circulation of United States notes, with the capacity of legal tender in private contracts, is a step to be taken in our progress towards a safe and stable currency which should be accepted as the policy and duty of the government and the interest and security of the people.

At the time of the passage of the act now in force requiring the coinage of silver dollars, fixing their value and giving them legal-tender character, it was believed by many of the supporters of the measure that the silver dollar which it authorized would speedily become, under the operations of the law, of equivalent value to the gold dollar. There were other supporters of the bill who, while they doubted as to the probability of this result, nevertheless were willing to give the proposed experiment a fair trial, with a view to stop the coinage if experience should prove that the silver dollar authorized by the bill continued to be of less commercial value than the standard gold dollar.

The coinage of silver dollars, under the act referred to, began in March, 1878, and has been continued as required by the act. The average rate per month to the present time has been $2,276,492. The total amount coined prior to the first of November last was $72,847,750. Of this amount $47,084,450 remain in the Treasury, and only $25,763,291 are in the hands of the people. A constant effort has been made to keep this currency in circulation, and considerable expense has been necessarily incurred for this purpose, but its return to the Treasury is prompt and sure. Contrary to the confident anticipation of the friends of the measure at the time of its adoption, the value of the silver dollar containing 412£ grains of silver has not increased. During the year prior to the passage of the bill authorizing its coinage, the market value of the silver which it contained was from 90 to 92 cents as compared with the standard gold dollar. During the last year the average market value of the silver dollar has been 88½ cents.

It is obvious that the legislation of the last Congress in regard to silver, so far as it was based on an anticipated rise in the value of silver as a result of that legislation, has failed to produce the effect then predicted. The longer the law remains in force, requiring as it does the coinage of a nominal dollar, which, in reality, is not a dollar, the greater becomes the danger that this country will be forced to accept a single metal as the sole legal standard of value in circulation, and this a standard of less value than it purports to be worth in the recognized money of the world.

The Constitution of the United States, sound financial principles, and our best interests all require that the country should have as its legal-tender money both gold and silver coin of an intrinsic value, as bullion, equivalent to that which, upon its face, it purports to possess. The Constitution, in express terms, recognizes both gold and silver as the only true legal-tender money. To banish either of these metals from our currency is to narrow and limit the circulating medium of exchange to the disparagement of important interests. The United States produces more silver than any other country, and is directly interested in maintaining it as one of the two precious metals which furnish the coinage of the world. It will, in my judgment, contribute to this result if Congress will repeal so much of existing legislation as requires the coinage of silver dollars containing only 412½ grains of silver, and in its stead will authorize the Secretary of the Treasury to coin silver dollars of equivalent value, as bullion, with gold dollars. This will defraud no man, and will be in accordance with familiar precedents. Congress, on several occasions, has altered the ratio of value between gold and silver, in order to establish it more nearly in accordance with the actual ratio of value between the two metals.

In financial legislation every measure in the direction of greater fidelity in the discharge of pecuniary obligations has been found by experience to diminish the rates of interest which debtors are required to pay, and to increase the facility with which money can be obtained for every legitimate purpose. Our own recent financial history shows how surely money becomes abundant whenever confidence in the exact performance of moneyed obligations is established.

The Secretary of War reports that the expenditures of the War Department for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1880, were $39,924,773.03. The appropriations for this department, for the current fiscal year, amount to $41,993,630.40.

With respect to the Army, the Secretary invites attention to the fact that its strength is limited by statute (section 1115 Revised Statutes) to not more than 30,000 enlisted men, but that provisos contained in appropriation bills have limited expenditures to the enlistment of but 25,000. It is believed the full legal strength is the least possible force at which the present organization can be maintained, having in view efficiency, discipline, and economy. While the enlistment of this force would add somewhat to the appropriation for pay of the Army, the saving made in other respects would be more than an equivalent for this additional outlay, and the efficiency of the Army would be largely increased.

The rapid extension of the railroad system west of the Mississippi River, and the great tide of settlers which has flowed in upon new territory, impose on the military an entire change of policy. The maintenance of small posts along wagon and stage routes of travel is no longer necessary. Permanent quarters at points selected, of a more substantial character than those heretofore constructed, will be required. Under existing laws permanent buildings cannot be erected without the sanction of Congress, and when sales of military sites and buildings have been authorized the moneys received have reverted to the Treasury and could only become available through a new appropriation. It is recommended that provision be made by a general statute for the sale of such abandoned military posts and buildings as are found to be unnecessary and for the application of the proceeds to the construction of other posts. While many of the present posts are of but slight value for military purposes, owing to the changed condition of the country, their occupation is continued at great expense and inconvenience, because they afford the only available shelter for troops.

The absence of a large number of officers of the line, in active duty, from their regiments is a serious detriment to the maintenance of the service. The constant demand for small detachments, each of which should be commanded by a commissioned officer, and the various details of officers for necessary service away from their commands, occasions a scarcity in the number required for company duties. With a view to lessening this drain to some extent it is recommended that the law authorizing the detail of officers from the active list, as professors of tactics and military science at certain colleges and universities, be so amended as to provide that all such details be made from the retired list of the Army.

Attention is asked to the necessity of providing by legislation for organizing, arming, and disciplining the active militia of the country, and liberal appropriations are recommended in this behalf. The reports of the Adjutant-General of the Army and the Chief of Ordnance touching this subject fully set forth its importance.

The report of the officer in charge of education in the Army shows that there are seventy-eight schools now in operation in the Army, with an aggregate attendance of 2,305 enlisted men and children. The Secretary recommends the enlistment of one hundred and fifty schoolmasters, with the rank and pay of commissary sergeants. An appropriation is needed to supply the judge-advocates of the Army with suitable libraries, and the Secretary recommends that the corps of judge-advocates be placed upon the same footing, as to promotion, with the other staff corps of the Army. Under existing laws, the Bureau of Military Justice consists of one officer, the Judge-Advocate-General, and the corps of judge-advocates of eight officers of equal rank (majors), with a provision that the limit of the corps shall remain at four when reduced by casualty or resignation to that number. The consolidation of the Bureau of Military Justice and the corps of judge-advocates, upon the same basis with the other staff corps of the Army, would remove an unjust discrimination against deserving officers, and subserve the best interests of the service.

Especial attention is asked to the report of the Chief of Engineers upon the condition of our national defenses. From a personal inspection of many of the fortifications referred to, the Secretary is able to emphasize the recommendations made, and to state that their incomplete and defenseless condition is discreditable to the country. While other nations have been increasing their means for carrying on offensive warfare and attacking maritime cities, we have been dormant in preparation for defense; nothing of importance has been done towards strengthening and finishing our casemated works since our late civil war, during which the great guns of modern warfare and the heavy armor of modern fortifications and ships came into use among the nations; and our earthworks, left by a sudden failure of appropriations some years since in all stages of incompletion, are now being rapidly destroyed by the elements.

The two great rivers of the North American Continent, the Mississippi and the Columbia, have their navigable waters wholly within the limits of the United States, and are of vast importance to our internal and foreign commerce. The permanency of the important work on the South Pass of the Mississippi River seems now to be assured. There has been no failure whatever in the maintenance of the maximum channel during the six months ended August 9, last. This experiment has opened a broad, deep highway to the ocean, and is an improvement, upon the permanent success of which congratulations may be exchanged among people abroad and at home, and especially among the communities of the Mississippi Valley, whose commercial exchanges float in an unobstructed channel safely to and from the sea.

A comprehensive improvement of the Mississippi and its tributaries is a matter of transcendent importance. These great water-ways comprise a system of inland transportation spread like net-work over a large portion of the United States, and navigable to the extent of many thousands of miles. Producers and consumers alike have a common interest in such unequaled facilities for cheap transportation. Geographically, commercially, and politically, they are the strongest tie between the various sections of the country. These channels of communication and interchange are the property of the nation. Its jurisdiction is paramount over their waters, gold the plainest principles of public interest require their intelligent and careful supervision, with a view to their protection, improvement, and the enhancement of their usefulness.

The channel of the Columbia River, for a distance of about one hundred miles from its mouth, is obstructed by a succession of bars, which occasion serious delays in navigation, and heavy expense for lighterage and towage. A depth of at least twenty feet at low tide should be secured and maintained, to meet the requirements of the extensive and growing inland and ocean commerce it subserves. The most urgent need, however, for this great water-way is a permanent improvement of the channel at the mouth of the river.

From Columbia River to San Francisco, a distance of over six hundred miles, there is no harbor on our Pacific coast which can be approached during stormy weather. An appropriation of $150,000 was made by the Forty-fifth Congress for the commencement of a breakwater and harbor of refuge, to be located at some point between the Straits of Fuca and San Francisco, at which the necessities of commerce, local and general, will be best accommodated. The amount appropriated is thought to be quite inadequate for the purpose intended. The cost of the work, when finished, will be very great, owing to the want of natural advantages for a site at any point on the coast between the designated limits, and it has not been thought to be advisable to undertake the work without a larger appropriation. I commend the matter to the attention of Congress.

The completion of the new building for the War Department is urgently needed, and the estimates for continuing it$ construction are especially recommended.

The collections of books, specimens, and records constituting the Army Medical Museum and Library are of national importance. The library now contains about fifty-one thousand five hundred (51,500) volumes and fifty-seven thousand (57,000) pamphlets relating to medicine, surgery, and allied topics. The contents of the Army Medical Museum consist of twenty-two thousand (22,000) specimens, and are unique in the completeness with which both military surgery and the diseases of armies are illustrated. Their destruction would be an irreparable loss, not only to the United States, but to the world. There are filed in the record and pension division over sixteen thousand (16,000) bound volumes of hospital records, together with a great quantity of papers, embracing the original records of the hospitals of our armies during the civil war. Aside from their historical value, these records are daily searched for evidence needed in the settlement of large numbers of pension and other claims, for the protection of the government against attempted frauds, as well as for the benefit of honest claimants. These valuable collections are now in a building which is peculiarly exposed to the danger of destruction by fire. It is therefore earnestly recommended that an appropriation be made for a new fire-proof building, adequate for the present needs and reasonable future expansion of these valuable collections. Such a building should be absolutely fire-proof; no expenditure for mere architectural display is required. It is believed that a suitable structure can be erected at a cost not to exceed two hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($250,000).

I commend to the attention of Congress the great services of the commander and chief of our armies during the war for the Union, whose wise, firm, and patriotic conduct did so much to bring that momentous conflict to a close. The legislation of the United States contains many precedents for the recognition of distinguished military merit, authorizing rank and emoluments to be conferred for eminent services to the country. An act of Congress authorizing the appointment of a Captain-General of the Army, with suitable provisions relating to compensation, retirement, and other details, would, in my judgment, be altogether fitting and proper, and would be warmly approved by the country.

The report of the Secretary of the Navy exhibits the successful and satisfactory management of that department during the last fiscal year. The total expenditures for the year were $12,916,639.45, leaving unexpended, at the close of the year, $2,141,682.23 of the amount of available appropriations. The appropriations for the present fiscal year ending June 30, 1881, are $15,095,061.45; and the total estimates for the next fiscal year ending June 30, 1882, are $15,953,751.61. The amount drawn by warrant from July 1, 1880, to November 1, 1880, is $5,041,570.45.

The recommendation of the Secretary of the Navy that provision be made for the establishment of some form of civil government for the people of Alaska is approved. At present there is no protection of persons or property in that Territory, except such as is afforded by the officers of the United States ship Jamestown. The vessel was dispatched to Sitka, because of the fear that, without the immediate presence of the national authority, there was impending danger of anarchy. The steps taken to restore order have been accepted in good faith by both white and Indian inhabitants, and the necessity for this method of restraint does not, in my opinion, now exist. If, however, the Jamestown should be withdrawn, leaving the people, as at present, without the ordinary, judicial, and administrative authority of organized local government, serious consequences might ensue.

The laws provide only for the collection of revenue, the protection of public property, and the transmission of the mails. The problem is to supply a local rule for a population so scattered and so peculiar in its origin and condition. The natives are reported to be teachable and self-supporting, and, if properly instructed, doubtless would advance rapidly in civilization, and a new factor of prosperity would be added to the national life. I therefore recommend the requisite legislation upon this subject.

The Secretary of the Navy has taken steps towards the establishment of naval coaling-stations at the Isthmus of Panama, to meet the requirements of our commercial relations with Central and South America, which are rapidly growing in importance. Locations eminently suitable, both as regards our naval purposes and the uses of commerce, have been selected, one on the east side of the isthmus, at Chiriqui Lagoon, in the Caribbean Sea, and the other on the Pacific coast, at the Bay of Golfito. The only safe harbors, sufficiently commodious, on the isthmus, are at these points, and the distance between them is less than one hundred miles. The report of the Secretary of the Navy concludes with valuable suggestions with respect to the building up of our merchant-marine service, which deserve the favorable consideration of Congress.

The report of the Postmaster-General exhibits the continual growth and the high state of efficiency of the postal service. The operations of no department of the government, perhaps, represent with greater exactness the increase in the population and the business of the country. In 1860 the postal receipts were $8,518,067.40; in 1880 the receipts were $33,315,479.34. All the inhabitants of the country are directly and personally interested in having proper mail facilities, and naturally watch the Post-Office very closely. This careful oversight on the part of the people has proved a constant stimulus to improvement. During the past year there was an increase of 2,134 post-offices, and the mail routes were extended 27,177 miles, making an additional annual transportation of 10,804,191 miles. The revenues of the postal service for the ensuing year are estimated at $38,845,174.10, and the expenditures at $42,475,932, leaving a deficiency to be appropriated out of the Treasury of $3,630,757.90.

The Universal Postal Union has received the accession of almost all the countries and colonies of the world maintaining organized postal services, and it is confidently expected that all the other countries and colonies now outside the Union will soon unite therewith, thus realizing the grand idea and aim of the founders of the Union of forming, for purposes of international mail communication, a single postal territory, embracing the world, with complete uniformity of postal charges and conditions of international exchange for all descriptions of correspondence. To enable the United States to do its full share of this great work additional legislation is asked by the Postmaster-General, to whose recommendations especial attention is called.

The suggestion of the Postmaster-General that it would be wise to encourage, by appropriate legislation, the establishment of American lines of steamers by our own citizens, to carry the mails between our own ports and those of Mexico, Central America, South America, and of transpacific countries, is commended to the serious consideration of Congress.

The attention of Congress is also invited to the suggestions of the Postmaster-General in regard to postal-savings.

The necessity for additional provision to aid in the transaction of the business of the Federal courts becomes each year more apparent. The dockets of the Supreme Court and of the circuit courts, in the greater number of the circuits, are encumbered with the constant accession of cases. In the former court, and in many instances in the circuit courts, years intervene before it is practicable to bring cases to a hearing.

The Attorney-General recommends the establishment of an intermediate court of errors and appeals. It is recommended that the number of judges of the circuit court in each circuit, with the exception of the second circuit, should be increased by the addition of another judge 5 in the second circuit, that two should be added; and that an intermediate appellate court should be formed in each circuit, to consist of the circuit judges and the circuit justice, and that in the event of the absence of either of these judges the place of the absent judge should be supplied by the judge of one of the district courts in the circuit. Such an appellate court could be safely invested with large jurisdiction, and its decisions would satisfy suitors in many cases where appeals would still be allowed to the Supreme Court. The expense incurred for this intermediate court will require a very moderate increase of the appropriations for the expenses of the Department of Justice. This recommendation is commended to the careful consideration of Congress.

It is evident that a delay of justice, in many instances oppressive and disastrous to suitors, now necessarily occurs in the Federal courts, which will in this way be remedied.

The report of the Secretary of the Interior presents an elaborate account of the operations of that department during the past year. It gives me great pleasure to say that our Indian affairs appear to be in a more hopeful condition now than ever before. The Indians have made gratifying progress in agriculture, herding, and mechanical pursuits. Many, who were a few years ago in hostile conflict with the government, are quietly settling down on farms where they hope to make their permanent homes, building houses, and engaging in the occupations of civilized life. The introduction of the freighting business among them has been remarkably fruitful of good results, in giving many of them congenial and remunerative employment, and in stimulating their ambition to earn their own support. Their honesty, fidelity, and efficiency as carriers are highly praised. The organization of a police force of Indians has been equally successful in maintaining law and order upon the reservations, and in exercising a wholesome moral influence among the Indians themselves. I concur with the Secretary of the Interior in the recommendation that the pay of this force be increased as an inducement to the best class of young men to enter it.

Much care and attention has been devoted to the enlargement of educational facilities for the Indians. The means available for this important object have been very inadequate. A few additional boarding-schools at Indian agencies have been established and the erection of buildings has been begun for several more, but an increase of the appropriations for this interesting undertaking is greatly needed to accommodate the large number of Indian children of school age. The number offered by their parents from all parts of the country for education in the government schools is much larger than can be accommodated with the means at present available for that purpose. The number of Indian pupils at the Normal School at Hampton, Virginia, under the direction of General Armstrong, has been considerably increased, and their progress is highly encouraging. The Indian school established by the Interior Department, in 1879, at Carlisle, Pennsylvania, under the direction of Captain Pratt, has been equally successful. It has now nearly two hundred pupils of both sexes, representing a great variety of the tribes east of the Rocky Mountains. The pupils in both these institutions receive not only an elementary English education, but are also instructed in housework, agriculture, and useful mechanical pursuits. A similar school was established this year at Forest Grove, Oregon, for the education of Indian youth on the Pacific coast. In addition to this, thirty-six Indian boys and girls were selected from the Eastern Cherokees and placed in boarding-schools in North Carolina, where they are to receive an elementary English education and training in industrial pursuits. The interest shown by Indian parents, even among the so-called wild tribes, in the education of their children is very gratifying, and gives promise that the results accomplished by the efforts now making will be of lasting benefit.

The expenses of Indian education have so far been drawn from the permanent civilization fund at the disposal of the Department of the Interior; but the fund is now so much reduced that the continuance of this beneficial work will in the future depend on specific appropriations by Congress for the purpose; and I venture to express the hope that Congress will not permit institutions so fruitful of good results to perish for want of means for their support. On the contrary, an increase of the number of such schools appears to me highly advisable.

The past year has been unusually free from disturbances among the Indian tribes. An agreement has been made with the Utes, by which they surrender their large reservation in Colorado in consideration of an annuity to be paid to them, and agree to settle in severalty on certain lands designated for that purpose, as farmers, holding individual title to their land in fee-simple, inalienable for a certain period. In this way a costly Indian war has been avoided, which, at one time, seemed imminent, and, for the first time in the history of the country, an Indian nation has given up its tribal existence to be settled in severalty, and to live as individuals under the common protection of the laws of the country.

The conduct of the Indians throughout the country during the past year, with but few noteworthy exceptions, has been orderly and peaceful. The guerilla warfare carried on for two years by Victoria and his band of Southern Apaches has virtually come to an end by the death of that chief and most of his followers, on Mexican soil. The disturbances caused on our northern frontier by Sitting Bull and his men, who had taken refuge in the British dominions, are also likely to cease. A large majority of his followers have surrendered to our military forces, and the remainder are apparently in progress of disintegration.

I concur with the Secretary of the Interior in expressing the earnest hope that Congress will at this session take favorable action on the bill providing for the allotment of lands on the different reservations in severalty to the Indians, with patents conferring fee-simple title inalienable for a certain period, and the eventual disposition of the residue of the reservations, for general settlement, with the consent and for the benefit of the Indians, placing the latter under the equal protection of the laws of the country. This measure, together with a vigorous prosecution of our educational efforts, will work the most important and effective advance toward the solution of the Indian problem, in preparing for the gradual merging of our Indian population in the great body of American citizenship.

A large increase is reported in the disposal of public lands for settlement during the past year, which marks the prosperous growth of our agricultural industry, and a vigorous movement of population toward our unoccupied lands. As this movement proceeds, the codification of our land laws, as well as proper legislation to regulate the disposition of public lands, become of more pressing necessity, and I therefore invite the consideration of Congress to the report and the accompanying draft of a bill, made by the Public Lands Commission, which were communicated by me to Congress at the last session. Early action upon this important subject is highly desirable.

The attention of Congress is again asked to the wasteful depredations committed on our public timber-lands, and the rapid and indiscriminate destruction of our forests. The urgent necessity for legislation to this end is now generally recognized. In view of the lawless character of the depredations committed, and the disastrous consequences which will inevitably follow their continuance, legislation has again and again been recommended to arrest the evil, and to preserve for the people of our Western States and Territories the timber needed for domestic and other essential uses.

The report of the Director of the Geological Survey is a document of unusual interest. The consolidation of the various geological and geographical surveys and exploring enterprises, each of which has heretofore operated upon an independent plan, without concert, cannot fail to be of great benefit to all those industries of the country which depend upon the development of our mineral resources. The labors of the scientific men, of recognized merit, who compose the corps of the Geological Survey, during the first season of their field operations and inquiries, appear to have been very comprehensive, and will soon be communicated to Congress in a number of volumes. The Director of the Survey recommends that the investigations carried on by his bureau, which so far have been confined to the so-called public-land States and Territories, be extended over the entire country, and that the necessary appropriation be made for this purpose. This would be particularly beneficial to the iron, coal, and other mining interests of the Mississippi Valley, and of the Eastern and Southern States. The subject is commended to the careful consideration of Congress.

The Secretary of the Interior asks attention to the want of room in the public buildings of the capital, now existing and in progress of construction, for the accommodation of the clerical force employed and of the public records. Necessity has compelled the renting of private buildings in different parts of the city for the location of public offices, for which a large amount of rent is annually paid, while the separation of offices belonging to the same department impede the transaction of current business. The Secretary suggests that the blocks surrounding Lafayette Square on the east, north, and west be purchased as the sites for new edifices for the accommodation of the government offices, leaving the square itself intact, and that, if such buildings were constructed upon a harmonious plan of architecture they would add much to the beauty of the national capital, and would, together with the Treasury and the new State, Navy, and War Department building, form one of the most imposing groups of public edifices in the world.

The Commissioner of Agriculture expresses the confident belief that his efforts in behalf of the production of our own sugar and tea have been encouragingly rewarded. The importance of the results attained have attracted marked attention at home, and have received the special consideration of foreign nations. The successful cultivation of our own tea and the manufacture of our own sugar would make a difference of many millions of dollars annually in the wealth of the nation.

The report of the Commissioner asks attention particularly to the continued prevalence of an infectious and contageous cattle disease known and dreaded in Europe and Asia as cattle-plague, or pleuro pneumonia. A mild type of this disease, in certain sections of our country, is the occasion of great loss to our farmers, and of serious disturbance to our trade with Great Britain, which furnishes a market for most of our live stock and dressed meats. The value of neat-cattle exported from the United States for the eight months ended August 31, 1880, was more than twelve million dollars, and nearly double the value for the same period in 1879, an unexampled increase of export trade. Your early attention is solicited to this important matter.

The Commissioner of Education reports a continued increase of public interest in educational affairs, and that the public schools generally throughout the country are well sustained. Industrial training is attracting deserved attention, and colleges for instruction, theoretical and practical, in agriculture and mechanic arts, including the government schools recently established for the instruction of Indian youth, are gaining steadily in public estimation. The Commissioner asks special attention to the depredations committed on the lands reserved for the future support of public instruction, and to the very great need of help from the nation for schools in the Territories and in the Southern States. The recommendation heretofore made is repeated and urged that an educational fund be set apart from the net proceeds of the sales of the public lands annually, the income of which and the remainder of the net annual proceeds, to be distributed on some satisfactory plan to the States and the Territories and the District of Columbia.

The success of the public schools of the District of Columbia, and the progress made, under the intelligent direction of the board of education and the superintendent, in supplying the educational requirements of the District with thoroughly trained and efficient teachers, is very gratifying. The acts of Congress, from time to time, donating public lands to the several States and Territories in aid of educational interests have proved to be wise measures of public policy, resulting in great and lasting benefit. It would seem to be a matter of simple justice to extend the benefits of this legislation, the wisdom of which has been so fully vindicated by experience, to the District of Columbia.

I again commend the general interests of the District of Columbia to the favorable consideration of Congress. The affairs of the District, as shown by the report of the Commissioners, are in a very satisfactory condition.

In my annual messages heretofore, and in my special message of December 19, 1879, I have urged upon the attention of Congress the necessity of reclaiming the marshes of the Potomac adjacent to the capital, and I am constrained by its importance to advert again to the subject. These flats embrace an area of several hundred acres. They are an impediment to the drainage of the city and seriously impair its health. It is believed that, with this substantial improvement of its river front, the capital would be, in all respects, one of the most attractive cities in the world. Aside from its permanent population this city is necessarily the place of residence of persons from every section of the country engaged in the public service. Many others reside here temporarily for the transaction of business with the government.

It should not be forgotten that the land acquired will probably be worth the cost of reclaiming it, and that the navigation of the river will be greatly improved. I therefore again invite the attention of Congress to the importance of prompt provision for this much-needed and too-long-delayed improvement.

The water supply of the city is inadequate. In addition to the ordinary use throughout the city, the consumption by government is necessarily very great in the navy-yard, arsenal, and the various departments, and a large quantity is required for the proper preservation of the numerous parks and the cleansing of sewers. I recommend that this subject receive the early attention of Congress, and that in making provision for an increased supply, such means be adopted as will have in view the future growth of the city. Temporary expedients for such a purpose cannot but be wastful of money, and therefore unwise. Amore ample reservoir, with corresponding facilities for keeping it filled, should, in my judgment, be constructed. I commend again to the attention of Congress the subject of the removal from their present location of the depots of the several railroads entering the city; and I renew the recommendations of my former messages in behalf of the erection of a building for the Congressional Library 5 the completion of the Washington Monument; and of liberal appropriations in support of the benevolent, reformatory, and penal institutions of the District.

RUTHERFORD B. HAYES.
Executive Mansion,
December 6, 1880.

Foreign relations Foreign relations

List of papers, with their subjects List of papers, with their subjects

circulars.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

1 Mr. Evarts to the consular officers of the United States at seaports. 1880. Feb. 18 Legal status, rights, and liabilities of foreign-built vessels purchased abroad, and wholly owned by citizens of the United States; attention of Department called to this point by recent case of steamship Honduras, built at Liverpool in 1871; on her arrival in Panama in 1879 sold by foreign owner to Panama Railroad Company; by that company sold to Pacific Mail Steamship Company; again resold to Panama Railroad Company, and run by latter company between Panama and Champerico, Guatemala. Tonnage dues; authentication of bill of sale and of citizenship of owner of vessel prima facie evidence of bona fide purchase. Tonnage of each and every vessel to be duly ascertained by collector of customs before issuance of his certificate; rulings of department coincident with provision of Treasury regulations; said vessels plying in foreign waters are therefore, subject to exaction and payment of tonnage dues in like manner as regularly registered American vessels; in case of vessels making regular weekly or monthly trips, tonnage-dues to be exacted only for four trips a year. Shipping and discharge of seamen; subjects of extra wages and relief discussed and law on these points established; consuls directed to conform to the suggestions herein contained. (See pages 150, 177, 861–865, 867, 874, 884, and 894 of volume of Foreign Relations for 1879.) 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]

2 Mr. Hay to consular officers of the United States. June 19 Regulation, by the Secretary of the Treasury, of the fees authorized by act of Congress “to prevent the introduction of contagious or infectious diseases into the United States,” to be collected for the examination of passengers, officers, and crews of vessels liable to such diseases. 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

3 Mr. Evarts to consulars-general, consuls, and commercial and consular agents of the United States. July 1 Expresses appreciation of previous efforts, and calls for further and fuller reports upon subjects calculated to Advance the commercial and industrial interests of the United States. 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

4 Mr. Evarts to the diplomatic officers of the United States. July 30 International Sanitary Conference: powers having jurisdiction of ports liable to be infected with contagious diseases invited to join; object—the adoption of an international system of notification as to sanitary condition of such ports and vessels sailing therefrom; memorandum stating reasons inclosed; the President suggests January 1, 1881, as a suitable date, subject to the approval of the other powers. 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 4]

5 Mr. Hay to the consular officers of the United States at seaports. Sept. 6 Shipping and discharge of seamen: further discussion of the subject; rules for the guidance of consular officers. 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

diplomatic correspondence.

argentine republic.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

6 Mr. T. O. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Dec. 18 No. 259.—The war between Chili and Peru and Bolivia: Chiliau successes causing uneasiness in government circles; discussions of President Avellaneda and cabinet, concerning the policy to be adopted by the Argentine Government; Ex-President Mitré to be invited to go to Chili on a special mission; his reported declination; preparations making, by sea and land, for possible rupture with Chili; the probable advantages of such an event. 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

7 do 1880. Jan. 17 No. 264.—The political situation: outwardly unchanged; President Avellaneda concentrating large forces of regulars in Buenos Ayres; Governor Tejedor’s adherents have also armed parades on Sundays; the legislature of Buenos Ayres, being opposed to Governor Tejedor, refuses to vote the provincial budget; the governor, by decree, revives last year’s estimates; the chamber of deputies votes the governor’s action illegal and unconstitutional; this movement supposed to originate with the Roca party; federal intervention unlikely in this breach between Governor Tejedor and his legislature; congressional elections, to be held February 1, will probably decide the Presidential contest; General Sarmiento reported to have secured three provinces, thus gaining the balance of power. 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

8 do Feb. 11 No. 265.—The political situation: election for members of the Argentine Congress; the candidates of the Tejedor party elected, the adherents of General Roca abstaining from voting in Buenos Ayres by reason of alleged military intimidation at the polls; disclaimer of such intention on the part of the Tejedor party, other motives being attributed to their opponents; the Roca party carries all the other provinces except Corrientes and possibly one or two others; attitude of the national guards; a conflict imminent. 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

9 do Feb. 13 No. 266.—The South American Continental Exhibition to be held at Buenos Ayres in September, 1880; transmits plans and regulations therefor, with text of note from Argentine foreign minister; the government seeks to repeat the success of the late Cordoba Exposition, but on a larger scaleattendance of Americans invited. (Note.—The regulations only provide for the concurrence of exhibitors from Spanish American countries. (See Mr. Osborn’s No. 271, of February 28, page 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14].) 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

10 Mr. Evarts to Mr. T. O. Osbern. Apr. 7 No. 121.—Expresses the interest felt by the Government of the United States in the “South American Continental Exhibition,” as tending to increase the commercial and agricultural prosperity of the Argentine Republic. 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11]

11 Mr. T. O. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 16 No. 267.—The political situation: Still critical; the city of Buenos Ayres under arms, and business suspended; proclamation of President Avellaneda ordering the disarmament of the national guards; probable refusal of Governor Tejedor to disarm the Buenos Ayres volunteers; concentration of troops and volunteers; prospect of martial law; efforts of the peace committee to procure the withdrawal of General Roca’s candidature, in like manner with Dr. Tejedor’s declension: the resignation of President Avellaneda also demanded by extremists; the text of his proclamation and decree of February 13, 1880. 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11]

12 do Feb. 18 No. 269.—The political situation; the crisis past, troops returning to their camps, and the people to their regular pursuits; the “peace committee” bring about an interview February 17, between President Avellaneda and Governor Tejedor of Buenos Ayres; decree of the President February 17, suspending the movements of troops; the results of the conference understood to be the withdrawal by the President of the national troops from the capital, and the disbandment of the volunteers by Governor Tejedor, with substitution of target companies for the latter; efforts of the peace committee to cause the withdrawal of General Roea’s candidature for the Presidency; his refusal to withdraw may endanger the prospects of a peaceful solution. 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

13 Mr. T. O. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 23 No. 270.—The political situation; General Roca’s reply to the peace committee; he declines to withdraw his candidature; his letter to Hector Tarela; the Buenos Ayres party refuse to accept General Tejedor’s withdrawal. 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

14 do Feb. 28 No. 271.—Continental Exposition; extension of time for reception of exhibits to July 31, 1880; no articles to be received outside of South American countries, except; machinery and works of art; proposal of American agents at Buenos Ayres to convey thither the American samples from the Rio Exhibition, and exhibit them separately; the scheme opposed by the directors of the Continental Exposition. 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

15 do May 8 No. 277.—The political situation; message of Governor Tejedor to the provincial legislature; attitude of Buenos Ayres and Corrientes in the Presidential contest; the Argentine Congress not yet organized; movements of General Roca and his troops on the borders of Buenos Ayres; the board of trade petitioned to attempt the restoration of political harmony; text of Governor Tejedor’s address. 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 15]

16 do May 11 No. 278.—The political situation; the dead-lock continues; interview between General Roca and Governor Tejedor on the 10th May; the conversation as reported by the press; no result; manifestation of 20,000 business men in favor of peace; assurances of President Avellaneda. 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

17 do June 4 No. 283.—The political situation; President Avellaneda withdraws with the national troops to a point without the capital; withdrawal of a majority of the Argentine Congress on board a gunboat; this action caused by the Tejedor party unlawfully introducing large quantities of arms free of duty; incidents of the landing of the arms; President Avellaneda asks Congress to declare the province under martial law; no quorum obtained. 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

18 do June 14 No. 284.—The political situation; President Avellaneda and cabinet at Belgrano; port of Buenos Ayres closed; the provincial (Tejedor) party hold the government buildings in Buenos Ayres; a majority of the senate at Belgrano; the supreme court and the lower house still in the capital; Dr. Tejedor declares Buenos Ayres under martial law; the city isolated; railways and telegraphs cut; efforts of General Sarmiento and others to bring about an understanding; the election; General Roca reported to have a majority; disturbed state of the other provinces; visit of Admiral Bryson, United States Navy, to Buenos Ayres. 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

19 do June 19 No. 286.—The situation; hostilities actually begun between the provincial and national forces; a collision near Merlo; defeat of the provincial forces under General Arias; probable investment of Buenos Ayres, but without bombardment. 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

20 do June 22 No. 287.—The situation; retreat of General Arias to Buenos Ayres; fresh engagements between the rival forces, with heavy loss; the provincial forces losing ground. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

21 do July 6 No. 288.—Peace restored; resignation of Governor Tejedor; port of Buenos Ayres opened; the incidents in detail; merchants petition Mr. Osborn to mediate between the contestants; Mr. Osborn’s notes to the Argentine Government and to the provincial authorities; Governor Tejedor’s overtures for surrender the Argentine ultimatum; its acceptance and execution. 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

22 Mr. Hay to Mr. T. O. Osborn Aug. 14 No. 131.—Political situation; acknowledges receipt of Mr. Osborn’s 288 conveying intelligence of the cessation of hostilities between Argentine Republic and province of Buenos Ayres; instructs Mr. Osborn to express to the Argentine minister for foreign affairs the gratification of the Government of the United States at the result. 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

23 Mr. Consul Baker to Mr. Hunter. July 15 No. 381.—The political situation; review of the results of the surrender of the Tejedor party and the success of the nationals; the terms of the surrender; anomalous position of the national Congress; proposition to make the capital, Buenos Ayres, a federal district, like the District of Columbia, questions put by Congress to the executive; and reply of the national government. 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

24 Mr. T. O. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. Sept. 6 No. 296.—The political situation; General Bustillos, national interventor, takes forcible possession of the provincial chambers by order of the President during a recess of the legislature; consequent resignation of Governor Moreno and his ministers, the municipal authorities and chief of police; Governor Moreno assigns his reasons therefor in an address to the people, a printed copy of which accompanies this dispatch; probable issuance by the President of an address antagonistic to that of Moreno; election of a new legislature on the 26th instant; acceptance of the situation by the people; they look forward to the administration of President Roca with confidence. 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 24]

25 do Sept. 22 No. 300.—Steam communication between New York and Buenos Ayres; proposed extension of Roach’s line of American steamers from Rio de Janeiro to Buenos Ayres; views of the President of the Argentine Republic thereon; his entire concurrence and promises of hearty co-operation from the incoming adminisiration; the subsidy voted by the Argentine Congress under President Sarmiento to any steamship company that would place a line of steam vessels between Buenos Ayres and any port of the United States; the increased subsidy voted during the present administration: the President’s willingness to ask for a still larger subsidy, if necessary; postponement of further action until the inauguration of General Roca; probable opposition to the proposed line; benefits to result therefrom. 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

26 do Sept. 24 No. 301.—The capital of the Argentine Republic; the national chamber of deputies passes a bill declaring Buenos Ayres the capital, subject to certain restrictions; peaceable election of new deputies to Congress in place of those unseated during the late rebellion; return of the President and Congress to Belgrano. 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

austria-hungary.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

27 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson. 1879. Nov. 28. No. 138.—The condition of Hebrews in Roumania; incloses copy of a letter from the president of the Hebrew board of delegates on civil and religious rights, asking that the good offices of the Government of the United States be exerted towards securing for Hebrew residents in Roumania equality of civil and religious rights stipulated in treaty of Berlin; deep interest felt by Government of United States in welfare of Hebrew race in foreign countries; this government will be grateful for any advantages its minister may be able to secure for that people. (See Mr. Kasson’s 271 of December 24, 1879, of this volume, and his No. 167 of February 16, 1879, page 49 of the Foreign Relations for 1879.) 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

28 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts Nov. 29 No. 265.—Trade-marks; refers to recent decision of United States Supreme Court, declaring the national trade-mark law unconstitutional; desires to know how this will affect previous instructions touching trade-mark convention with Servia and Roumania. 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

29 do Dec. 18 No. 269.—River improvements in Austria-Hungary; Capt. J. R. Eads’ application for information thereon, for the use of the Mississippi River Commission; papers and map transmitted; memorandum of the Vienna foreign office accompanying the same. (See Mr. Kasson’s No. 282, of January 17, 1879, page 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 32].) 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

30 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson Dec. 19 No. 142.—Trade-marks; refers to recent decision of United States Supreme Court in relation thereto; as Congress is at present occupied in the consideration of the law of trade-marks, the Department considers it best to delay the proposed negotiations on the subject with Servia and Roumania. 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

31 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts Dec. 24 No. 271.—The condition of Hebrews in Roumania; refers to inaccuracies in the memorial addressed to the Department by the union of American Hebrew congregations, and sent to Mr. Kasson with Mr. Evarts’ No. 138 (of November 28, 1879); Italy, Austria, and France satisfied with Roumanian action toward the Hebrews; progress made in assuring them protection of person and property; naturalization question remains to be settled, on basis in common with other races; the question one of internal administration; articles, conoerning religious freedom and protection, which Mr. Kasson proposes to include in the treaty no win process of negotiation with Roumania. (See instruction to Mr. Kasson of November 28, 1879, No. 138.) 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

32 do 1880. Jan. 17 No. 282.—Improvements of river navigation in Austria-Hungary; continuation of information for the use of the Mississippi River Commission; Mr. Kasson transmits all the correspondence in translation; the Austrian Danube; improvements begun 1850; cost thus far, 45,350,000 florins; improvements of the affluents of the Danube; the Hungarian Danube; 44,000,000 florins expended on the river since 1871, and 9,930,000 florins on its affluents, by the Hungarian Government; effects of these improvements on rates of transportation mainly conjectural. 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 32]

33 do Feb. 9 No. 291.—European railways; effects of increase in governmental ownership of railways upon international engagements; new clauses necessary in commercial treaties to control transportation tariffs; how Prussia’s ownership of the trunk lines influences the foreign commerce of Austria-Hungary; Austria acquiring control of the great railway lines of the empire; this tendency general in Europe; military and commercial reasons therefor; transit countries thereby force commercial concessions from their neighbors; need of guarding, in future treaties, against railway tariff discriminations against American products; Mr. Kasson proposes to introduce clauses in the treaties now under negotiation to protect American trade from such discriminations in the Danubian principalities. (See Mr. Kasson’s No. 195, of May 7, 1879, Foreign Relations, 1879, page 63.) 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

34 do Feb. 13 No. 292.—Mormon recruiting in Austria; reply of the Austro-Hungarian foreign office to Mr. Kasson’s communication of the circular of the Department of State of August 9, 1879; willingness of Austrian Government to check such unlawful emigration by all proper means. (See Mr. Evarts’ circular, Foreign Relations, 1879, page. 11.) 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

35 do Feb. 14 No. 293.—Completion of the Austrian census of the “occupied” provinces of Bosnia and Herzegovina; population of both 1,142,147, an increase of 90,662 over the Turkish census of 1876; religious and other statistics. 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

36 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 18 No. 295.—Recognition of Roumania; reports receipt of telegram from United States commercial agent at Bucharest, stating that recognition of Roumania by England, France, and Germany takes place on 26th instant; asks intention of this government as to same. 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

37 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson. Mar. 9 No. 158.—Recognition of Roumania; acknowledges Mr. Kasson’s No. 295, conveying information of immediate recognition by Great Britain, France, and Germany, and asking intentions of this government in that regard; the President has addressed Congress on the subject; qualified recognition by appointment of consul at Galatz; action of Congress only wanting to the full establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries. 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

38 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts Feb. 25 No. 297.—Roumanian independence; recognition of by the remaining signatories of the treaty of Berlin; identical note of recognition by representatives of Great Britain, France, and Germany; Austrian action respecting the settlement of the Jewish question; text of Baron Haymerle’s note of February 7; text of the identical note of the three powers, of February 20, 1880. 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 38]

39 do Mar. 1 No. 298.—Emigration from Hungary to the United States; active movement from Ober-Zemplin and Saros in Upper Hungary, and from-manufacturing districts in Zipsc and Abazzy; many hundreds said to have emigrated from Trentschin and Neutra; a Pesth newspaper suggests checking emigration by grants of public land to the needy. (See Mr. Kasson’s No. 327, of May 29, 1880, page 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44].)

40 do Apr. 14 No. 310.—The liberal victory in England; depressing effects in Austrian political circles; expressions of the government press; the fall of the Beaconsfield cabinet regarded as equivalent to the death of the treaty of Berlin; the artificial character of the solutions of that treaty requires the personal efforts of its framers to carry it through; disappearance of five of its framers from their places at the head of their respective governments.

41 do May 5 No. 320.—Political condition of affairs at Monte-negro. 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

42 do May 13 No. 322.—The Albanian movement; it seems to be more rapid and more extensive than was at first expected; independence aimed at; the assembly at Scutari, April 19, 1880; effective and war-like speech of Hodo Bey; his dramatic appeals to the popular sentiment against the Turks; he strips off his Ottoman decorations and cuts down the Turkish flag; the lion-standard of Albania hoisted; the movement supported; a syndicate of bankers at Scutari offers $2,000 a day for the maintenance of those actually under arms; choice of Doda, a Christian, and Hodo, a Mussulman, as military commanders; the official league at Scutari, May 7, proclaims Albanian independence; the expulsion of Turkish functionaries ordered; Turkish troops passing over to the League; Mr. Kasson’s comments on the movement; later dispatches, May 11, indicate that the movement is rather for autonomy, under the rule of an Albanian prince, than for complete independence; the Turkish forces awaiting re-enforcements in the citadel of Scutari. (See Mr. Kasson’s No. 320, page 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], supra. 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

43 do May 29 No. 327.—Emigration from Hungary to the United States; petition to the Diet by the county of Saros; over 3,000 emigrants from one county the past season; local suggestions for checking emigration by passport rules, international convenitions, and for returning “undeceived” emigrants to their homes. (See Mr. Kasson’s No. 298, March 1, 1880, page 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39].) 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

44 do July 6 No. 340.—Coinage statistics. (Vide F. R., 1879, pages 82–86.) 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

45 do July 26 No. 343.—Abundance of the harvest in Hungary. 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

46 Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. Aug. 4 No. 350.—Montenegro; report upon Mr. Kasson’s visit to the Montenegrin frontier and capital; his stay in Cettinjé; hospitality of the prince; population and organization of Montenegro; religion and education; productions and commerce; foreign trading ports; foreign representation in Montenegro. 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

47 do Aug. 7 No. 351.—Statistics of food-consumption in Vienna; large seizures of articles unfit for food. 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

48 do Aug. 7 No. 352.—Bosnia; completion of the Austria census; correction of statistics heretofore given. 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

belgium.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

49 Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts 1879. July 24 No. 78.—Continued excitement concerning the public instruction law; Baron d’Anethan’s mission to the Vatican; coquetry with the Holy See; Catholic animosity to the law; the priests urge the withdrawal of Catholic children from the schools; they continue, however, for the most part to attend; violence of party invective; threats against the King’s life; probably due to fanaticism or lunacy; charges against Pere Malou; the King’s personal indifference to rumors of danger. (See Mr. Goodloe’s Nos. 58 and 70, April 16 and June 18, 1879, Foreign Relations, 1879, pp. 90 and 97.) 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 49]

50 do Aug. 4 No. 79.—Floods in Belgium; disastrous results; Mr. Goodloe’s journey through the submerged district; the climate of Belgium in 1878—206 rainy days, 17 hail, 19 snow, 17 severe frost, 24 showery with thunder, 47 foggy, 33 very cloudy, and 2 dear. 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

51 Mr. Wilson to Mr. Evarts. 1880. Feb. 16 No. 3.—Permanent Exhibition of Arts, Science, Commerce, and Industry at Brussels, independent of the National Exhibition to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of Belgian independence; opportunities for American exhibits. 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

52 do Feb. 28 No. 6.—Permanent Industrial Exhibition at Brussels; samples for exhibit to be admitted free of entry. 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]

53 Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts Apr. 1 No. 98.—Prevention of Mormon emigration to the “United States; action of the Belgian Government on the circular note of the United States of August 9, 1879. (See Foreign Relations, 1879, page 11.) 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

54 Mr. Putnam to Mr. Evarts July 26 No. 7.—National celebration in honor of the fiftieth anniversary of Belgian independence; opening of the National Exhibition in Brussels, June 16; rich agricultural, industrial, and artistic display; grand review; religious and civic ceremonial; inauguration at Lachen of a statue of Leopold I: the addresses. 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

55 July 27 No. 8.—Brussels Permanent Exhibition; progress of Belgium in the arts; suggestions of Mr. Putnam that American manufacturers contribute specimens of their craft; agricultural machinery rendered unnecessary by reason of the smaliness of farms and abundance of cheap hand-labor. 71 [Pg. 71 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

56 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Putnam Sept. 7 No. 13.—International Congress; appointment of a delegate to represent the Government of the United States at the same. 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57]

correspondence with the belgian legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

57 Mr. Neyt to Mr. Evarts July 22 Consular convention between Belgium and the United States; authorization of, by Senate; suppression of the word “alone” in the second paragraph of Article XII; asks reason therefor. 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57]

58 do July 23 Celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of independence of Belgium; organization of International Congress of Commerce and Industry, to meet at Brussels on 6th of September;’ expresses hope that the Government of the United States will be represented therein. 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

59 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Nevt 1880. Aug. 13 Same subject; reply of the Secretary of State to Mr. Neyt’s note of July 22, regretting the inability of the department to comply with the request therein expressed; probable motive of the Senate. 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

60 do Sept. 8 International Congress; appointment of a delegate to represent the United States at. 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

bolivia.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

61 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis 1879. Aug. 8 No. 17.—The war; overtures for mediation of Colombia in the interest of peace; mission of Dr. Arosemena, ex-foreign minister of Colombia, to visit La Paz, Lima, and Santiago; the interest with which the results of this attempt will be watched. (See Mr. Dichman’s No. 119, this volume, paee 309.) 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, and Doc. 62]

62 Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts Sept. 15 No. 29.—Death of the Bolivian minister of foreign affairs, Sefior Pedro J. de Guerra; his high public offices; official tributes to his memory and eminent services. 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, and Doc. 62]

63 do Sept. 29 No. 35.—The South American war; the mission of Dr. Arosemena proffering the friendly mediation of Colombia; its failure. (See Mr. Dichman’s No. 119 of August 2, 1879, page 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], and Mr. Evarts’ No. 73 of October 15, 1879, page 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], this volume.) 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63]

64 do Oct. 9 No. 43.—Bolivian decree concerning privateers and letters of marque; a purpose avowed of resorting to such means of warfare, Bolivia not having adhered to the Treaty of Paris; Chilian property on United States Vessels to be respected. Note of Bolivian foreign minister to Mr. Pettis. (See Mr. Evarts’ instructions to Mr. Pettis of June 23 and 25, 1879, Foreign Relations, 1879, pp. 125–128.) 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

65 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis Oct. 24 No. 34.—Death of Señor Guerra, foreign minister of Bolivia; expressions of condolence and regret. 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

66 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Adams 1880. Apr. 19 No. 3.—Exchange of prisoners of war between Chili and Peru and Bolivia; Mr. Osborn’s dispatch on the proposed exchange transmitted; Mr. Adams instructed to further the proposal so far as consistent and proper. (See No. 132 from Mr. Osborn this volume, page 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113].) 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

67 Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts June 14 No. 3.—Mr. Adams’ arrival at Lima. Bolivian affairs as seen from the Peruvian point of view. Movements of Mr. Adams and the United States steamship Alaska. Conferences with Mr. Christiancy and the diplomatic corps at Lima. 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

68 do June 22 No. 4.—Political affairs in Bolivia; the national Congress elects General Campero President and adopts active war measures; a strong government foreshadowed; publication of a protocol looking to the union of Peru and Bolivia under a single constitution. Mr. Adams’ journey toward La Paz. 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

69 do Aug. 5 No. 22.—Political situation; Congress still in session; discussion of the peace policy; two members of the cabinet said to favor the same. Arica now open to Bolivian commerce. Movements of Chilian troops. An early invasion of Bolivia probable. 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69]

brazil.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

70 Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts 1879. June 16 No. 107.—Electoral reform bill: has passed the Chambers without amendment; now before the Senate; its chances there doubtful; Baron de Cotegipe’s leadership in favor of the bill; proposal to amend by making non-Catholics and naturalized Brazilians eligible to office; this radical reform is a conservative measure; precedents for such conservative reforms; the abolition of slavery was brought forward as a conservative measure, and so prevailed against liberal opposition. 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70]

71 Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts Aug. 2 No. 113.—The political and material situation of Brazil since 1878 reviewed; the measures of the liberal ministry on taking office; issue of paper currency with bad effects; successful issue of bonds; a reformed budget introduced and passed by the lower Chamber; action of the Senate; the former years’ budget continued with modifications; a new 125,000,000 coupon loan to be sold at 96 per cent, minimum; its success assured; the large railway concessions to Senhor Pecego; efforts to raise funds for this railway scheme in London and Paris; mission of Mr. de La Hande to Rio; the Brazilian government made depositary for the construction funds of the railway, paying 7 per cent, thereon; statement of the public debt of Brazil; large increase since 1870. 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

72 do Sept. 4 No. 123.—The interoceanic canal scheme of Mr. de Lesseps: reported that application has been made to the Brazilian government for laborers for the work; 15,000 negroes said to be promised; great demand for labor in Brazil; projects to introduce Chinese labor; debate on the subject in the Chambers; views of Mr. de Sinimbú on cooly labor; unlikelihood that laborers will be sent out of the country to aid Mr. de Lesseps. 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

73 do Nov. 3 No. 133.—Death of two prominent Brazilian statesmen, General Osorio, minister of war, and Baron de Villa Bella, ex-minister of foreign affairs; their respective careers. 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

74 do Nov. 3. No. 135.—The political situation; closing of the second session of the Chambers and opening of an extraordinary session; the extra session called to act on the electoral reform bill; its fate in the Senate doubtful; the Emperor’s speech from the throne; neutrality of Brazil in the South American war on the Pacific coast. 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

75 do Nov. 15 No. 136.—The political situation; failure of the electoral reform bill in the Senate; defeat of the ministry; the Chambers not dissolved, but adjourned; Mr. de Sinimbú’s character; comments on the chances of appealing from the Chambers to the people by a dissolution; probable attempt to revive the bill in a changed form at the next session; the labor question attracting much attention. 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

76 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hilliard. Dec. 1 No. 89.—Recent decision of Supreme Court declaring the trade-mark act of July 8, 1870, unconstitutional; effect upon the recent trademark agreement between the United States and Brazil. 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

77 Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. 1880. Jan. 23 No. 147.—The railroad riots in Rio de Janeiro; history of the affair a new tax levied on passengers in public conveyances; failure of the attempt of some of the street railways to commute the tax by monthly payments; public indignation meetings held; the law enforced; January 1 a public holiday; resistance of the people; acts of violence; the troops fire on the people; second day’s fighting; attempt to memorialize the Emperor; the crowds refused access to the palace; action of the Botanical Gardens Tramway; tranquillity restored; Mr. Hilliard’s comments; the Emperor’s views on government. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

do Apr. 3 No. 156.—Resignation of the Sinimbú cabinet; disastrous results to the administration of the failure of the electoral reform bill; the, Emperor’s refusal to dissolve the Chambers; Senhor Saraiva forms a new cabinet; sketch of his career and character; his associates in the new cabinet. 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

79 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. June 5 No. 166.—Contemplated withdrawal of the regular line of steamers between the United States and Brazil: disastrous effect on commerce. 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

80 Mr. J. C. White to Mr. Evarts July 24 No. 168.—Proposed subsidy to a steamship line between Brazil and the United States and Canada; Canada has voted £10,000 subsidy; action of the Chambers toward the American line; the subsidy suspended, because the steamers are unable to call at Maranhao, as stipulated in the contract. 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

81 Mr. Devens to Mr. Hilliard. Aug. 21 No. 114.—Franco-American Claims Commission; appointment Of a third commissioner by Brazil. 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

82 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts Aug. 21 No. 175.—The Franco-American Claims Commission; appointment of a third commissioner by Brazil; probability that Baron de Arinos, now at Brussels, will be appointed. 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]

83 do Aug. 26 No. 176.—Franco-American Claims Commission; Baron de Arinos, minister to Brussels, selected by the Emperor as third commissioner; copy of note from the Foreign Office announcing the appointment. 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83]

correspondence with the brazilian legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

84 Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts 1879. June 12 Counterfeiting paper currency of foreign governments in the United States; law for the punishment of; the subject laid before the Brazilian Government; hopes the matter will again be brought to the attention of Congress. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85]

85 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros. June 20 Counterfeiting paper currency of foreign governments; acknowledges receipt of Mr. Borges’s note of the 12th instant, and will again address the proper committee of Congress on the subject. 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85]

86 Mr. Torreão de Barros to Mr. Evarts. Dec. 12 Counterfeiting the paper money of foreign countries; the Brazilian Government would be glad to see the repressive measures made more ample, to cover government securities, &c. 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

87 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros. 1880. Jan. 8 Counterfeiting paper money of foreign governments; the chairman of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary informed. 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

88 do Jan. 30 Brazilian embassy to China; hearty co-operation and moral support of the Government of the United States promised. 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

89 Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts May 18 Case of the Brazilian vessel Foster; alleged excessive dues collected at the port of New York; if persisted in must be detrimental to commercial interest of both countries. 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89]

90 do May 20 Brazilian embassy to China; thanks for promised support of this government. 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92]

91 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges May 26 Case of the Foster; overcharges at the New York custom-house; commerce must not be permitted to suffer through neglect or absence of treaty provisions or legislation. 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92]

92 do June 15 Case of the Foster; opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury; the Foster entitled to exemption by virtue of the President’s proclamation of November 4, 1847. (9 Stat’s at Large, p. 1001.) 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92]

93 Mr. Hay to Mr. Borges. June 17 Case of the Foster; copy Of the proclamation of President Polk of November 4, 1847, transmitted. 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

94 do June 18 Case of the Foster; steps taken by the Treasury for the refunding of excess of tonnage tax paid by that vessel. 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]

95 Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts Aug. 2 Case of the Foster; acknowledges courtesy of United States Government in non-exaction of additional duties complained of, Brazilian vessels being exempted as heretofore, in pursuance of proclamation of November 4, 1847. 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]

central america.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

96 Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts 1879. Aug. 28 No. 24.—Question of citizenship; the Government of Honduras claims Mr. Consul Burchard as a citizen of that country through long residence and acceptance of public office. Note of Mr. Rosa to Mr. Logan. 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

97 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan Sept. 19 No. 22.—Question of citizenship; views of Department on the Honduras claim that Mr. Con-sul Burchard has lost his American citizenship by long residence and acceptance of office; regular naturalization, by the express act of the party, deemed necessary to effect change of allegiance in such a case; mere acceptance of a foreign office does not denationalize. 107 [Pg. 107 includes portions of Doc. 96 and Doc. 97]

98 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Logan Oct. 7 No. 24.—Abuse of the claim to American protection abroad, particularly in the Central American States; the case of Anton Joseph Maassen; expatriation, and what is necessary to be done to constitute it; impracticability of concluding that the continued residence of a native American citizen abroad of itself is sufficient to establish the fact; positive acquisition of other citizenship should be shown in order to constistitute legal expatriation. (See instruction No. 170, of October 19, 1880, to Mr. Fish, page 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605]; also, Mr. Logan’s No. 22 of August 20, 1879, in the volume of Foreign Relations for that year.) 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 98]

99 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan Nov. 3 No. 32.—Cases of the American schooners Santos Oteri and Susan Scranton; irregular proceedings on the part of Honduras customs officials; the consul of Honduras at New Orleans to be asked for an explanation of his action in clearing vessels for ports reported to be closed; Mr. Logan instructed to ascertain whether the ports of Bonaca and Utilla are closed or not. 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 99]

100 Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts Dec. 6 No 44.—Guatemala; changes in the constitution of the Republic; Mr. Logan considers how the proposed changes will affect foreign interests; conflicting claims as to nationality of children of foreigners born in Guatemala; representations of the diplomatic body against these provisions; Mr. Logan’s interview with President Barrios; the assembly makes no change; historical summary of the like constitutional provision in the Spanish-American States as compared with the parent legislation of Spain; the ground long abandoned by Spain is still adhered to in Snanish-America. 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 100]

101 do Dec. 20 No. 45.—The new constitution of Guatemala; text of the obnoxious articles concerning citizenship; Mr. Logan’s note to foreign minister reserving the rights of Americans; similar notes sent in by other foreign representatives. The Guatemalan reply. (See Mr. Logan’s No. 44, ante.) 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101]

102 do 1880. Mar. 5 No. 63.—Mr. Logan’s official visits to the several Central American States; his reception in San Salvador; addresses of Mr. Logan and President Zaldivar. 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

103 do May 7 No. 83.—Marriages of Americans abroad; Mr. Logan’s inquiries on the subject of the duties and rights of United States diplomatic representatives to perform, or authenticate the performance of, the marriage ceremony. 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

104 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan June 8 No. 69.—Same subject; performance of marriage ceremony by a diplomatic or consular representative of the United States not legal unless authorized by law of the place [lex loci) where he officially resides. 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

105 Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts June 30 No. 95.—The Guatemala Central Railway; formal celebration of its’ opening to travel; sketch of the history of the road: it becomes an American corporation; three Central American presidents attend the opening ceremonies on June 15; animation of the scene; character of the road; its good business prospects; probable extension to the capital by the American Company. 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

106 do July 17 No. 99.—Visit of President Soto, of Honduras, to Guatemala; Mr. Logan entertains him and other distinguished guests at dinner, July 15; incidents of the occasion. 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

chili.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

107 Mr. Evarts to Mr. T. A. Os-born. 1879. Aug. 8 No. 70.—The South American war; mission of Dr. Arosemena to tender the mediation of Colombia in the direction of peace; while not directly indorsing Dr. Arosemena’s mission, this government feels an interest in its result. (See Mr. Dichman’s No. 119, of August 2, 1879, p. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]. 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107]

108 Mr. T. A. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. Aug. 16 No. 112.—The situation; the war spirit in the ascendancy; president making and, possibly, president breaking; the government called upon by Congress for war explanations; rumor Of intended intervention of the United States; it is short lived, but develops strong public opposition. 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109]

109 do Oct. 28 No. 120.—The South American war; the peace mission of Dr. Arosemena, the Colombian ambassador; Mr. Osborn’s conversation with him; no results from his proffer of mediation; Dr. Arosemena will soon leave for Peru; Chili confident of success in the war; aggressive popular spirit; probable guarantees of future security to be exacted by Chili if successful; remote prospects of peace in view of the pretensions of both sides; strength of the Chilian forces; enthusiasm over the capture of the Huascar. 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109]

110 Mr. Evarts to Mr. T. A. Osborn. Dec. 26 1880. No. 78.—Foreign built ships owned by Americans abroad; the substance of further instructions to Mr. Christiancy on the subject now sent to Mr. Osborn, to insure entire correspondence between the instructions given to ministers at Lima and Santiago on the subject; the right of Americans to buy foreign built ships abroad is clear, and has been uniformly recognized; possibility of collusion in such transactions does not invalidate this natural right; the flying of the American flag cannot be absolutely prohibited; if the consul has reason to believe a sale made before him is honest, the flag can be flown as an emblem of the owner’s nationality; duties of consuls in the premises to record bill of sale, authenticate its execution, and certify to the owner’s citizenship; discretion necessary to determine good faith in the transactions; if fraud, or ground of belief of fraud, appears, the certificate may be refused, but the mere fact of transfer of a foreign vessel to an American is not evidence of bad faith; if a vessel so certified comes within the jurisdiction of another American consul, only the most conclusive evidence of fraud would justify the latter in not recognizing the vessel’s nationality; caution necessary in such cases; the privileges and immunities of such foreign built vessels registered in consulates abroad are different from those of regularly registered American vessels; they trade as neutrals, in time of war, at their own risk; duty of the execution to protect legitimate American interests as far as practicable; action of one consul or minister should not be reversed by another, except on the strongest proof of mistake or collusion. (See Mr. Evarts’ Nos. 65 and 67 to Mr. Osborn, and Nos. 7, 11, and 23 to Mr. Christiancy, and also, dispatches from Chili and Peru, in Foreign Relations, 1879, pages 150, 177, 180, 861, 865, 867, 874, 877, 881, 882, 884, 894.) 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

111 do Feb. 19 No. 83.—The war; destruction of American property at Talara and at the Lobos Islands by the Chilian fleet; instructed to represent that the United States expect the rights of American citizens under treaties and international law to be respected. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

112 Mr. T. A. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 25 No. 131.—The war; Chilian order for the bombardment of all defended towns on the Peruvian coast, and destruction of all moles and launches; danger to neutral rights thereby; action of the diplomatic corps; simultaneous notes of protest addressed to the Chilian Government; text of Mr. Osborn’s note; the grounds of his remonstrance; the coast property of Peru belongs largely to foreign owners, many being Americans. 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

113 Mr. T. A. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 27 No. 132.—The war; proposed exchange of prisoners of war between Chili and Bolivia; note from the Chilian foreign office, and action of Mr. Osborn thereon. 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113]

114 do Mar. 5 No. 133.—The war; the nitre and guano deposits of the Tarapaca district: probability of Chili’s holding them on the conclusion of the war; public opinion in favor of annexation; difficulties in the way of the Chilian military administration of the occupied nitre district; export duty levied; reduction of exportations in consequence; the prices of nitre in Europe; Chilian control of guano exports; foreign holders of Peruvian bonds permitted by Chilian Government to export guano in satisfaction of their primary lien thereon; text of General Villagran’s order to that end. 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

115 Mr. Evarts to Mr. T. A. Osborn. Apr. 13 No. 87.—The war; proposed exchange of prisoners between Chili and Bolivia; instructions to be sent to Mr. Adams at La Paz. (See instruction to Mr. Adams of April 19, 1880.) (September 13, 1880, page 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66], supra.) 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

116 do Apr. 14 No. 88.—The war; approval of Mr. Osborn’s protest against the order to bombard Peruvian towns and destroy moles, &c. No effort to be spared to restrict the war to collisions of a military character. (See Mr. Osborn’s No. 131, of February 25, 1880, page 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], supra.) 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

117 do Apr. 23 No. 89.—Exchange of prisoners between Chili and Bolivia; transmits text of instruction to Mr. Adams, concerning the proposition of Chili. (See instruction No. 3 of April 19, 1880, to Mr. Adams, page 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]. ante.) 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

118 Mr. T. A. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. Apr. 30 No. 143.—The war in South America; destruction of property at Talara and at Labos Islands by Chilian navy; Mr. Osborn reports his conclusions thereon; the action at Talara unjustifiable; restrictions on the exportation of niter. Property of British subjects at Lobos and Pabellon de Pico destroyed, as a war measure against Peru. Chili likely to maintain her position respecting Peruvian guano exports. 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 118]

119 do June 10 No. 151.—Message of the President to Congress; it relates mainly to war matters; notwithstanding the war, the past year has been a prosperous one, as shown by subjoined extracts from the message. 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

120 do Aug. 4 No. 155.—The war; efforts of foreign legations in the direction of peace; notably those of France, Italy, and Great Britain; no evidence of any intention to dictate terms; European intervention by force not thought of; no speedy termination of the war apparent; public opinion demands Tarapaca, which district Peru is not willing to cede; a new president to be elected in April, 1880; anxiety of the party in power to continue to hold the reins of government; effect of this upon the war policy; strength of the army 25,000 men; the government desires to avoid a Campaign against Lima. 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

121 do Sept. 9 No. 164.—The South-American war; reply of the minister of foreign relations to Mr. Osborn’s note of the 21st February; attitude of foreign powers. 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

122 do Sept. 13 No. 165.—The war; exchange of prisoners with Bolivia; correspondence thereon with the Chilian foreign office. 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 121 and Doc. 122]

correspondence with the chilian legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

123 Mr. Asta-Buxuaga to Mr. Evarts. 1879 Dec. 15 Case of an alleged torpedo-boat said to be in process of construction at and awaiting shipment from Bristol, R. I.; asks that measures be taken for its detention, as it is intended to be used against Chili by the allied powers. 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

124 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Asta-Buruaga. 1880. Feb. 10 Alleged violation by the government of the neutrality laws; no ground of action against the builders of the vessel said to be a torpedo-boat for use of the allies in the war with Chili; a watch ordered to be kept on the vessel’s movements. 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124]

125 Mr. Asta-Buruaga to Mr. Evarts. Apr. 24 The South American war; presentation of the subject by the Chilian minister. 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 125]

126 Mr. Hay to Mr. Asta-Buruaga. June 18 Decision of the Secretary of the Treasury that Chilian vessels are to be exempted from a greater tonnagetax than 30 cents per ton. 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

china.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

127 Mr. G. F. Seward to Mr. Evarts. 1879. July 12 No. 451.—Diplomatic action on general grievances; a meeting of diplomatic body held July 10; decided to present questions of taxation of foreign manufactures and foreign-owned native produce, official intercourse, and judicial procedure; these subjects considered in connection with the late German treaty; likelihood of harmonious agreement in conference on these questions; improvement in official intercourse; beneficial results of the extinction of the FooChow Trade Committee. 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

128 do Sept. 24 No. 482.—Diplomatic action on general grievances; conference of all foreign representatives at Peking, September 23; lekin taxes, transit passes; judicial procedure, and official intercourse to be discussed: committees formed. 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

129 do Oct. 29 No. 495.—Shanghai harbor rules; Mr. Seward transmits a letter addressed by him to Consul-General Bailey, in relation to the prospect of breaking the dead-lock and having the rules put in operation; memorandum for Mr. Holcombe’s guidance in his conference with the Tsung-li Yamên, September 16, 1879, and minute of that conference transmitted to Mr. Bailey. 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

130 do Nov. 1 No. 499.—Procedure and extra-territorial rights in mixed cases; report of the judicial subcommittee of the foreign representatives as to the reforms required in mixed procedure, and two memoranda on the subject prepared by Mr. Seward, transmitted. (For text of Mr. Seward’s memoranda see appendices 1 and 2 to Mr. Seward’s No. 505, page 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133] of this volume.) 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

131 do Nov. 3 No. 502.—Consular interpreters; representations as to the necessity of increasing the number and salaries of these officers; $2,500 recommended for interpreters at Tientsin, Foo-Chow, and Shanghai; one of same grade needed at Canton; inadequacy of the salary, $750, at present paid to the interpreters at the lesser consulates; the consular service of the United States in China falling behind that of the other western powers: suggested remedies. 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131]

132 Mr. Hunter to Mr. G-. F. Seward. Nov. 7 No. 321.—Judicial systems of the United States, Great Britain, and France in China; instructed to report upon. 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

133 Mr. G. F. Seward to Mr. Evarts. Nov. 18 No. 505.—Procedure and extra-territorial rights in mixed cases; report of the judicial subcommittee adopted by the conference of foreign representatives; reports, memoranda, and protocols transmitted; joint note to the Tsung-li Yamên; Mr. Seward reviews the whole subject connectedly in his memoranda. (See Mr. Seward’s Nos. 482 and 499, pages 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128] and 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130] of this volume.) 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

134 do Nov. 21 No. 510.—Commercial grievances; results of the conferences of foreign representatives in this branch of their deliberations; full analysis of the questions involved; the received intent of existing commercial treaties; the proposals of the Chefoo convention, as to, 1, transit passes, 2, foreign settlements in the open ports, 3, opium traffic, and, 4, transit duties; the position of the Chinese Government; the radical differences between these two positions; provisions of foreign treaties compared; past correspondence reviewed; movement for a general conference on trade and judicial grievances; a statement prepared by Mr. von Brandt; letter of the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce; prospects of the discussion thus inaugurated between the foreign representatives and the Tsung-li Yamên; full appendices of statements, memoranda, protocols, and notes transmitted. 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

135 Mr. Gr. F. Seward to Mr. Evarts. Nov. 25 No. 512.—Official intercourse of foreign representatives with native officers; questions discussed in the conferences of foreign representatives. Report of the subcommittee; the same results reached as in the conferences of 1876. Memorandum of Mr. C. Arendt on the subject. Memorandum of Mr. Deveria; protocol of the resolution of the diplomatic conference to address the Chinese government on the matter. 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

136 do Dec. 4 No. 523.—General question of foreign grievances as to trade, procedure, and intercourse; reply of the Tsung-li Yaineji to the preliminary joint note of the foreign representatives; their readiness to discuss the questions involved; their position indicated in the Chinese diplomatic circular of 1878. (See enclosure with Mr. Seward’s No. 510, p. 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 134] of this volume.) China invites a discussion of the existing treaties apart from the grievances; action of the foreign representatives on the reply of the Tsung-li Yamên. 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

137 do Dec. 8 No. 526.—The lekin tax on opium; representations of the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce, concerning the operations of the Swatow Guild in farming out this tax in the open ports; efforts of trade combinations of native merchants against the interests of the Chinese Government; Consul General Bailey’s letter transmittingletter of the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce. 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

138 do Dec. 10 No. 530.—Transit-pass rules; local rules iramed at Canton without consulting the consulates or the foreign representatives; their objectionable character; the foreign representatives instruct the consuls to refuse assent thereto; Mr. Seward’s circular to the United States consuls. 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

139 do Dec. 11 No. 531.—The Lew Chew dispute between China and Japan; the Chinese aspect of the question historically considered; the ancient status of Lew Chew as a quasi dependency of China, as opposed to the Japanese claim of domination; mode of investiture of the Lew-Chewan kings by China since 1655; comparison of the relationship of Corea, Lew Chew, Siam, Annam, and Burmah to the Imperial Government of China; resentment of the Chinese at the action of Japanese in reducing Lew Chew to vassalage; the application of the Chinese Government to General Grant to mediate in the question; text of certain historical documents touching the Chinese prerogative of investiture. 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

140 do Dec. 27 No. 542.—Outward transit-pass rules; action of the foreign representatives on a report of the German consul at Shanghai on certain rules proposed to be enforced there; adoption of a uniform code of rules by the central government recommended; memorandum of Mr. Brenan, of the British legation, communicated to the Tsung-li Yamên. 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

141 do Dec. 27 No. 544.—Shanghai harbor rules; inquiry of the foreign representatives concerning the action of the Chinese Government on the proposal to frame a new code of rules; Mr. Holcombe deputed to present the new rules for consideration; text of the new rules; the old rules of 1878 to remain in force in the foreign district. 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 141]

142 Mr. G. F. Seward to Mr. Evarts. 1880. Jan. 12 No. 557.—Chung How’s case; text of the Imperial decree; résumé of the life and public services of the late ambassador to Russia: occupation of Kuldja by the Russians and the mission of Chung How; description of Kuldja, its political, social, and geographical aspects; its value to Russia; the situation in the early part of 1879; the object of Chung How’s mission the re-occupation of Kuldja by the Chinese; his task no easy one because of Russia’s disinclination to relinquish a territory so long held by her; the foreign office believed to have been willing to adhere to Russia’s pledge to restore Kuldja to China whenever she should be in a position to re-occupy it, but the military party opposed thereto because of the value of this territory as a base of operations against Kashgaria, should such be projected; the policy of Russia toward China; failure of the two parties to agree; a middle course adopted; China to pay an indemnity of two and a half millions of dollars to Russia; trading privileges accorded to Russian frontier merchants; the treaty distasteful to China; Chung How considered to have failed in his mission; did he exceed his instructions or was he sacrificed to cover a mistake of the Yamên? Possible rejection of the Hreaty by China; probable result of the whole matter. 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

143 do Jan. 15 No. 561.—Judicial procedure in mixed cases; transmitting report of Consul Stahel on the subject of Mr. Seward’s memoranda of October 4, 1879, and October 14, 1879, with his No. 505, and on the operation of the existing procedure as between Americans and Chinese. (See Mr. Seward’s Nos. 499 and 505 of pages 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130] and 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], supra. 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

144 do Jan. 16 No. 563.—Shanghai harbor rules; note of Prince Kung to the foreign representatives, promising immediate enforcement of the rules of 1878 for the neighborhood of the foreign settlements and of the new rules above the settlements; the arrangement deemed satisfactory; comments of Mr. Seward; correspondence transmitted. 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 144]

145 Jan. 20 No. 564.—Shanghai harbor rules; the foreign representatives accept the arrangement proposed by Prince Kung; the foreign consuls at Shanghai instructed accordingly. 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

146 Mr. Evarts to Mr. G. F. Seward. Jan. 22 No. 337.—Judicial system and mixed courts in China; report of the committee upon the administration of justice; proposition that mixed cases, whether civil or criminal, should be tried in the proper court of defendant and in accordance with the laws of his country approved. 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

147 Mr. G. F. Seward to Mr. Evarts. Jan. 23 No. 567.—Judicial administration; response of the Tsung-li Yamên to the joint representations of the foreign representatives; the subject referred for report. (See Mr. Seward’s No. 505 of November 18, 1879, page 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133], supra.) 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

148 do Jan. 29 No. 575.—Chung How’s case; official hostility in Peking to the Kuldja treaty; probable punishment of Chung How; sympathy of the foreign representatives in his favor; imperial decrees ordering investigation of treaty and criminal process against Chung How. 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

149 do Jan. 30 No. 579.—Trade grievances; response of the Tsung-li Yamên to the joint note of the foreign representatives; their adherence to the terms of the Chinese circular of 1879, while expressing willingness to discuss the alleged grievances; correspondence transmitted. 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

150 Mr. Evarts to Mr. G. F. Seward. Jan. 31 No. 339.—Brazilian embassy to China: requested to extend his good office and moral support to the embassy. 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

151 Mr. G. F. Seward to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 6 No. 586.—Chung How’s case; the late ambassador’s life in danger: intention of diplomatic corps to communicate to the foreign office on subject; encloses copy of letter to Prince Kung. 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 151]

152 Mr. G. F. Seward to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 10 No. 591.—Trade grievances; conference with the foreign office requested by the diplomatic body. 223 [Pg. 223 includes portions of Doc. 151 and Doc. 152]

153 do Feb. 16 No. 596.—The Chinese circular of 1878; copies sent to consuls in China with instructions to report thereon; transmits the report of the consul at Ningpo; discussion of the circular from Consul Lord’s standpoint. 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

154 do Feb. 23 No. 605.—Chung How’s case; transmits copy of note of foreign office in reply to the circular-letter addressed to that department by the representatives of England, Germany, France, and the United States; a more hopeful outlook. 235 [Pg. 235 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

155 do Feb. 23 No. 606.—Kuldja treaty; Chung How’s case; practical rejection of the treaty; negotiations with Russia to be reopened; Chung How turned over to an extraordinary council for trial. 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 155]

156 do Mar. 1 No. 614.—Chinese emigration to Cuba and the Sandwich Islands; statements that such emigration is favored by the Chinese Government untrue. 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157]

157 do Mar. 8 No. 618.—Chung How’s case: the findings of the grand council approved; the late ambassador to Russia to be beheaded; review of the case from a western or more moderate standpoint. 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157]

158 do Mar. 16 No. 623.—Cargo-boats: transmits copy of a dispatch from the consul at Foochow, reporting the intention of the customs authorities at that port to levy a tonnage-due or registration fee upon cargo-boats; opposition thereto by the representatives of foreign powers as being contrary to treaty stipulations and injurious to trade. 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 158]

159 do Mar. 27 No. 645—Cargo-boats, tax on: the right to impose the same insisted on, but the actual taxation waived; the minister’s letter on the subject to the British ambassador inclosed. 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

160 do Apr. 1 No. 650.—Mixed court at Shanghai: administration of justice in mixed cases; reply of Prince Kung to the foreign representatives; views of the Taotal; Mr. Seward’s comments thereon. (See Mr. Seward’s circular to consuls in China, page 220 of Foreign Relations for 1879; also pages 221 and 229 of same volume.) 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

161 do Apr. 7 No. 654.—Cargo-boats, tax on: discussion of the subject at a meeting of the diplomatic corns. 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

162 do Apr. 19 No. 661.—Mixed court at Shanghai; Mr. Seward’s interview with the Yamên. 249 [Pg. 249 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

163 do Apr. 23 No. 665.—Trade grievances: conference of the diplomatic body with the Yamên; schedule of the line of action agreed upon and subsequently followed out at the interview. 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

164 do Apr. 24 No. 666.—Trade grievances: irregularities in the currency system of China; monetary conference of the diplomatic body with the Yamên. 256 [Pg. 256 includes portions of Doc. 163 and Doc. 164]

165 Mr. Evarts to Mr. G. F. Seward. May 1 No. 369.—Chung How’s case: approves course of Mr. Seward in addressing a note to Prince Kung on behalf of that officer. 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

166 Mr. Gr. F. Seward to Mr. Evarts. May 1 No 673.—Outward transit-pass rules: transmitting M. von Brandt’s memorandum on the same, as revised by the diplomatic conferences; the scheme to be presented to the Tsung-li Yamên on behalf of the diplomatic body; text of Mr. von Brandt’s memorandum and proposed new provisional rules for outward-transit passes, and for coastwise shipments of free native produce. 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

167 do May 6 No 681.—Foreign grievances: currency and customs-dues; memorandum of Mr. Seward’s remarks in presenting to the Tsung-li Yamên the questions on these subjects raised in the diplomatic conferences; text of Mr. Seward’s note to Prince Kung; necessity of a standard scale of currency for the payment of customs-dues throughout the Empire; the treasury tael compared with the local taels; objections to the Haikwan standard. 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

168 Mr. Consul-General Benny to Mr. Pay son. May 15 No. 32.—Russo-Chinese treaty: Mr. Denny forwards text of the Russo-Chinese treaty, concluded by Chung How, upon whom sentence of death was passed therefor; important memorial of Chih-t’ung, a scribe, analyzing the treaty and pointing out its obnoxious provisions. 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 168]

169 Mr. G. F. Seward to Mr. Evarts. May 27 No. 692.—Official intercourse between consuls and provincial authorities; text of a minute on the subject from the Chinese foreign office; the views of the Yamên on the representations of the diplomatic body not entirely satisfactory; the matter to be further considered. 272 [Pg. 272 is part of Doc. 169]

170 do May 31 No. 698.—Mixed court at Shanghai; letter of thanks from the doyen of the diplomatic corps for Mr. Seward’s conference with the Tsung-li Yamên. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171]

171 do June 10 No. 704.—War power of China; consular reports thereon transmitted. 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171]

172 do June 11 No. 705.—Education of Chinese in foreign branches; reports of consular officers of the United States in China upon the subject. 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 172]

173 do July 5 No. 718.—Chung How’s case; Prince Kung communicates an important edict in relation thereto; the Kuldja question under deliberation in a council of state; peace counsels in the ascendency; suspension of the punishment of Chung How. 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

174 do July 6 No. 719.—Correspondence with Chinese authorities; the advisability of our officers transmitting communications to the Chinese in English; Mr. Consul Lord’s views on the subject. 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174]

175 do July 10 No. 726.—Chung How’s case: copy of Mr. Seward’s note to Prince Kung expressing gratification at the result of this case. 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

176 do July 28 No. 739.—Export trade; reforms in; reports interview between the German minister and the foreign office. 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

177 do Aug. 13 No. 742.—Chung How, release of; text of the imperial decree temporarily revoking the sentence of death transmitted. 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177]

178 Mr. Hay to Mr. Angel I Aug. 10 No. 26.—Mixed courts of China; objectional methods of extracting evidence from criminals or witnesses employed by the mixed courts of China; statement of Mr. Parry, an Englishman; comment of the English press; distinction to be observed between punishment for crime and practical torture for the purpose of extracting evidence; failure of the code, framed with the co-operation of the foreign representatives, to rectify these abuses; instructed to use his efforts to secure, if possible, a more humanitarian method of compelling testimony. 292 [Pg. 292 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

179 Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts Aug. 20 No. 8.—The employment of the English language as a medium of communication with Chinese officials; correspondence with Consul Lord thereon; the change desirable, but must be effected gradually. 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179]

180 do Aug. 20 No. 9.—Cargo-boat regulations; recent attempts to enforce same at Foochow; correspondence with consul thereon. 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

181 do Aug. 20 No. 10.—Foochow; regulations for land transfers at; attempt of the authorities to enforce new and offensive rules; consul instructed to inform the Chinese officials that these rules will not be acquiesced in. 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 181]

182 do Aug. 28 No. 14.—Copyright in China; no law for the protection of authors in their works. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

183 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Angell Oct. 11 No. 47.—Chung How’s case; gratification of this government at the result. 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

correspondence with the chinese legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

184 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Yung Wing. 1880. Feb. 17 Chinese emigration; copy of translation of section CCLV of the penal code of China transmitted. 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 184]

185 Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 2 Chinese emigration; section CCLV to the Chinese penal code has no reference to Chinese emigration as contemplated in and sanctioned by the Burlingame treaty. 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

186 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Yung Wing. May 25 Special commission to China, announces appointment of; object thereof. 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

187 Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts. July 31 Transmits copies of a note of the Tsung-li-Yamên (foreign office) to the ministers of China in foreign countries. (See Appendix 6 to Mr. Seward’s No. 570 of November 21, 1879. ante, page 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 134].) 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188]

188 do Aug. 9 Wo Chung, case of the: arrival of the first Chinese steamer at an American port; asks that the same privileges in respect of duties, &c., be accorded to her which are conceded to vessels of other nations in treaty relations with the United States. 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188]

189 Mr. Hay to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing. Aug. 13 Wo Chung, case of the: the Secretary of the Treasury announces that it will be necessary to exact tonnage-tax at alien rates. 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

190 do Aug. 23 Wo Chung, case of the: careful consideration thereof by Department; customs duties on cargo, like alien tonnage dues, must, in the absence of specific and reciprocal treaty exemption, be decided by domestic legislation; existing commercial treaties between the United States and China do not cover the present case; interrogatories submitted; reply thereto awaited, when decision of this government will be announced. 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 189 and Doc. 190]

191 Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts. Sept, 4 Wo Chung: tonnage and import dues; case of the Chinese steamer Wo Chung recently arrived at San Francisco; reasons alleged why discriminating dues should not have been levied; the hope expressed that she will be relieved therefrom by the President’s proclamation. 306 [Pg. 306 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

192 Mr. Evarts to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing. Sept. 8 Wo Chung, case of the: official intelligence of action by customs authorities at San Francisco awaited; will confer with Secretary of the Treasury thereon. 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

193 do Nov. 23 Same subject: assurances contained in legation’s note of September 4, 1880, that no discriminating dues are levied upon American vessels in Chinese waters are satisfactory: text of the President’s proclamation of Nos. 23, 1880, transmitted. 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

colombia.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

194 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Aug. 2 No. 119.—The South American war; Dr Arosemena’s peace mission; note from Señor Louis Carlos Rico, secretary of the interior and foreign relations for the United States of Colombia on the subject transmitted. 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

195 do Aug. 14 No. 128.—Colombian boundary questions: efforts to come to an understanding with Venezuela; questions between Colombia and Costa Rica. 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

196 do Aug. 23 No. 130.—Purposes of the Venezuelan President Guzman Blanco’s visit to Europe; reported purchase of ironclads and arms in England for use against Colombia; anxiety caused in Colombia by this report: rumored secret treaty between Venezuela and Ecuador; the boundary dispute with Colombia. 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

197 do Sept. 4 No. 133.—Deposit of ships’ papers in Colombian ports; the protocol on that subject superseded by the Colombian law of 1879; its application general and not disadvantageous to United States mail steamers; the matter investigated by Mr. Dichman at Aspinwall; annoyance to shipping at Barranquilla; international character of ships’ papers examined; necessity of a change in Colombian legislation; Mr. Dichman’s exertions to protect mail steamers from inconvenience in its application; the protocol and law analyzed; questions between the Panama Railroad Company and the Colombian authorities at Aspinwall and Panama; duties of the port inspectors under existing treaties; necessity of defining the “neutralty” of the Isthmus as guaranteed by the treaty; reasons for regarding the new law as satisfactory to all interests concerned. 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 197]

198 do Sept. 20 No. 138.—Deposit of ships’ papers; translation of a part of the report of the Colombian foreign office, showing how the diplomatic agreement of 1876 came to be set aside. 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

199 Do Oct. 2 No. 146.—The riot at Bucaramanga: transmits a letter giving a detailed account of the occurrence; the lessons to be deduced therefrom; possible complications between Germany and Colombia. 316 [Pg. 316 includes portions of Doc. 198 and Doc. 199]

200 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. Oct. 15 No. 73.—The South American war; mediation of Colombia in; Dr.Arosemena’s peace mission; indications that the intervention of a neutral American power might be productive of good results; any proper effort in the direction of peace must be gratifying to the Government of the United States. 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

201 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. Nov. 9 No. 156.—Transit of extradited prisoners across Colombian territory; article 3 of the American-Colombian protocol of February 22, 1879, modified to allow prisoners to be transited in charge of civil, not military, officers; supplementary protocol to that end concluded October 23, 1879. (See Mr. Dichman’s No. 58, of March 17, 1879, arid Mr. Evarts’ instruction of May 12, 1879, Foreign Relations, 1879, pages 273 and 284.) 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

202 do Nov. 9 No. 158.—Deposit of ships’ papers in Colombian ports; Colombian Congress will be asked to modify the existing law, to adapt the system to the needs of the free ports of Aspinwall and Panama; correspondence with the Colombian foreign office transmitted. (See Foreign Relations, 1879, pp. 260, 266, 273, 280, 289.) 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

203 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman Dec. 9 No. 83.—Excessive tariff of postal charges in the United States of Colombia on correspondence intended for this country; letter from Postmaster-General of the United States inclosed; adhesion of Colombia to the Universal Postal Convention concluded at Paris, June 1, 1878, all that is necessary to remedy; instructed to urge the same. 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

204 do 1880. Mar. 8 No. 102.—Right of transit across Isthmus of Panama; protocol signed February 22, 1879, respecting; change therein accepted. (See Mr. Dichman’s Nos. 17, of October 30, 1878; 48 of February 15, 1879; 58 of March 17, 1879; 68 of April 14, 1879; and Mr. Evarts’ No. 41, of May 12, 1879, to Mr. Dichman, pages 251, 271, 273, and 284, of the volume of Foreign Relations for 1879.) 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

205 do June 7 No. 115.—Visit of the Adams and Kearsargeto the waters of the Isthmus of Panama; correspondence* with the Colombian legation in Washington transmitted; the action of President Cervera, the Panama executive, criticised; instructed to bring the matter earnestly to the attention of the Colombian Government with the view to placing in its proper light the unwarranted and unusual conduct of President Cervera. 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205]

206 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. July 13 No. 185.—Fourth of July celebration at Bogota: friendly demonstrations of the Colombian Government on the occasion; resolutions adopted by the Senate; Mr. Dichman’s cordial interview with President Nunez. 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

207 do July 19 No. 187.—Colombia and Costa Rica; disputed boundaries; warlike attitude of Colombia as regards same; special mission to Costa Rica; the newly-appointed Colombian minister to England to visit Costa Rica, en route, for the purpose of effecting a satisfactory settlement of the miestien lands claimed by Colombia. 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

208 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. Aug. 7 No. 123.—Visit of the Adams to Golfo Dulce; correspondence with the Costa Rican foreign office transmitted. 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

209 Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. Aug. 16 No. 198.—Visit of the Adams and Kearsarge to Colombian waters; unfriendly action of Panama authorities toward; conference with President Nunez; correspondence with foreign office; imperfect transmission by the telegraph of orders from Bogota to authorities at Panama alleged as the excuse; action of Panama executive distinctly disapproved. 328 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 209]

210 do Sept. 7 No. 205.—Questions between Colombia and Chili: conclusion of a treaty for their eventual adjustment by arbitration by the President of the United States; affirmation of the principle of international arbitration; text of the treaty: Article I—All unadjusted disputes between the countries to be arbitrated: Article II—Manner of submission to the President of the United States; Article III—Chili and Colombia to endeavor to conclude like conventions with the other American countries. 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

211 Mr. Dichnian to Mr. Evarts Sept. 11 No. 208.—Postal facilities: importance of Colombia’s adhesion to the convention of Paris; law authorizing the incorporation of Colombia into the Universal Postal Union; that government finds it necessary, however, to qualify the application for admission into the Union by requesting exemption from the expense of transportation of foreign mails carried across Colombian territory via the Isthmus of Panama—reason, the contract of the Colombian Government with the Panama Railroad Company; Article XVI of that contract quoted; position of Colombian Government resolves itself into willingness to enter the Postal Union for all its territory except the state of Panama; is such qualified adhesion to convention of Paris admissable? probable result, such a modification of the above-quoted article of the contract with the Panama Railroad Company as will enable Colombia to apply for admission to the Postal Union unqualifiedly; last report of Colombian postmaster general transmitted. 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

212 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. Nov. 29 No. 143.—Visit of the Adams and Kearsarge: unfriendly action of the Panama authorities toward; Señor Rico’s explanations satisfactory; no further action in the premises believed to be necessary. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

correspondence with the colombian legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

213 Señor Don Justo Arosemena to Mr. Evarts. 1880. Apr. 1 Visit of the United States men-of-war Adams and Kearsarge to Chiriqui Bay and Golfo Dulce: the title in the lands selected by these vessels for the establishment of coaling stations discussed; objections to the latter. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213]

214 Mr. Evarts to Señor Don Justo Arosemena. Apr. 17 Visit of the United States men-of-war Adams and Kearsage to the waters of the Isthmus of Panama; the object thereof the establishment of coaling stations in the interest of the mercantile and naval marine of this government; the ports selected by the two vessels for that numose. 336 [Pg. 336 includes portions of Doc. 213 and Doc. 214]

215 Señor Don Justo Arosemena to Mr. Evarts. Apr. 19 Visit of the Adams and Kearsage to Colombian waters: satisfaction expressed at the explanations in Mr. Evarts’ note of the 17th instant. 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

216 do May 19 Visit of the Adams and Kearsarge to the Colombian Isthmus: the establishment of coaling stations thereon; expresses the hope that the vessels sent by this government to Chiriqui Bay and Golfo Dulce will be withdrawn from those waters. 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 215, Doc. 216, and Doc. 217]

217 Mr. Evarts to Señor Don Justo Arosemena. June 5 Visit of the Adams and Kearsage to Colombian waters: the establishment of coaling stations on the isthmus; regret that the purport of the visit of the Adams and Kearsarge should have been misunderstood; the summary and ill-judged action of the authorities of Panama deplored; the hope expressed that the frank and fall explanation of this government as to the friendly character of the visit of the vessels above named will be amply sufficient to allay all feelings of suspicion, and will tend to cement more closely than ever the bonds of good-will and friendship between the two corm tries. 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 209]

218 Señor Don Justo Arosemena to Mr. Evarts. June 10 Visit of the Adams and Kearsarge to the isthmus: recapitulation of Mr. Evarts’ note of the 5th June; expresses the hope that the affair has been happily terminated by the withdrawal of the vessels. 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

denmark.

No. From whom and to whom. J Date. 1 Subject. Page.

219 Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts 1879. Aug. 30 No. 551.—Naturalization and expatriation; inquiries of Danish foreign minister concerning conditions of naturalization in the United States; must aliens previously show their release from native allegiance? Mr. Cramer’s reply. 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

220 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Cramer. Sept. 1 No. 303.—The rumored cession of St. Thomas: satisfaction of this government at its denial. (See Mr. Cramer’s No. 547 and 550 of August 11 and 29, 1879, Foreign Relations, 1879, pages 309 and 310.) 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221]

221 Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts Oct. 8 No. 556.—Condition of the Danish “West India islands: bill introduced to increase the Danish garrisons there; arguments of the minister of finance in the Rigsdag; the Santa Cruz troubles; the islands not self-supporting; reduction of the revenues of Santa Cruz; impossibility of a corresponding reduction of administrative expenses; the situation no longer tenable. 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221]

222 do Oct. 17 No. 557.—Mormon emigration to the United States: Mr. Cramer has addressed the Danish Government in pursuance of his instructions; personal conference with the foreign minister on the subject; the Danish press warns the people against violation of United States law. 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]

223 do 1880. Jan. 2 No. 569.—New Tear’s ceremonies: reception of the diplomatic body by the King; His Majesty’s remarks. 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

224 do Feb. 4 No’. 573.—Mormon emigration to the United States; reply of the Danish foreign office to Mr. Cramer’s note on the subject; views of the Danish minister of justice; large Mormon emigration admitted and deplored; no power, under Danish law, to check the abuse; the minister expresses satisfaction on seeing that the United States Government is to adopt strong measures against polygamy. (See Mr. Cramer’s No. 557 of October 17, 1879, page 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222].) 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

france.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

225 Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts 1879. Nov. 14 No. 288.—International committee of weights and measures; transmits copy of report thereof for 1879; estimates for 1880; insufficiency of previous allowance for the expenses of the Bureau; increased to 100,000 francs annually; reimbursement of certain extraordinary preliminary expenses asked; the quota of the United States fixed for 1880 at 15,224 francs. (See Mr. Noyes’ Nos. 149 and 150, Foreign Relations, 1879, pages 311 and 312.) 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

226 do Nov. 28 No 289.—Removal of the legislative chambers from Versailles to Paris, description of the incidents; scenes at the Senate Chamber, and at the Chamber of Deputies; M. Gambetta’s speech; the difficulties in the way of transferring the seat of government from Versailles to Paris; political objections long entertained to make Paris the capital; history of the edifices occupied; political composition of the two chambers; character of the debates; permanency of the republic. 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 226]

227 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hitt. 1880. Feb. 10 No. 208.—American life-insurance companies in France; unfavorable position of; letter from Mr. Merritt, attorney for the New York Life Insurance Company, inclosed; instructed to reopen the discussion with the French authorities. 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

228 do Mar. 3 No. 217.—French protectorate in the Society Islands; the department informed that foreigners are required to pay $100 annually while sailing under the protectorate flag; this discrimination incompatible with the French Government’s announcement of freedom of navigation; Mr. Hitt to make inquiries; dispatch from Consul At-water, at Tahiti, transmitted. 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

229 Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts Mar. 12. No. 316.—Claims for damages in Franco-Prussian war; no distinction between French citizens and foreigners in allowing indemnity therefor; claims were presented directly to the cantonal commissions, and not through the legations; copy of M. de Remusat’s reply to Mr. Noyes’s inquiry. 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

230 do Mar. 26 No. 322.—Liberia; Mr. Noyes reaffirms his statements that there is no ground for the rumor of a French officer to establish a protectorate over Liberia.—(See Mr. Noyes’s No. 256, Foreign Relations, 1879, page 341,” and Mr. Smyth’s No. 30, Foreign Relations, 1879, page 718.) 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

231 do Apr. 29 No. 341.—The French protectorate in the Society Islands; Mr. Noyes applies for copy of the regulations governing the right of foreign masters to sail under the flag of the protectorate; no other regulations than the instructions of the ministry of marine, heretofore communicated.—(See Mr. Outrey’s note of September 29, 1879, page 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243].) 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

232 do May 7 No. 346.—Consular jurisdiction in France, with respect to estates of deceased Americans; question arises between the consul-general and a French judge, by reason of the death of a Mr. Gentil; both place seals on his effects; note of Mr. Noyes to Mr. Freycinet, reciting the facts; Mr. Freycinet replies that neither treaty nor reciprocity gives the consul-general the power he claims: the correspondence transmitted. 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232]

233 do May 10 No. 347.—International bureau of weights and measures; transmitting circular of the committee fixing the new abbreviated figuration adopted. 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233]

234 do May 13 No. 350.—Rumored offer of a French protectorate over Liberia; origin of the report; unofficial action of the Liberian consul-general in proposing partial protection in exchange for a war vessel to be supplied to Liberia; the proposal not entertained by the French Government; Mr. Noyes comments on the indiscretion of the Liberian consul.—(See Mr. Noves’s No. 341. supra.) 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

235 Mr. Hay Mr. Noyes June 17 No. 248.—Administration of estates of American decedents in France; the Gentil case; Mr. Hay transmits copy of instruction sent to Consul-General Walker instructing him not to press claim to jurisdiction in absence of specific treaty rights, but to watch and co-operate as far as possible. 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 235]

236 Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. June 18 No. 359.—The Trans-Sahara railway project; Mr. Noyes transmits a newspaper extract concerning it. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

237 do June 26 No. 361.—The French protectorate 11 the Pacific; reply of M. de Freycinet to the renewed inquiry of Mr. Noyes; the tax of $100 imposed on foreign captains navigating under the flag of the protectorate is removed. 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

238 do July 15 No. 368.—Bartholdi’s statue of Liberty; Franco-American Union; success of the work under taken thereby assured; the colossal statue of Liberty offered by France to the United States, and to be erected in New York Harbor, to be finished in 1883. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239]

239 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes July 28 No. 261.—American life insurance companies in France; unfavorable position occupied by these institutions as compared with similar foreign corporations of other countries; instructed to make inquiry in the proper quarter as to what conclusion, if any, has been reached by the French government upon the subject. 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239]

240 Mr. Hay Mr. Noyes Aug. 14 No. 267.—Military maneuvers of French army; invitation of French government conveyed through her minister at this capitol to the United States, to send delegates from the Army; names of officers selected by the Secretary of War to be present. 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241]

241 Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts Sept. 3 No. 388.—Text of the French constitution of February 13, 1871, transmitted. 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241]

242 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes Oct. 30 No. 298.—International Industrial Property Congress; selection of Mr. Noyes and Mr. Putnam, minister of the United States to Belgium, as delegates from this government thereto; note of the French minister explanatory of the aims had in view in summoning the congress transmitted; decision of the Supreme Court of the United States covering the federal protection of trade-marks under treaty stipulations also inclosed. 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

correspondence with the french legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

243 Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts 1879. Sept. 29 Right to sail under the flag of the French protectorate among the Society Islands; this right hitherto the exclusive prerogative of vessels commanded by French or native captains; regulations recently adopted accord to foreign captains of all nationalities the privilege on certain conditions. 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

244 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Outrey. Oct. 3 Right of sailing under flag of French protectorate among Society Islands; new measures adopted with a view to regulating exercise of; gratification expressed at modification allowing foreigners privilege of commanding vessels sailing under protectorate flag. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

245 Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts Nov. 26 Trade-marks; communication addressed to the minister of France in the United States by importers of French goods doing business in New York, declaring the recent decision of the Supreme Court of the United States to be prejudicial to their interests, and at variance with the stipulations of the treaty of April 16, 1869; correspondence transmitted. 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

246 do 1880. Jan. 9 Industrial Property Congress; appointment of a permanent commission by the congress of 1878; draft of a treaty prepared to form a “union for the protection of industrial property;” asks whether the government of the United States is disposed to send special delegates to an international conference. 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

247 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey Jan. 16 New York Life Insurance Company; unequal footing occupied by American corporations in France as compared with those of other nations; consideration of the subject; information as to precise legal status of American corporations in France requested. 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

248 do Mar. 19 Industrial property questions; consideration of by congress held’ at Paris in 1878; assembling of an international congress desirable; France requested by the congress to take initiative in bringing about same; minister of France instructed, to inquire whether this government will participate in; draft of a treaty prepared having for its object the formation of a union for the protection of industrial property; subject for consideration of proposed conference; position of this country with regard to trademarks; certain reservations necessary before submitting that question to conference; these granted, this government will designate its delegate. 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

249 Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts Mar. 22 Interoceanic Canal; views of the French government thereon; the character of the enterprise inaugurated by Mr. de Lesseps to remain an essentially private one; the neutral position assumed by France at the outset to be maintained—(vide Foreign Relations for 1879, pages 339 and 340.) 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

250 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey Mar. 25 Interoceanic Canal; position of France toward; implicit confidence in good faith of that government to maintain the same. 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

251 Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts June 20 Military maneuvers; this government invited to designate officers of the Army to witness the same. 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

252 Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts Aug. 10 International conference for the discussion of questions connected with the protection of industrial property; proposition for the meeting thereof at Paris accepted with certain reservations by this government; England, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Italy, Russia, and Switzerland have also signified their assent thereto; arrangements for the meeting; the United States invited to participate and requested to designate her delegates; copies of programme transmitted. 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 252]

253 Mr. Hay to Mr. Outrey Aug. 14 Military maneuvers of French troops; Maj. A. P. Morrow, of Ninth Cavalry, First Lieut. William H. Bixby, of Engineer Corps, and First Lieut. Rogers Birnie, jr., of Ordnance, detailed to witness same. 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

254 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey Oct. 30 Industrial Property Congress; the ministers of the United States to France and Belgium selected as delegates to represent this government. 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

germany.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

255 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts 1879. Oct. 22 No. 62.—Death of Herr von Billow, minister of state and secretary for foreign affairs; his illness and high character; Herr von Philipsborn in charge of the office. 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

256 do Nov. 17 No. 67.—The monetary question; views in Germany thereon; Bavarian coinage of gold to be increased owing to difficulty of circulating silver; effort of the Saxon Landtag to reintroduce the double standard; falling off in the production of the Freiberg silver mines petitions of Saxon boards of trade. 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

257 do Nov. 18 No. 69.—The political relations of Germany to European questions; the feeling between the Russian and German people; recent events tending to aggravate it; account of the conclusion of a treaty of alliance between Germany and Austria-Hungary: character of its reciprocal engagements; indications of its probable ultimate results. 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 257]

258 do 1880. Jan. 5 No. 75.—International Fishery Exhibition at Berlin; desire of Germany that the United States should be adequately represented; statements of Baron von Bunsen to Mr. White; an exhibit, under Professor Baird’s personal control, suggested. 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

259 do Jan. 12 No. 78.—The fishery exposition at Berlin; interview of Mr. White with the vice-chancellor, who expresses the anxiety of the Imperial Government for the adequate representation of the United States at the exposition; Mr. White states the limited time in which to procure the action of Congress; great interest felt throughout Germany in the success of the exposition; transmits text of the memorandum handed him by the vice-chancellor. 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 259]

260 do Jan. 23 No. 82.—Proposed increase of the German army; bill introduced in the Bundesrath, adding an effective strength of 30,000 men and 300 guns; provision for the thorough drill of the recruits; cost of the measure; no prospect of diminution in European armaments. 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

261 Mr. Evarts to Mr. White Jan. 28 No. 66.—International fishery exposition; appreciates the anxiety of the German Government that the United States should be represented at Berlin; active measures have been taken to secure the desired representation. 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

262 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 2 No. 87—Spurious medical diplomas from the United States; their fraudulent sale in Germany; inquiries made of Mr. White concerning their genuineness: he declines to authenticate one exhibited to him purporting to be issued by the “American University at Philadelphia”; case of Mr. Tolland’s diploma: these spurious diplomas bring discredit upon the American educational system; popular contempt therefor, as reflected in recent plays on the German stage. 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

263 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 12 No. 89.—The fishery exposition at Berlin Mr. White announces the intended participation of the United States, and applies for space as instructed; general satisfaction felt in Berlin; 500 meters space assigned; letter of Mr. White to Professor Baird explaining the desires of the German government as to the character and scone of the American exhibit. 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]

264 Mr. Evarts to Mr. White. Feb. 18 No. 69.—Fishery exposition at Berlin; anxiety that the United States should participate; favorable action taken by Congress; appointment of a deputy commissioner; expressions of good will on the part of this government. 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265]

265 do Mar. 12 No. 76.—Spurious diplomas; issuance of, by the so-called “American university at Philadelphia”; efforts for the suppression of the practice. 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265]

266 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts Mar. 15 No. 97.—Increase of the German army; discussion of proposed and amended measures before the committee of the Reichstag; total addition of about 300,000 men to the effective war strength of the empire; Mr. White makes a comparison between the military and naval expenditures of the, European powers; the military forces of Europe undiminished. 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 266]

267 do Mar. 20 No. 100.—Unclaimed estates in Germany; detailed report on the subject by Mr. Coleman, second secretary, forwarded; numerous applications to the legation on the subject; suggestion of publicity to Mr. Coleman’s report. 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

268 do Apr. 12 No. 107.—Prince Bismarck’s tender of his resignation as chancellor; his motives; dissatisfied with the vote in the federal council on the stamp-tax question; the minor states of the empire outvote the great kingdoms; Prince Bismarck regards this as a defect in the constitution; his resignation tendered and not accepted; possible solutions of the complication commented upon. 405 [Pg. 405 includes portions of Doc. 267 and Doc. 268]

269 do Apr. 12 No. 109.—The German coinage law; measure introduced in the federal council by Prince Bismarck increasing the silver coinage from 10 marks per capita to 12 marks; some statistics of coinage given; Germany appears to be gradually reverting to the employment of silver money. 407 [Pg. 407 includes portions of Doc. 268 and Doc. 269]

270 do Apr. 12 No. 110.—Railways in Germany; Mr. White transmits a very full report on the governmental control of the German railways, prepared by Dr. R. T. Ely, of New York. 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 270]

271 Mr. Evarts to Mr. White. Apr. 14 No. 96.—International fishery exhibition at Berlin; appointment of members of an international jury on behalf of the United States. 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

272 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts Apr. 24 No. 114.—Passports for American students in Germany; Mr. White regards the tax of $5.00 charged for passports as a hardship in the case of meritorious and struggling students, and suggests their free issue by the legation in deserving cases; number of American students is Germany; their arduous efforts to acquire education on limited means of support. 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

273 do Apr. 26 No. 115.—The fishery exposition at Berlin; opening ceremonies April 20th, under the presidency of the Crown Prince; his satisfaction at the fine American exhibit; visit of the Emperor and Empress; reception given to the commissions and diplomatic body by the city authorities of Berlin: Mr. White’s address on the occasion. 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 273]

274 do May 3 No. 118.—German commercial interests in Samoa; debates in the Reichstag on a bill guaranteeing the bonds of the successors to the fallen house of Godeffroy & Co., of Hamburg, who controlled the German South Sea trade; expectations entertained of its passage; public apprehension of the dangers of a colonial policy and an increased navy; rejection of the measure and defeat of the government. 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 274]

275 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts May 10 No. 121.—German interests in Samoa; defeat of the Samoan hill in the Reichstag; comments of the German official press: the chancellor’s advocacy of the measure; its defeat due to the general feeling of opposition to any departure from the traditional policy of Germany to maintain no colonial establishments. 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 274 and Doc. 275]

276 Mr. Evarts to Mr. White May 19 No. 102.—International fishery exhibition; satisfaction expressed at the creditable display made by the American department. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277]

277 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts May 22 No. 127.—Closing of the session of the Reichstag; review of the work accomplished; the budget; deficit remedied by increased customs duties and taxes; the army increased; Field-Marshal Ton Moltke’s plans adopted; employes and guilds bill; socialism; commercial treaties with Austria, Belgiunl, and Switzerland continued until June, 1881; new treaties with Hawaii and Paraguay; rejected measures; the Samoan bill; new taxation’: political tendencies of the session; Prince Bismarck’s attitude. 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277]

278 Mr. Evarts to Mr. White May 25 No. 104.—Passports for American students in Germany; the Department finds obstacles to the free issue of such passports; liability to abuse of such a privilege; the interest of the government requires passports to be procured in the United States before going abroad. 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

279 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts May 31 No. 129.—Annual spring parade at Berlin; 30,000 troops reviewed; their efficient and soldierly appearance; Germany not relaxing her military standard of excellence. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

280 do June 22 No. 132.—International fishery exhibition; distribution of prizes; first grand prize of honor to Professor Baird; the American Commission and individual exhibitors more successful than those of any other country; good effect of the exhibition; list of awards to the American Commission and exhibitors. 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

281 do July 5 No. 137.—The Berlin conference on the Greco-Turkish frontier question; in accordance with article 24 of the treaty of Berlin, representatives of the six great powers confer to settle the frontier line between Greece and Turkey; character of Mr. Goschen’s’ “identical note” summoning the conference; extracts therefrom; composition of the conference; its deliberations narrated; description of the proposed frontier; large cessions to Greece; a collective note addressed to the Porte; the general question involved and its possible solution. 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 281]

282 do Sept. 1 No. 146.—Alsace-Lorraine; application of the treaty of February 22, 1868, to; foreign office contends that treaty does not apply; legation maintains the contrary. 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

283 do Sept. 21 No. 151.—Alsace-Lorraine and the treaties of 1868; German Government still contends that they do not apply to that territory; minister asks for instructions. 448 [Pg. 448 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

284 Mr. Evarts to Mr. White Oct. 7 No. 138.—Alsace-Lorraine; fines and penalties imposed upon adopted citizens of the United States on their return to; regret expressed thereat; a reconsideration of the question on the part of Germany desirable. 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

285 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts Oct. 15 No. 160.—Case of Aaron Weill, a native of Alsace-Lorraine; his imprisonment by local authorities of Reichshofen; an application made for his release as a naturalized citizen of the United States. (Tide volume Foreign Relations, 1879, page 367.) 449 [Pg. 449 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

286 do Oct. 18 No. 161.—Disputed questions of American nationality; report of cases calling for intervention of legation during year 1879; Nos. 25 to 50 inclusive. 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

287 do Oct. 18 No. 162.—Cases of Joseph Lauber, Alois Fisher, and Nicholas T. Gabriel decided unfavorablv. 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

288 Mr. Hay to Mr. White. Oct. 26 No. 147.—Spurious American diplomas; issuance of, at Philadelphia; measures instituted to suppress the practice. 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

289 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts Nov. 1 No. 165.—Case of Aaron Weill; correspondence with foreign office. (Tide volume Foreign Relations for 1879, page 367.) 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

290 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts Nov. 5 Telegram; Aaron Wwill’s case 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

291 Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. Nov. 22 No. 4.—The cases of Aaron Weill and Alois Gehres; information of the pardon of both transmitted. 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

292 Mr. White to Mr. Evarts Nov. 29 Telegram: Gehres’ case 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

correspondence with the german legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

293 Mr. von Schlözer to Mr. Evarts. 1880. Feb. 25 Case of Carl Weinrebe, cook of the steamer Mosel; difference of opinion between the Governments of Germany and the United States as to the interpretation to be given to Article XII, paragraph 2, of the consular convention of December 11, 1871; discussion of the same by the German minister. 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

294 Mr. Evarts to Mr. von Schlözer Mar. 8 Case of Carl Weinrebe, cook of the Mosel; a further discussion of this case deemed unnecessary. (For detailed statement of the facts and circumstances attending the arrest of Weinrebe, and the search of his personal effects on board the Mosel, vide Mr. Evarts’ note to Mr. Von Schlözer of April 17, 1879, volume of Foreign Relations for that year, page 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 268]; also Mr. Von Schlözer’s note to Mr. Evarts of March 2, 1879, same volume, page 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 267].) 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

295 Mr. von Schlözer to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 17 Official intercourse in China; audience question and matters of etiquette; resolution on the part of the representatives of the treaty powers to discontinue negotiations in regard to these points and to confine themselves to the demand for free access for all consular representatives of the treaty powers to the provincial authorities; Germany prepared to acquiesce; views of this government requested. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

296 Mr. Evarts to Mr. von Schlözer Mar. 20 Official intercourse in China; acknowledges receipt of information from imperial envoy at Peking (through German legation) that the representatives of the treaty powers at that capital have adopted the resolution to discontinue the negotiation in regard to the audience question, and other matters of etiquette, and to confine themselves to the demand for free access to provincial authorities on the part of consular representatives of the treaty powers; adherence to this view on the part of the Government of the United States. 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296]

great britain.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

297 Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts 1879. July 29 No. 327.—Proposal of British Government for an adjustment of expenses of extradition annually. 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

298 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Hoppin. Sept. 15 No. 371.—Extradition; expenses incurred in connection with cases of; proposal of British Government for an annual adjustment; treaty of 1842, Article X, cited as making provision therefor; while no legal, objection is apparent to entering into the arrangement proposed by Lord Salisbury, it is considered inexpedient to do so. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

299 Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. Oct. 29 No. 89.—Mormon emigration to the United States; correspondence with Lord Salisbury, based on information received from the consul at Liverpool of preparations for a large departure of Mormons; Lord Salisbury’s reply; steps taken to notify the emigrants of the danger of their course: text of the correspondence. 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

300 do Nov. 4 No. 95.—Collisions at sea; order in council of August 14, 1879, transmitted, containing international rules for preventing collisions, to take effect September 1, 1880; text of the rules. (See Mr. Drummond’s note of August 24, 1880, page 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353] infra.) 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

301 Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts Dec. 27 No. 128. Adjustment of international extradition expenses; correspondence on the subject with the foreign office; declension of the British proposal for an annual settlement of such accounts. 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

302 do 1880. Jan. 23 No. 139. Mormon emigration to the “United States; correspondence with the foreign office on the subject; British government can lawfully do no more than give warning to emigrants of the probable consequences of violating: the law. 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302]

303 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin Feb. 11 No. 421. Mormon emigration to the United States; acknowledging receipt of foregoing; British government has no power to prevent; can only give notice of illegal character of Mormon marriages. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

304 do Mar. 25 No. 432. Extradition expenses; method of settling accounts of; approval of the plan proposed by Lord Salisbury Of preferring, separately, each claim arising on a case of extradition, with the proviso that payment shall be made on the spot. 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

305 Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts Mar. 27 No. 166. Mormon emigration; correspondence with the consul at Liverpool concerning a departure of emigrants; the authorities there requested to give the promised warning. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

306 do Apr. 24 No. 180. The United States ship Constellation, carrying Irish relief supplies, subjected to customs requirements at Queenstown; correspondence with the foreign office; promised withdrawal of the customs-officers in charge of the vessel and cargo. 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

307 do May 1 No. 184. Action of the customs authorities at Queenstown toward the Constellation, carrying relief to the suffering Irish; correspondence with the foreign office; regret expressed for the occurrence; text of the customs law under which the Queenstown officers mistakenly acted. 478 [Pg. 478 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

308 Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts June 16 No. 17. Murder on the high seas; case of John Anderson. (Vide volume Foreign Relations for 1879, pages 435 and 446.) 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308]

309 do June 17 No. 19. The supplies stored during the British Arctic Expedition of 1875 and 1876 to be placed at the disposal of the Howgate Polar Expedition; correspondence with Lord Granville. (Vide volume Foreign Relalions for 1875, part 1, pages 649 and 650.) 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 309]

310 Mr. Hay to Mr. Lowell. July 7 No. 35. Case of John Anderson; gratification expressed at the candor of the British government in acknowledging that the action of the Calcutta authorities was based upon a misconception of the law, and could not, consequently, be supported by the home government. (For full details of this case, vide volume of Foreign Relations for 1879, pages 435 and 446.) 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

311 Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. Aug. 6 No. 35. Carrying trade between Great Britain and India; foreign vessels not allowed to convey British stores; an exception made in the case of an Italian vessel; unsuccessful effort to have American vessels admitted to the trade; correspondence with the foreign office transmitted. 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

correspondence with the british legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

312 Mr. Seward to Sir E. Thornton. 1879. Aug. 9 Depredations committed by northern Indians in the Yellowstone Valley. 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

313 do Aug. 12 Intrusion of Canadian fishermen upon shores of Lake Ontario; investigation by Canadian government requested. 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

314 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. F.W. Seward. Sept. 8 The South American war; Sir Edward would be glad to know whether the United States Government has taken any steps toward friendly intervention between the belligerents. 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314]

315 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Hunter. Sept. 13 Custody of ships’ registers in Colombian ports; law passed by’ Colombian legislature relative to; objection to third article of that law on the part of Her Majesty’s minister at Bogota, who believes that it is based on the terms of a convention between the minister of the United States at Bogota and the late Colombian secretary for foreign affairs; Sir Edward desires to be informed whether this government has ratified that convention. 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

316 Mr. Evarts to Sir E. Thornton. Sept. 16 Custody of ships’ papers; convention concluded by United States minister at Bogota relative to, not yet formally approved. 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

317 do Sept. 24 South American war; mediation in the direction of peace; co-operation with Great Britain and Germany while desirable would be, as yet, premature; the Government of the United States willing to use its good offices as soon as belligerents are prepared, to receive them. 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 317]

318 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Hunter. Oct. 2 Liberian boundary commission: British commissioners satisfied that territories referred to in deeds of cession had no existence: thanks of Her Majesty’s Government to Commodore Schufeldt, U.S.N. 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

319 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Oct. 20 Canadian Indians; incursions by, into United States territory; copy of approved report of privy council of Canada transmitted. 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319]

320 do Oct. 22 Canadian fishermen; encroachments by, within the jurisdiction of the United States on the shores of Lake Ontario: copy of approved; report of privy council of Canada transmitted. 493 [Pg. 493 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

321 Mr. Evarts to Sir E. Thornton. Oct. 28 Incroachments by Canadian fishermen within United States “jurisdiction; gratification at prompt attention of Canadian Government thereto. 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

322 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Nov. 4 Moorish protection: proposed conference at Madrid; views of this government requested. 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

323 do Nov. 14 Mexican customs regulations; imprisonment of captain of American steamer “Newborn for alleged violation of; letter from Mr. George Kelly, of Mazatlan, Mexico, and copy of regulations above referred to transmitted. 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323]

324 Mr. Evarts to Sir E. Thornton. Nov. 14 Intrusion of British half-breeds and Sitting Bull’s men upon the Crow reservation in Montana Territory. 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

325 Sir. E. Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Nov. 15 Crow reservation in Montana; invasion of, by British half-breeds and Sitting Bull’s men; anxiety of Canadian Government for settlement of these matters. [Vide volume Foreign Relations for 1879, pages 488 and 496.] 498 [Pg. 498 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

326 Mr. Hunter to Sir E. Thornton. Nov. 18 Mexican customs regulations; imprisonment of captain of American steamer Newborn for 1 alleged violation of: said regulations considered [ unnecessarily severe; this government will remonstrate against them. 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

327 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Dec. 13 Nicaragua and Great Britain; documents in the archives of the United States relating to question in dispute between; appreciation of Her Majesty’s Government of friendly conduct of this government in giving access to. 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

328 do Dec. 13 Jews in Morocco; irregular protection afforded by diplomatic and consular agents of foreign powers; memorandum of the language held to Sir J. H. Drummond Hay by the Rev. A. Lowy, secretary of the Anglo-Jewish Association, and of Sir J. H. Drummond Hay’s replies; the British minister would like to know the views of this government as regards the proposal to refer the further discussion of the question of regular protection of Moors to a meeting of the representatives of the powers concerned at Madrid. 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

329 Mr. Hay to Sir E. Thornton. Dec. 20 Nicaragua and Great Britain; application of the former government for certain documents in the archives of the United States relating to the question in dispute; papers sent to minister of United States at Vienna. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 328, Doc. 329, and Doc. 330]

330 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Jan. 21 Canadian inshore fisheries; alleged trespass on grounds of, by American schooner Emily Stephenson; correspondence between the inspector of fisheries for British Columbia and the Canadian commissioner of fisheries transmitted. 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 328, Doc. 329, and Doc. 330]

331 Mr. Evarts to Sir E. Thornton. Feb. 3 Wrecking on the great lakes; desirability of an international policy to allow the life-saving appliances of the United States and Canada to be used for the relief of vessels in distress within the jurisdiction of either nation; this government desirous of carrying out this principle of reciprocity: case of the Jane McCloud. 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

332 Mr. Evarts to Sir E. Thornton. 1880. Feb. 19 Incursions of Sioux Indians from Canada into United States territory; attention of British Government called thereto. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

333 do Feb. 27 Indian raids; co-operation of Canadian Government solicited. 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333]

334 do Feb. 28 Transportation of merchandise to, from, and through Canada; regulations governing same. 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

335 do Mar. 13 Foreign protection of native Moors; conference to be held at Madrid for consideration of; Mr. Fairchild, United States minister to Spain, to act as the representative of this government. 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

336 do Mar. 25 American cattle; privilege of transit through Canada. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

337 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Hay. Mar. 29 Fires on board of cotton-laden ships in American ports; representation by the committee of Lloyd’s; attention of this government called to; incendiarism the alleged cause. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

338 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Evarts. Apr. 17 American cattle; transit of, through Canada from one American port to another; report of a committee of the privy council for Canada transmitted. 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

339 do Apr. 23 Collisions at sea; international regulations for prevention of; Great Britain has decided, in consequence of representations on behalf of her fishing interests, to suspend the operation of Article X of said regulations until September 1, 1881; copy of the Queen’s order in council transmitted 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

340 do May 14 Belief for Ireland; visit of Constellation; thanks of British Government for. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

341 Mr. Evarts to Sir E. Thornton. May 25 Canadian fisheries; alleged trespass by the schooner Emily Stephenson. 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

342 do June 8 American cattle; purchase of, by Canadians, for breeding purposes; proposed modification by Her Majesty’s Government of rules regulating the importation of cattle into Canada, so as to permit short-horned cattle raised west of Alleghany Mountains to enter the Dominion unobstructed. 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

343 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Evarts. June 9 Importation of American cattle into Canada for breeding purposes. 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

344 do June 12 Commission of liquidation for settlement of Egyptian debt; text of Khedival decree; course adopted by Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, Great Britain, and Italy, explained by importance of the interests of these governments in Egypt; nearly the whole debt owned by subjects thereof; adhesion of this government to the joint declaration desirable. (For text of decree, see Mr. Farman’s dispatch No. 381 of April 5, 1880, under correspondence with Turkey.) 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

345 Mr. Evarts to Sir E. Thornton. June 16 Fires on board of cotton-laden ships at the ports of Charleston and New Orleans; proclamation of governor of Louisiana transmitted. 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

346 Sir E. Thornton to Mr. Evarts. June 17 Light-houses in the Bay of Port-au-Prince; erection of two, and the establishment of light-dues in connection therewith; alleged unfair discrimination in the levying of these dues between Haytian vessels and those of foreign powers; British vice-consul instructed to urge upon the Haytian Government a just equalization in this respect; co-operation of this government desirable in endeavoring to secure same. 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

347 Mr. Hay to Sir E. Thornton June 19 Discriminating light-dues levied at Port-au-Prince on foreign-merchant vessels; this government ready and willing to co-operate with Her Majesty’s Government for their modification. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

348 Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. June 19 Fires on board of cotton-laden ships in American ports; expresses gratification at the vigorous measures adopted by governor of Louisiana to repress incendiarism at New Orleans; the governor’s proclamation of May 14, 1880. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

349 do June 28 Kentucky cattle for breeding purposes; desire of Canadians to purchase; copy of report of privy council of Canada, relative to, transmitted. 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

350 Mr. Hay to Sir E. Thornton. June 29 Collisions at sea: revised international regulations for prevention of; deemed advisable to await action of Congress before taking further steps. 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

351 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond. July 30 The Egyptian commission of liquidation: reply to the identic request of Great Britain, Austria, France, Germany, and Italy, that the United States should adhere to the scheme; the views of the United States defined: not being a party to the negotiation of the commission, and not being concerned as a government in the scheme of liquidation decided upon by it, the United States had preferred at first to reserve possible rights of American citizens for direct settlement with the Khedival Government, and not accept in advance as binding decisions in which neither it nor American interests were represented; adhesion, however, finally given at the urgent solicitation of the Khedive’s Government. 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

352 Mr. Drummond to Mr. Hay. Aug. 20 Reform in Egypt; proposed revision of the tribunals; changes called for in the constitution of the tribunals of the reform; proposal of Egyptian Government that an international commission should be appointed to consider the same; opinion of British Government as to composition of commission; views of this government requested. 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352]

353 Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts. Aug. 24 Collisions at sea: Her Majesty’s order in council of August 14, 1879, in relation thereto transmitted. (For the text of above, vide Mr. Hoppin’s dispatch No. 95, of November 4, 1879, page 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], ante.) 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

354 do Aug. 26 Arctic discovery ship Resolute: writing-table made from timbers of, to be presented by Her Majesty the Queen to the President and people of the United States. 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355]

355 Mr. Hay to Mr. Drummond. Sept. 4 Arctic discovery ship Resolute: acknowledging receipt of Mr. Drummond’s note of August 26, 1880. 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355]

356 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond. Sept. 6 Collisions at sea: revised regulations for prevention of; general order No. 253, of the Navy Department, transmitted; that department has no power to formally authorize the adoption of the new international regulations so long as the provisions of section 4233 of the Revised Statutes remain in force; a compliance by vessels of the United States with the new regulations, while navigating foreign waters, will not, however, entail any penalties upon them. (For text of revised international regulations vide Mr. Hoppin’s No. 95 of November 4, 1879, page 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], supra.) 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356]

357 Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts. Sept. 7 Collisions at sea: acknowledging receipt of foregoing and expressing gratification at action of Treasury Department. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

358 Mr. Hay to Mr. Drummond. Oct. 26 Reform in Egypt; acceptance of the proposal of the Khedival Government for an international commission of delegates, who shall consider and report to the powers upon such modifications as may appear to be expedient in the constitution of the tribunals of the reform and in their administration of the law; two delegates to be appointed by this government; consideration of other essential and minor points bearing upon the subject. 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

359 Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts. Nov. 1 Right of American vessels laden with American products to unlade at any ports within the Dominion of Canada; report of the privy council for Canada. 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

360 do Nov. 20 Transportation of merchandise to, from, and through the Dominion of Canada: regulations governing the same; copy of a report of a committee of the privy council transmitted.

fortune bay correspondence.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

361 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh 1879. Aug. 1 No. 347.—Fortune Bay claims: Alleged outrage upon American fishermen at Fortune Bay, Newfoundland; report of Captain Sulivan, R. N.; three breaches of the law alleged, and assumed by Lord Salisbury as conclusively established, viz: 1. The use of seines, and their use at a time prohibited by a colonial statute; 2. Fishing upon a day (Sunday) forbidden by same; 3. Barring fish in Violation of same; and furthermore, illegally interfering with rights of British fishermen contrary to terms of treaty of Washington; correspondence between the Department of State and the United States legation at London, and between the latter and the British foreign office; evidence in support of alleged losses by-twenty American vessels; testimony of witnesses; detailed statements of claims. 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

362 Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts Ang. 13 No. 347.—Acknowledging receipt of above; copy sent to foreign office. 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362]

363 Mr. Seward to Mr. Honnin Aug. 28 No. 361.—Acknowledging receipt of above 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365]

364 Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts Nov. 22 No. 111.—Acknowledging telegram from department instructing him to ask the Marquis of Salisbury when an answer may be expected as to Fortune Bay Claims: no reply vet received. 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365]

365 do Nov. 25 No. 112.—Lord Salisbury expresses his regret at being unable, as yet, to give a reply to the Fortune Bay claims. 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365]

366 do Nov. 28 No. 113.—Transmits Lord Salisbury’s formal answer to inquiry as to when a reply to Mr. Evarts No. 347 to Mr. Welsh may be expected. 564 [Pg. 564 includes portions of Doc. 365 and Doc. 366]

367 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin. 1880. Feb. 5 Telegram: As to when an answer may be expected in matter of Fortune Bay claims. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

368 Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 7 No. 143.—Receipt of above telegram acknowledged; further inquiry at foreign office and result thereof. 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368]

369 do Feb. 10 No. 147.—No answer yet received from foreign office 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

370 do Feb. 14 No. 150.—Regret of Her Majesty’s Government at unavoidable delay in answering note in relation to Fortune Bay claims. 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

371 do Feb. 14 Paragraph from “London Times” transmitted. 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

372 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin. Feb. 26 Telegram: Regret at possibility of still further delay. 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

373 Mr. Honnin to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 27 No. 156.—Acknowledging receipt of above. 567 [Pg. 567 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

374 do Mar. 9 No. 163.—Report of law officers of the Crown now received. 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 373 and Doc. 374]

375 do Apr. 6 No. 170—Transmitting communication from Lord Salisbury unfavorable to Fortune Bay claims. 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 375]

376 Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. Oct. 28 No. 81.—Fortune Bay claims; correspondence with foreign office transmitted. 588 [Pg. 588 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

hawaiian islands.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

377 Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts 1879. Nov. 24 No. 85.—Hawaiian tariff on American-made cotton clothing; concluding correspondence with the Hawaiian Government transmitted, showing the acceptance of the Treasury Department’s interpretation; the duties ordered not to be levied. (See Mr. Comly’s dispatch of June 9, 1879, and Mr. Evarts’ instruction of September 23, 1879, Foreign Relations, 1879, pages 527 and 544.) 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]

378 do Dec. 22 No. 86—American vessels changing their registry to the Hawaiian flag. 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

379 do Dec. 22 No. 87.—Proceedings against the bark Kalakaua for smuggling opium; confiscation of the vessel; no conviction of any person for smuggling; the bark alone adjudged guilty; interesting report of the case; ingenious method of concealing tins of opium in firewood. 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

380 do Dec. 22 No. 88.—Immigration to Hawaii of cognate races from Micronesia; newspaper extracts in relation thereto, transmitted. 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 380]

381 Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. 1880. Feb. 16 No. 91.—Case of Patrick Quinn, an American citizen, illegally taxed by the native authorities; Ins appeal; the judgment of the lower court of Hilo reversed by the Hawaiian cabinet; question of the hospital tax. 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

382 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly Mar. 5 No. 55.—Case of Patrick Quinn; Mr. Comly’s course approved. 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

383 Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 15 No; 95.—Case of Patrick Quinn; further correspondence with Hawaiian foreign office transmitted. 601 [Pg. 601 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

S84 do Mar. 15 No. 100.—Customs statistics of Hawaii; importations of rice, and sugar-producing machinery; large importations of sugar machinery from England; low invoice rates thereof, calculated to mislead; gratifying increase of American trade; tables of imports. 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

385 do Apr. 8 No. 101.—Customs statistics; supplementary remarks of Mr. Comly, to the foregoing dispatch; falling off of imports of rice, and increase of exports thereof. 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

386 do June 8 No. 111.—Case of Patrick Quinn; promise of Hawaiian Government that all future cases analogous to that of Quinn shall be similarly disposed of, upon simple application to minister of finance. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387]

387 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly. May 12 No 58.—Case of Patrick Quinn; tax money and costs having been returned, no further action necessary in this case; other similar cases reported as having been submitted to Hawaiian foreign office will have consideration. 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387]

388 Mr. Hay to Mr. Comly. June 30 No. 64.—Alleged illegal taxation by the Hawaiian Government of American citizens; gratification at promise of Hawaiian Government that, in future, all such cases shall be disposed of upon simple application to Hawaiian minister of finance. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

389 Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts July 30 No. 120.—The rice question; reply to the Treasury Department’s inquiries as to alleged frauds in exportations of rice to the United States; no danger of any foreign rice being exported as Hawaiian rice and as such duty free in the United States; differences between the two classes of rice; proposal of the government to tax imported rice not successful in the Hawaiian legislature; correspondence of Mr. Comly with the Hawaiian foreign minister on the general subject; report of Vice-Consul Hastings, with annexed papers transmitted. 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

390 do Sept. 20 No. 124.—Danger of foreign-grown rice being shipped to the United States under the name of Hawaiian. 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 392]

hayti.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

391 Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Oct. 30 No. 197.—General Salomon’s inauguration as President of the Republic; the ceremonial described; the President’s address summarized; appearance and character of President Solomon. 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

392 do Nov. 6 No. 198.—Historical sketch of the Haytian revolutionary movement of June 30, 1879; the intrigues of Bazelais against Canal, and their result in the choice of General Salomon; incidents of the revolution; destruction of life and property; the support of the revolutionary army insured General Solomon’s success. 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

393 do Dec. 20 No. 204.—Classification of inhabitants in respect of color; only the descendants of Haytians, Africans, and Indians can become citizens; social and political discrimination between the black and the mulatto and mixed classes; origin thereof traced to status of latter class during existence of slavery in French colonial times; aristocracy of color created; brief history of the first struggle for freedom, resulting in the independence of the people; existing prejudices as to color; its effect upon politics; party feeling on this point gradually dying out; majority of population black; Haytians quick to thrust aside personal prejudice in moments of peril to the country; history of war against the French, English, and Spaniards; efforts at annexation regarded as the first step toward annihilation of Haytian independence; pride of African origin; the future of the race a common bond of social and political amity; disunion impossible on that account. 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 257]

394 Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. Dec. 20 No. 205.—Speech of General Salomon on the occasion of an official reception, November 30, 1879; his plans and views touching administrative reforms; proposed reorganization of the Haytian army; the constitution of 1867 revised; the President’s prerogatives defined; text of the speech in full. 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 393 and Doc. 394]

395 do Dec. 20 No. 207.—Relations with other countries; presence of Spanish vessels of war in Haytian waters; supposed presence of Cuban recruiting agents the cause; Santo Dominica; considerable traffic on the frontier. 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

396 do 1880. Jan. 9 No. 220.—Anniversary of Haytian independence; entered into with zest by all classes; reception by the President; diplomatic corps attend; brief summary of Hayti’s seventy six years of independence; programme of the festivities, civil and religious; President Salomon’s address to the people. 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

397 do Apr. 9 No. 247.—The national bank question; the introduction of foreign capital essential to the development of the resources of the country; provisions of the ordinance in respect to the same. 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

398 do Apr. 21 No. 258.—Right to expel foreigners; announcement of this doctrine in the official section of Le Moniteur; is this indicative of a new policy on the part of the Haytian Government? 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

399 do May 20 No. 266.—Erection of light-houses in the gulf and harbor of Port-au-Prince. 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

400 do May 20 No. 270.—The national bank; efforts for the establishment thereof successful. 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

401 do June 18 No. 277.—Conduct of consular officers in Hayti; complaint of that government that unseemly haste is exercised in the boarding of vessels. 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402]

402 do June 18 No. 279.—Arrest in Port-au-Prince of alleged conspirators; supposed discovery of a revolutionary movement; arrests of twenty persons on suspicion; names and public records of some of the alleged conspirators; tranquillity of the city not disturbed; probable delay in investigating the conspiracy. 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402]

403 Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston June 22 No. 114.—Erection of light-houses in the harbor of Port-au-Prince; alleged unjust discrimination in the levying of light-dues; co-operation of the British Government in endeavoring to secure equal treatment to vessels of all nationalities. 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

404 Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts July 2 No. 283.—Report on gold and silver money in Hayti; difficulty of obtaining statistics; no banks in Hayti; no mines of precious metals and no coinage; imports and exports of gold small; of silver considerable American silver the circulating medium; estimated amount, $5,000,000; no laws governing the coin standard; United States silver dollars preferred to Mexican dollars. 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

405 do July 2 No. 284.—Amenability of foreign consuls to local jurisdiction; Haytian claim of right to expel turbulent foreigners and to control consuls engaged in business; the precedent of General Salomon’s expulsion from Jamaica by the British authorities in 1865. 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 405]

406 do July 3 No. 290.—The political situation; no further arrests of alleged conspirators; vigilance of the government; wisdom of President Salomn’s course; increase of the military and pooice forces; public confidence strengthened. 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

407 Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston July 6 No. 118.—Complaint of Haytian Government concerning the unlawful boarding of incoming vessels; answer to the representations made to Mr. Langston; no objection to Haytian rule as to the agents of such vessels being prohibited access to them until customs formalities are complied with, but cases may arise requiring immediate presence of consuls; rights under treaties examined; our consuls should have the [same treatment in this respect as those of the most favored nation. 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

408 Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston. July 17 No. 124.—Pretended right of Haytian Government to expel obnoxious foreigners; revocation of exequatur the extreme to which this government would probably proceed in like cases. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

409 Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. July 24 No. 297.—Discriminating light-dues; correspondence with Havtian foreign office transmitted. 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

410 do Aug. 9 No. 301.—Extract from the message of President Salomon; foreign relations of Hayti. 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

italy.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

411 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Oct. 4 No. 851.—Mormon proselytism in Europe; transmits report from Mr. Bayley, consul at Palermo; failure of proselytism in Sicily. 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]

412 Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts Jan. 26 No. 865.—The political situation; New Yearns reception at Borne; the Queen’s illness; meeting of Parliament; defeat of the ministry in the Senate; disasters of the year 1879; increase of crime throughout Italy; its cause. 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

413 do Feb. 17 No. 867.—New session of Parliament; senatorial vacancies filled; anti-ministerial majority; opening of the session; firm declarations of the King and the cabinet; probability that ministerial measures may be adopted. 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

414 do Mar. 22 No. 874.—Political debates; diplomatic appropriations and foreign relations of Italy; vote of confidence in the ministry; relations between Italy and Austria. 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

415 do Apr. 17 No. 881.—Italy and the Mediterranean countries; jealousies and commercial rivalries; how Northern Africa is affected by the fall of the Napoleonic dynasty; room for agricultural improvement of the region; France and Tunis; England and Cyrerie; the projected trans-Sahara railway; conflicting interests of the powers with respect to Mediterranean and African commerce. 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

416 do May 24 No. 890.—Election of a new Chamber of Deputies; large opposition gains reported. 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

417 do July 20 No. 897.—Parliamentary proceedings; postponement of question of electoral reform until next session; passage of bill for abolition of grist tax; predicted embarrassment by the opposition party of the national exchequer by so considerable a reduction; hope expressed that this measure is the first step toward ameliorating the condition of the poor. 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

418 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Marsh Aug. 11 No. 731.—Alleged intended monopoly by the Italian National Museum of Pompeiian curiosities by destruction of duplicate specimens for which that institution has no room; proposed reception of them by the United States National Museum in exchange for “a series of specimens of pueblo pottery and other aboriginal objects.” 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

japan.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

419 Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Oct. 22 No. 995.—The ravages of the recent cholera epidemic in Japan; 153, 486 cases and 86,644 deaths; foreign opposition to native sanitary precautions. (Vide vol. Foreign Relations for 1879, pages 663, 665, 668, and 695.) 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

420 do Oct. 22 No. 996.—Transmits official regulations for the branch mint at Tokio. 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 420]

421 Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts Oct. 22 No. 997.—Compulsory education in Japan; transmits regulations of the Japanese Department of Education. 655 [Pg. 655 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

422 do Oct. 24 No. 999.—Revision of Japanese treaties; Mr. Bingham transmits a report on the subject by the Tokio general chamber of commerce, with comments thereon, showing the necessity for such revision; defects of the existing treaties, and injurious effects on Japanese revenues and producers; valuable statements of the productions of Japan contained in the report. 657 [Pg. 657 includes portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]

423 do Oct. 27 No. 1008.—Prof. Nordenshjöld, of the Swedish Arctic exploring expedition reaches Japan and is entertained by Mr. Bingham; foreign trade may reach Siberia by the Lena River. 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

424 do Nov. 11 No. 1010.—Transmitting full text of the revised conscription act of Japan. 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 424]

425 do Dec. 29 No. 1040.—Education in Japan; report of the Commissioner of Education for 1877; statistics of schools, attendance, Sec. 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]

426 do Dec. 29 No. 1042.—Destruction of the consular agency at Hakodate by fire; loss of the property and archives. 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

427 do Dec. 30 No. 1043—Conflagration at Tokei; disastrous effects; narrow escape of the legation from destruction; recommendation that the United States erect fireproof buildings on land offered for the purpose by the Japanese Government. 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

428 do 1880 Jan. 16 No. 1050.—The coinage and operations of the Japanese mint for 1878–’79. 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

429 do Jan. 16 No. 1051.—Cholera in Japan; total cases and deaths during the last epidemic. 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430]

430 do Jan. 21 No. 1059.—Quarantine against importation of cattle from Shanghai; issuance of an imperial proclamation; action of the foreign representatives; Mr. Bingham’s instructions to the consuls. 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430]

431 do Feb. 6 No. 1070.—Postal administration of Japan; report of the Postmaster-General for 1878–79; revenue in excess of expenditure; foreign and domestic mail statistics. 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

432 do Mar. 1 No. 1077.—Earthquake Feb. 22d; severity of the shock; no lives lost; many houses destroyed at Yokohama; newspaper report transmitted. 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 432]

433 do Mar. 1 No. 1078.—Petition of the local assembly of Miyagi in favor of a national constituent assembly and the exercise of legislative power by the Japanese people; change in the Japanese ministry: tendencies toward a constitutional government. 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

434 do Mar. 4 No. 1079.—Death of Mr. Matthew Scott, an American citizen employed in the Japanese department of finance; proposal of the government to erect a monument to his memory at San Francisco. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]

435 do Mar. 15 No. 1088.—Lew Chew; issuance of a proclamation fixing formalities for presentation of claims against the late Han of Lew Chew, and for the collection of debts due thereto. 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]

436 do Apr. 13 No. 1101.—Political meetings and societies; issuance of an imperial decree for the regulation of; copy of the same inclosed; such meetings not to be held until approved by the police; list of persons forbidden to attend; penalty for violation of these regulations. 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

437 do Apr. 13 No. 1102.—The Emperor’s address to the provincial governors. 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]

438 do J 24 No. 1159.—The tour of the Mikado in the provinces; popularity of the young Emperor; what his administration has accomplished for Japan in twelve years; he has abolished feudalism, created an army and navy, assured liberty of conscience, introduced newspapers, railways, steam navigation, post-offices, savings banks, and compulsory education. 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

liberia.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

439 Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Aug. 13 No. 42.—Relations of Liberia to the interior tribes; mission of the King of Musardú to the Liberian Government offering to open direct trade; prospect of a commercial treaty with the Mandingoes. 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 439]

440 do Nov. 18 No. 52.—French protection to Liberia; Mr. Smyth refers to previous correspondence and shows the character of the overtures made to the French Government by Mr. Carrance, Liberian consul-general at Bordeaux; projected French mining operations in Liberia; the resources and geographical position of Liberia a temptation to foreign powers to gain ascendency in the republic. 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

441 do Dec. 12 1880. No. 58.—Message of the President of Liberia to Congress; policy of the government; Liberian trade with the aborigines; openings for foreign capital; opening of coast settlements and inland rivers to foreign commerce recommended; consolidation of the debt; educational plans; thanks to the United States for co-operation in the Northwest Boundary Commission; full text of the message. 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441]

442 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Smyth. Jan. 27 No. 42.—The message of the President of Liberia; comments thereon; expressions of friendship for Liberia. 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

443 Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. Jan. 21 The Liberian ministry; the new cabinet; appointment of a secretary of the interior. 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

444 do Feb. 12 No. 69.—Source of the Niger; discovery of by Messrs. Zweifel and Moustier; copy of the Marseilles Geographical Society’s Bulletin and of extracts from the explorers’ letter of appointment and other correspondence in relation thereto: military occupation of Sego. 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

445 do Feb. 12 No. 70.—The island of Matacong; occupation of by the French; protest of governor of Sierra Leone on ground of its cession to Great Britain in 1826; non-ratification of the treaty by the English Government; subsequent endeavors of the governors to enforce the terms thereof by exaction of customs dues; consequent falling off of trade: protest by the native authorities. 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

446 do Apr. 13 No. 77.—Visit of the French man-of-war Talisman to Liberia: interview of Captain Thierry with the President; expression of good wishes for the welfare and prosperity of Liberia on behalf of France; reception at the legation. 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

447 do Apr. 14 No. 78.—Claim of United States vs. Liberia for ordnance, &c.; resolution of the legislature looking to a settlement thereof; text of the resolution approved January 17, 1880. 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

448 Nov. 22 No. 90.—Proposition of the Vatican to maintain a legate in Liberia. 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

mexico.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

449 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts 1879. Sept. 26 No. 1041.—Trial, conviction, and execution in Mexico of a Mexican convicted of a murder in Texas; the record of the proceedings requested by Mr. Foster; the ease in its aspects as a precedent. (See Mr. Foster’s No. 1073. page 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453].) 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

450 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foster. Oct. 1 No. 682.—Indian raids into the State of Chihuahua; correspondence with War Department transmitted. 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

451 do Nov. 4 No. 695.—Case of the captain of the American schooner Newbern; his arrest and imprisonment by the Mexican authorities at Mazatlan on a charge of smuggling; letter from Senator McPherson transmitted. (Vide Sir Edward Thornton’s note of Nov. 14, 1879, page 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]. supra.) 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

452 Mr. Neill to Mr. Evarts Nov. 26 No. 1054.—Operations of the United States steamer Tuscarora in surveying the coast of Oajaca; although the consent of the Mexican Government had not been asked beforehand, orders have been given to render every assistance; suggestion that previous notice be given in future cases; note of Señor Ruelas. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

453 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts Dec. 18 No. 1073.—Judicial proceedings in the case of the Mexican convicted and executed in Mexico for the murder of another Mexican in Texas; copy of the record transmitted; the case valuable as a precedent. 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

454 do Dec. 24 No. 1075.—Railroad projects in Mexico; opposition continues to be manifested in Congress to establishing railroad connections with the United States; failure of the Rio Grande and Sonora schemes to obtain favorable consideration; amendments in Mexican interest introduced in proposed new charter; efforts of the projectors to revive old charters through the ministry of public works; power of the Executive to revive them; surveys to be proceeded with under the Blair charter; the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe road to undertake the Guaymas frontier road; official promulgation of the transfer of the Blair charter. (Vide Foreign Relations for 1879, pages 774 and 826.) 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

455 do Dec. 24 No. 1076.—The revolutionary movement in Chihuahua: its object to depose Governor Frias; injuries to American interests in Chihuahua, as detailed in the accompanying report of Consul Scott; forced loans; Mr. Foster’s representations to the Mexican Government; question of the exaction of a forced loan from the business house of which the consul is a member; correspondence transmitted. 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

456 do Dec. 26 No. 1077.—The “Zona Libre;” interesting report thereon, derived from Mr. Foster’s personal observation; reference to its origin; established in 1858, when the United States tariff was much lower than the Mexican, by the Governor of Tamaulipas; growth of smuggling operations during the American civil war; goods imported to the zone from Europe, duty free, carried into Texas; decline of this cortraband trade as American products compete in Mexican markets with European goods; growth of smuggling operations from the zone to”the interior of Mexico: the zone now a greater evil to Mexico than to the United States. 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456]

457 do Dec. 27 No. 1078.—Condition of the Mexican frontier states, as seen by Mr. Foster in his recent tour; his interviews with the military and civil authorities: good disposition of President Diaz on frontier questions; difficulty of maintaining a large force on the border; good order and peace restored; possibilities of disturbances by reason of revolutionary movements and the presidential campaign: operations against vagabond Indians in Coahuila; large numbers of Indians reported to have escaped from the border reservations of the United States. (Vide Foreign Relations for 1879, page 754.) 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 457]

458 do 1880. Jan. 7 No. 1089.—Revolutionary movement in Lower California; report of Consul Turner of La Paz; these movements characterized by forced loans, exacted by violence and imprisonment. 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

459 do Jan. 12 No. 1092.—Forced loans from American citizens; details of proceedings in the suit brought by Mr. P. B. Chishem to recover a forced loan; decision of lower court in his favor, sustained by the Supreme Court; repayment declined for want of funds. (For further and detailed information upon this important head, vide Foreign Relations for 1879, pages 727 and 746.) 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

460 do Jan. 14 No. 1093.—Mormon propaganda in Mexico; movements of Elder Thatcher supposed to have visited Mexico to found a Mormon colony in one of the northern States of Mexico; partial denial of the report. 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 459, Doc. 460, and Doc. 461]

461 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster Jan. 23 No. 713.—Procedure of the Mexican judicial tribunals of the State of Coahuila; a valuable precedent established in the trial, conviction, and execution of Zeferino Avalos. 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 459, Doc. 460, and Doc. 461]

462 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 5 No. 1101.—Mexican penalties for infringement of revenue laws; three American shipmasters imprisoned for clerical irregularities in their manifests; the subject represented to the Mexican Government with a view to future relief; consideration promised; particulars of the case of Captain Jacobson, of the Dreadnaught; Mr. Foster’s arguments thereon; text of correspondence exchanged. (See Mr. Foster’s No. 969, of June 7. 1879. Foreign Relations, 1879, page 812.) 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

463 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. Feb. 20 No. 725.—Forced loans in Chihuahua; case of Mr. Consul Scott. 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

464 do Mar. 1 No. 727.—Frontier affairs; “War Department’s order of June 1, 1877, providing for a direction to General Ord that under certain circumstances he might pursue raiders across the Mexican border into that republic declared inoperative; correspondence with War Department and the minister of Mexico at Washington transmitted. (Vide Foreign Relations, 1879, page 730.) 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

465 do Mar. 1 No. 728.—Imprisonment of citizens of the United States by Mexican customs authorities for slight clerical errors in invoices; disastrous effect, commercially, of a too rigid interpretation of the “contraband law.” 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]

466 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 1 No. 1108.—Belgian residents in Mexico; the Belgian minister conveys the thanks of his government to Mr. Foster for good offices in behalf of Belgian interests in Mexico during the suspension of relations 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467]

467 Mr. Neill to Mr. Evarts Mar. 15 No. 1.—Departure of Mr. Foster; official civilities shown to him. 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467]

468 do Apr. 2 No. 5.—Murder of three American citizens at Anganqueo; the matter properly brought to the attention of the Mexican Government; full statements of the murder by two survivors and by Mr. Kitchner, the director of the Trojes Mining Works, where the outrage occurred. 739 [Pg. 739 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]

469 do Apr. 12 No. 7.—The repeal of the “Ord order” for the crossing of United States troops into Mexico in pursuit of marauders; the Mexican Government informed thereof; Mr. Ruelas’ reply transmitted. 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

470 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan Apr. 20 No. 8.—Arganqueo murders; directed to urge the Mexican Government to lose no time in bringing the offenders to justice. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

471 Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts May 4 No. 11.—Murder of three Americans by a mob at Angangueo, State of Michoacan; correspondence with the foreign office transmitted. 745 [Pg. 745 includes portions of Doc. 470 and Doc. 471]

472 do May 18 No. 18.—Argangueo murders; correspondence with foreign office transmitted. 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 471 and Doc. 472]

473 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan June 12 No. 25.—Alleged violation by Mexican agriculturists of the rights of riparian owners by the artificial diversion of the waters of the Rio Grande; letter from the governor of Texas transmitted. 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]

474 Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts June 15 No. 29.—Arrest of cattle thieves; their subsequent release by the Mexican Government. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

475 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan June 26 No 28.—Raids across the border by hostile Indians; correspondence with the War Department transmitted. 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

476 Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts June 29 No. 32—Inability of President Diaz to allow United States troops to cross into Mexican territory in pursuit of hostile Indians without consent of Mexican senate; further correspondence with the foreign office transmitted. 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476]

477 do June 29 No. 38.—The Presidential elections; electors chosen June 27, 1880 result not yet known; the candidates are Messrs. Gonzalez, Benitez, Mexia, Garcia de la Cadena, and Zamacona; the prospect in event of no candidate having a majority in the electoral colleges; General Gonzalez supported by President Diaz. 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

478 do July 13 No. 51.—Depredations of Indians on the frontier; Mr. Morgan intimates to the Mexican Government its prospective accountability for acts of the American Indians who have received asylum in Mexico, should they recross and commit new hostilities in the United States. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

479 Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. July 16 No. 57.—Attempt to assassinate General Gonzalez at Guanajuato. 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

480 do July 17 No. 58.—Arreola and his band to be tried by civil process. 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

481 do July 24 No. 63.—Declension of President Diaz to allow United States troops to cross the Mexican border in pursuit of Indians; note from the minister for foreign affairs reiterating the desire of his government to enter into negotiations with that of the United States to the end that the troops of each nation may be authorized to cross into the territory of the others in pursuit of hostile Indians. 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481]

482 do July 24 No. 65.—Another attempt to assassinate General Gonzalez, at Leon; election of Gonzalez as President; Mazatlan taken by insurgents and recaptured; revolutionary and political rumors. 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

483 do July 27 No. 66.—Railroad schemes: President Diaz approves a contract for a railroad and telegraph line from Acapulco to the city of Mexico; terms of the agreement: difficulties of the enterprise. 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483]

484 do Aug. 10 No. 77.—Murder of three Americans at Anganqueso; arrest of the ringleaders; correspondence with the foreign office transmitted. 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 483 and Doc. 484]

485 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Morgan Sept. 15 No. 64.—Indian raids; attack upon United States troops by Victorio’s band, and subsequent escape of the latter into Mexico; Mr. Morgan instructed to offer to that government the alternative of allowing our troops to follow Victorio across the border, or of her assuming all responsibility arising from a non-compliance therewith. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486]

486 Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts Sept. 16 Message of President Diaz to the two houses of Congress; text of the message transmitted. 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486]

487 do Sept. 21 No. 102.—Requesting the consent of the Mexican Government to the fitting out of troops by the United States to pursue victorio across the border into Mexican territory; correspondence with the foreign office transmitted; Mr. Morgan’s interview with President Diaz. 774 [Pg. 774 includes portions of Doc. 486 and Doc. 487]

488 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Morgan. Oct. 9 No. 71.—Alleged illegal impressment of American citizens for service in the Mexican army; detailed report of the vice-consul at Piedras-Negras transmitted; Mr. Morgan instructed to demand the instant release of the parties and reasonable pecuniary indemnification for losses sustained by their detention; action of the local authorities a clear violation of treaty stipulations. (Vide Foreign Relations for 1879, page 741.) 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488]

489 Mr. Hay to Mr. Morgan. Oct. 20 No. 74.—Death of Señor Ruelas, the minister for foreign affairs of Mexico; expressions of regret at the sad intelligence conveyed. 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

correspondence with the mexican legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

490 Mr. Hunter to Señor Zamacona. 1879. Nov. 7 Movements of Indian marauders on the Mexican border. 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

491 Mr. Evarts to Señor Zamacona. 1880. Mar. 1 The “Ord order,” providing for the pursuit of raiders across the border, declared no longer operative. 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

492 Señor Zamacona to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 10 The “Ord order”; gratification expressed at its suppression. 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]

493 Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro June 15 Alleged infringement upon the riparian rights of agriculturists on the eastern (American) shore of the Rio Grande by the Mexican population similarly engaged on the western (Mexican) shore; statement of the county judge of El Paso County, and petitions signed by several hundred citizens of Elzeara and Socorro; requested to bring the matter to the attention of his government. 783 [Pg. 783 includes portions of Doc. 492 and Doc. 493]

494 Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts June 16 Alleged violation of riparian rights by Mexicans on the west side of the Rio Grande; the matter referred to his government as requested. 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495]

495 Mr. Hay to Señor Navarro. June 23 Raids across the Mexican border; text of a telegram from the Secretary of War to Major General McDowell, commanding the Division of the Pacific, relative to transmitted. 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495]

496 Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts June 25 Proposed filibustering expedition for the invasion of the State of Sonora; gratification expressed at the anticipatory action taken by the War Department at Washington in issuing an order to the commander of the Department of the Pacific for the prevention thereof. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

497 Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro July 27 Invasion of Mexican territory by raiding parties; information conveyed of the disbanding of the forces under General Marquez; measures will be taken to suppress promptly any movements toward a renewal of his protected invasion. 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

498 Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts July 28 Same subject, acknowledging receipt of Mr. Evarts’s note of 27th instant, and expressing the belief that his government will gladly cooperate with that of the United States in frustrating any efforts made in this country tending to disturb the peace in Mexico. 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, and Doc. 499]

499 do Aug. 28 Case of the bandit Robert Martin; hopes the Department will bring the doings of the band of outlaws, of whom Martin is the head, to the notice of the local authorities. 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, and Doc. 499]

500 Señor Navarro to Mr. Hay. Sept. 3 Acknowledging receipt of Department’s note informing him of arrest of individuals suspected of belonging to a party of revolutionists against the government of Mexico; asks that steps be taken to procure extradition of the criminals. 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500]

501 Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro Sept. 11 Alleged raids by marauders into Mexico; all possible measures will be taken for suppressing the same. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502]

502 Mr. Hunter to Señor Navarro Sept. 22 Extradition of eight Mexican revolutionists in the custody of United States troops; reply to Señor Navarro’s note of the 3d instant, requesting the same; the granting of this request, in the absence of detailed specifications of their other than political crimes, would be a violation of treaty stipulations. 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502]

503 Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts Oct. 18 Alleged outrage to outlaws on Mexican soil; correspondence between the governor of the State of Chihuahua and the Mexican foreign office, transmitted. 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 503]

morocco.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

504 Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Dec. 7 No. 343.—Affairs in Morocco; heavy rains; crops; harvest prospects, &c. 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506]

505 do 1880. Feb. 28 No. 353.—Expatriation; naturalization of Moorish subjects in foreign countries; circular of foreign office to the effect that Moorish subjects sp naturalized shall become amenable to Moorish jurisdiction upon revisiting Morocco [repatriation]; the aame privileges claimed, by Mr. Mathews, for naturalized citizens of the United States born in Morocco as for those of the most favored nations. 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505]

506 do Mar. 8 No. 354. The Jews in Morocco; letter of Mr. Mathews to the Sultan on the subject of the recent atrocities, with a view to ameliorating their present condition. 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506]

507 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews. Apr. 13 No. 165.—Protection of naturalized Moors; Mr. Mathews’ action on the proposals of the Moorish foreign minister meets with entire approval. (See Mr. Mathews’ No. 353, of February 28, 1880, page 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505], supra.) 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

508 Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. Apr. 16 No. 361.—Transmits copy of his letter to Minister Fairchild, on the subject of the protection to be extended to native Moors resident in Spain, by the diplomatic and consular representatives of foreign powers resident in that country. 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

509 do Apr. 17 No. 362.—Persecution of Jews in Morocco; copy of the Grand Vizier’s reply to Mr. Mathews’ letter to the Sultan. 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]

510 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews. Apr. 22 No. 166.—Native Jews in Morocco; approval of Mr. Mathews’ course in addressing the Sultan’s prime minister in behalf of that oppressed race. (See Mr. Mathews’ No. 354 of March 8, 1880, page 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506].) 803 [Pg. 803 includes portions of Doc. 509 and Doc. 510]

511 Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. July 30 No. 383.—Insurrection in Morocco; defeat of the Imperial troops sent to collect exorbitant imposts by the Kabyles near Wazan; the Sultan gathering contingents to subjugate the rebels; cruel acts and extortions by the Moorish governors; distressing state of affairs among the poor classes of the tribe of Angera. 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511]

512 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews. Oct. 28 Hebrews in Morocco; efforts for the amelioration of their condition; designation of Mr. Levi A. Cohen by the board of delegates of the’ Union of American Hebrew Congregations in New York as the accredited agent of that board at Tangier, Morocco, to look after their interests; Mr. Mathews instructed to lend his co-operation. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513]

the netherlands.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

513 Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts 1879. Nov. 27 No. 134.—Reply of the minister of foreign affairs to questions propounded by a committee of the Staats General. 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513]

514 do Dec. 20 No. 138.—Question of differential duties imposed in the United States on Dutch colonial products when imported from Holland; the foreign minister interrogated by the Staats General; the question to be reopened by Holland and the abrogation of the discrimination claimed under existing treaties; the treaty question examined; conference with the foreign minister; correspondence exchanged. 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 514]

515 do 1880. Mar. 10 No. 143.—Extensive defalcation in Rotterdam; case of Messrs. Lodewick Pincoffs and H. Kerdijk. 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515]

516 do May 18 No. 151.—Estates in Holland; case of Stephen Bove. 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 515 and Doc. 516]

517 do Sept. 30 Opening of the annual session of the Staats General; address by His Majesty the King of the Netherlands. 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517]

correspondence with the legation of the netherlands in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

518 Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts 1880. Jan. 6 Discriminating duties; alleged levy of by the United States on Dutch colonial products imported from ports of the Netherlands; coffee especially affected thereby; the propriety of calling the attention of Congress to this point suggested. 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

519 do Feb. 10 Recognition of Roumanian independence; elevation of the consulate-general of the Netherlands at Bucharest to the rank of a diplomatic agency. 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

520 Mr. Evarts to Mr. de Pestel. Mar. 2 Recognition of Roumanian independence; steps taken on the part of the Government of the United States for the establishment of diplomatic relations with the principality. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]

521 Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts May 12 Discriminating duties levied on Dutch colonial products imported into the United States; again urges the presentation of this subject to Congress for legislation. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]

peru.

No. From whom and to whom. Date, Subject. Page.

522 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Dec. 23 No. 94.—Revolution in favor of General Piéola; departure of President Prado for Europe; General La Puerta left as President; popular sympathy with General Piérola manifests itself; the troops declare for Pierola; attempt of General La Cotera to reduce the mutiny; sharp fighting in the streets of Lima as witnessed by Mr. Christiancy; Callao declares for Pierola; he leaves the capital and goes to Callao; success of the revolutionary movement and departure of General La Cotera; Pierola expected to proclaim himself dictator; his letter to the nation; question of Pierola’s recognition: instructions asked. 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]

523 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. Dec. 26 No. 53.—Right of foreign-built ships claimed to have been purchased by American citizens from subjects or citizens of’ a belligerent power during the existence of an actual war between such belligerent government and another belligerent, toward both of which our government maintains a neutral position, to fly the American flag; the principles which are to govern our diplomatic and consular and naval officers in respect thereto; case of the Itala; Mr. Christiancy’s fears that that vessel is about to assume again the American flag and his anxiety to ascertain exactly the views of the Department of State, in the light of this possibility, and of the fact that a large part of the Chilian merchant marine would, in all probability, range itself also under the same colors; his attention called to previous instructions on this head; the inability of the Department to frame rules to meet the requirements of every individual case; the right of American citizens to purchase foreign-built vessels and to carry on commerce with them clear and undoubted; the possibility of collusion and fraud in connection with these transactions not a sufficient reason to invalidate a right existing independently of statute law; hence this right cannot be absolutely prohibited if the transfer of ownership be abonafide transaction; a consular officer should consider the question of good faith the governing element in transfers of this character, and should be guided thereby in granting any marine document or certificate of ownership: in the absence of any evidence of fraud a sale in the regular way, with the usual business formalities, to be regarded by the consul as made in good faith; the act of one American minister or consul in such cases not to be challenged or reversed by another except upon the strongest proof of mistake or collusion. (Vide Foreign Relations for 1879, pages 861, 865, 874, 884, and 894.) 824 [Pg. 824 includes portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523]

524 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. Dec. 31 No. 98.—Complete success of the revolution in favor of General Piérola; decrees of General Pierola on assuming the dictatorship; his letter to the Pope; his letters to the chiefs of friendly powers; decree reorganizing the government of Peru: decree of military reorganization. 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 524]

525 do 1880. Jan. 21 No. 106.—Transmitting several important decrees of the Peruvian Government; adoption of gold as standard currency; depreciation of paper; circulars of the minister of foreign relations to friendly powers concerning the conduct of the war and the right to ship nitrates under the authority of Chill; the newspaper El Comercio suppressed; text of the currency decrees; text of the diplomatic circulars. 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525]

526 do Jan. 28 No. 111.—Blockade of Mollendo by the Chilians; Correspondence with the United States consular agent at Arica on the international questions involved; what constitutes an effective blockade; Mr. Nugent reports the arrival and departure of neutral vessels notwithstanding the biockade. 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

527 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. Jan. 28 No. 112.—The question of exporting nitrates from the territory held by Chilians; Mr. Christiancy’s instructions to the United States consul at Iquique; the right of the consul to grant clearances under the belligerent authority of Chili considered; novelty of the question. 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 527]

528 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. Mar. 1 Alleged seizure by Chili of nitrates on the Peruvian coast, the ownership of which is claimed by Peru; their export by the former government in neutral vessels; Peruvian cruisers will not respect a neutral flag detected in that business; Mr. Christiancy instructed to call the attention of the Peruvian government to the 18th article of the treaty of 1870, and to the fact that the declaration of Peru, above-mentioned, would be a direct violation thereof. 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

529 do Mar. 2 No. 65.—Consular clearances at Iquique; answers Mr. Christiancy’s inquiries as to the duty of consul, having exequatur from Peru, to grant clearances under Chilian regulations while the port is under military occupancy. The consul’s action not to be governed by the nature of the cargo, but to conform to the de facto rights of the belligerent in occupation. 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529]

530 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. Mar. 24 No. 138.—The exportation of Peruvian nitrates by the Chilians occupying Tarapaca; diplomatic circular of Peru protesting against such exportation and against the Chilian conduct of the war; expected attack on Chorillos; strong feeling among the foreign diplomatic body at Lima; a meeting of the body to be held; text of the Peruvian circular. 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530]

531 do Mar. 24 No. 140.—Destruction of foreign property at Lobos Islands and Eten by the Chilian fleet; letter from the United States consul at Lambay-eque and protest against injuries to American citizens; the injury clearer than the remedy. 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531]

532 do Apr 6 No. 151.—Question of exportation of nitrates from the Peruvian territory occupied by Chili; note of Mr. Christiancy to the Peruvian minister of foreign affairs on the subject, calling attention to the treaty stipulations between the United States and Peru, in connection with the Peruvian decree prohibiting such exports and ordering capture of neutral vessels conveying them. 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532]

533 do Apr. 14 No. 156.—The war; continued successes of the Chilians on land; the Chilian fleet controls the sea; its appearance before Callao; failure of attempt to blow up the Peruvian corvette Union by a torpedo launch; notification of blockade of Calloa given to the consular corps; time for departure of neutral vessels and non-combatants extended to 15 days; the mails not to be interrupted during this term; exodus of Americans from Callao to Lima; Mr. Christiancy will remain at his post for their protection; further depreciation of the paper sol to 12½ cents gold. 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

534 do Apr. 18 No. 157.—The war; communication of the foreign diplomatic body to the Chilian admiral relative to possible bombardment of Lima; the notice of blockade held by the diplomatic corps to apply only to Callao; mail facilities stopped; expected bombardment of Callao; operations on land; suppression of the revolution against President Campero at La Paz; concentration of the allied 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]

535 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. Apr. 19 No. 76.—Alleged destruction of neutral property in the Lobos Islands by Chilian vessels; proper representation will be made to the Chilian minister at Washington with a view to obtaining a discontinuance of an infraction of the rights of neutrals. 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536]

536 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. May 9 No. 164.—A decree promulgated April 12 restricting the price of the necessaries of life to those prevailing when Callao was blockaded; decree of the prefect of Lima of May 4, 1880, fixing the prices; many dealers close” their shops; the measure an extreme one; its effect in keeping up the value of the paper currency. 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536]

537 Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. June 20 No. 179.—The South American war; address of the supreme chief to the nation. 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537]

correspondence with the peruvian legation in the united states.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

538 Mr. Tracy to Mr. Evarts 1879. Nov. 5 Treaty of peace between Spain and Peru 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 538]

portugal.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

539 Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts 1879. Sept. 19 No. 277.—Naval cemetery at Porto Grande, Cape Verd Islands; transfer of remains from old to new cemetery. 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 539]

540 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Moran. Oct. 29 No. 168.—Acquirement for the United States, through proper application to Portuguese Government, of the tariff privileges of Annex B of Franco-Portuguese treaty of 1866; no reason for longer deferring action in the premises. 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540]

541 Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts Nov. 21 No. 293.—Transfer of remains of the dead from old to new cemetery at Porto Grande; thanks of this government conveyed to that of Portugal for its courtesy and action in constructing the new cemetery, and causing the respectful transfer thereto of the remains of American officers and seamen. 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541]

542 do Dec. 23 Gallant conduct of Mr. Samuel W. Dabney, consul at Fayal, and his son, in rescuing, at the risk of their own lives, four seamen of the French hark “Jacques Coeur,” on the night of November 30, 1879. 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542]

543 do 1880. Jan. 7 No. 297.—Opening of the Cortes by the King in person on the 2d instant; text of His Majesty’s speech. 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543]

544 do Mar. 15 No. 308.—Application of this government to be admitted to the benefits of Annex B of the Portuguese-French treaty of 1866; acquiescence of Portuguese Government thereto. 860 [Pg. 860 includes portions of Doc. 543 and Doc. 544]

545 do May 22 No. 320.—Financial estimate of the receipts and expenditures of the kingdom for 1880–81; deficit of £1,145,000; the government resorts to extraordinary measures to reduce the same. 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545]

546 do June 12 No. 322.—Cortes of 1880; session of, closed on 7th instant. 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

russia.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

547 Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Dec. 4 No. 159.—Attempt on the Emperor’s life 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548]

548 do Dec. 5 No. 161.—Attempt upon the Emperor’s life; particulars of the affair. 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548]

549 do Dec. 5 Attempt upon life of the Emperor by explosion of railway train; no one hurt. 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 548, Doc. 549, and Doc. 550]

550 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman. Dec. 8 No. 83.—Presumed attempt on life of Emperor by railway explosion near Moscow; congratulations of the people of the United States transmitted. 867 [Pg. 867 includes portions of Doc. 548, Doc. 549, and Doc. 550]

551 Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. Dec. 9 No. 162.—Attempt on Emperor’s life; congratulations of President Hayes, and thanks of His Majesty therefor. 868 [Pg. 868 includes portions of Doc. 550 and Doc. 551]

552 do 1880. Feb. 19 No. 184.—Attempt on the Emperor’s life; the third blow aimed at the Russian dynasty; explosion in the Winter Palace; the result abortive as far as the royal family were concerned, but successful in the killing and wounding of some fifty soldiers; great excitement in the city; failing health of the Empress; Her Majesty’s death probably hastened by this last shock. 869 [Pg. 869 is part of Doc. 552]

553 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman. Feb. 24 No. 90.—Attempt on Emperor’s life; congratulations at providential escape. 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554]

554 Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. Feb. 24 No. 186.—Attempt on the Emperor’s life; congratulations of the President at the providential escape. 870 [Pg. 870 includes portions of Doc. 553 and Doc. 554]

555 do Feb. 27 No. 187.—General Loris Melikoff succeeds General Gourko as military governor of St. Petersburg; his power second only to that of the Emperor, to whom alone he is responsible; excitement in the city; threatened Nihilist outbreak. 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555]

556 do Mar. 2 No. 188.—Twenty-fifth anniversary of the Emperor’s accession to the throne; congratulations of the President of the United States tendered and acknowledged. 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556]

557 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster Apr. 14 No. 2.—Jews in Russia; alleged persecution of; good offices of this government requested by the Union of American-Hebrew Congregations. 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558]

558 Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. May 7 No. 205.—Jews in Russia: case of Henry Pinkos. 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558]

559 do May 17 No. 208.—Jews in Russia; case of Henry Pinkos. 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560]

560 Mr. Fostor to Mr. Evarts June 7 No. 5—Death of the Empress 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560]

561 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. June 28 No. 14.—Jews in Russia; case of Henry Pinkos; supposed implication of Jews in plots against the life of the Emperor; no such charge against Mr. Pinkos. 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561]

562 Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. July 15 No. 18.—Jews in Russia; case of Henry Pinkos; Jews only ordered to leave St. Petersburg, Moscow, and other large towns under martial law, not the whole of Russia. 876 [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 561 and Doc. 562]

563 do July 16 No. 19.—Censorship over consular correspondence; result of application for the freedom of the mails addressed to the United States consul-general; explanatory remarks of Mr. de Giers; the rule waived in Mr. Edwards’ case and all his printed matter to be delivered unopened; one of the censors personally asks Mr. Edwards to excuse in advance any oversight which may hereafter occur. 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563]

564 do July 21 No. 20.—The Jews in Russia; case of Henry Pinkos continued. 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564]

565 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman. Aug. 10 No. 22.—Jews in Russia; case of Henry Pinkos; instructing Mr. Hoffman to make every proper representation to the Russian Government in Pinkos’ case. 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566]

566 Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts Aug. 11 No. 23.—Pinkos’ case; further correspondence with Russian Government deemed unnecessary, as Pinkos has left the country. 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 564, Doc. 565, and Doc. 566]

567 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster Sept. 4 No. 27.—Jews in Russia: case of Henry Pinkos 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568]

568 Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts Sept. 16 No. 37.—Case of Henry Pinkos; correspondence with the foreign office transmitted. 880 [Pg. 880 includes portions of Doc. 566, Doc. 567, and Doc. 568]

correspondence with the russian legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

569 Mr. de Willamov to Mr. Evarts. 1880. May 31 Makes inquiries concerning the system of literary and scientific exchanges in the United States; transmits the regulations adopted by the Russian Commission of International Exchange. 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569]

570. Mr. Hay to Mr. de Willamov. July 13 International literary and scientific exchanges; transmits information as to the system pursued in the United States by the Smithsonian Institution, as received from Professor Baird; the letter of Professor Baird to the president of the Italian commission of international exchanges. 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570]

571 Mr. de Willamov to Mr. Evarts. July 21 Egyptian finances; appointment of a commission of liquidation for the regulation of; communications from the Governments of France and England. 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 527]

572 Mr. Evarts to Mr. de Willamov. Aug. 4 Egyptian finances; appointment of a commission of liquidation for the regulation of; attitude of reserve originally adopted by Government of United States abandoned at earnest request of Khedivial Government; copy of note to British chargé d’affaires at Washington transmitted. (Identic notes to Austria-Hungary, Italy, and Germany.) 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528]

spain.

No. To whom and from whom. Date. Subject. Page.

573 Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts 1879. Nov. 8 No. 215.—Case of the American whaling schooner Edward Lee: correspondence with the foreign office transmitted; the claim not entertained by the Spanish Government. 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573]

574 do Nov. 11 No. 216.—Abolition of slavery in Cuba: copy of the proposed law transmitted. 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574]

575 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell Dec. 10 No. 180.—Abolition of slavery in Cuba: gratification expressed at the proposed law for the abolition of. 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

576 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild. 1880. Mar. 12 No. 4.—Native Moors in Morocco: Mr. Fairchild authorized to participate in a friendly conference of foreign representatives proposed to be held at Madrid to discuss the question of the protection extended to these persons by the diplomatic and consular representatives of foreign states resident in that country. 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

577 Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts. Apr. 13 No. 10.—The Morocco conference: questions of protection to be considered; foreign freedom from taxation; employment of native Moors as agents, &c.; treatment of Moors naturalized abroad and returning to Morocco; inequity of exempting foreigners and protected persons from taxation; the right of foreigners to protection and freedom from extraordinary taxation indisputable; need of circumscribing foreign protection of native Moors. 895 [Pg. 895 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577]

578 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild. June 15 No. 30.—Morocco conference at Madrid: instructed to support the Austrian proposition to secure religious toleration in Morocco. 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579]

579 Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts. July 3 No. 39.—The Morocco conference at Madrid: adjournment after a successful conclusion of its labors; Mr. Fairchild’s detailed report of each day’s proceedings; text of the convention signed by all the representatives. Article I. Protection, except as herein modified, to be in conformity with certain existing treaties. II. Chiefs of missions to select interpreters and employes who are free from all taxation except “gate-tax.” III. Consular officers limited to protection of one native interpreter, one soldier, and two servants, with, in case of need, a native secretary. IV. Natives appointed to minor consular posts to be respected, and freed from taxation. V. Certain sheiks and other native functionaries, as well as persons under prosecution, not to be employed by chiefs of missions; judicial procedure with respect to protected persons defined. VI. Dwelling and family of a protected person to be respected. Protection, with one exception, not hereditary; any future exceptional hereditary protection to be enjoyed by all the powers. VII. Lists of protected persons to be furnished, with certain formalities. VIII. Consular duty repecting such lists. IX. Employés of protected Moors not to have protection, but certain considerations to be shown to them. X. Present treaty stipulations as to taxes unchanged, except as to agricultural and gate-taxes. XI. The right of foreigners to hold property guaranteed, subject to local law of titles. XII. Agricultural tax to be paid by land tenants; mode of payment through consuls; penalties for evasion: the tax to be specially regulated by agreement. XIII. The gate-tax; its apportionment and collection to be regulated by mutual agreement; not to be increased with a new agreement; XIV. Mediation of consular interpreters allowed, but only when duly credentialed. XV. Rules as to foreign naturalization and return to Morocco; naturalization heretofore obtained not affected by these rules. XVI. No irregular protection to be granted, except, after previous notification, as a reward for signal service to a foreign government, and then not to exceed 12 for each power; such persons, already under protection, remain as now. XVII. General “favored nation” clause. XVIII. Ratification and exchange; to take temporary effect immediately. 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579]

580 Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts. July 26 No. 54.—Transit of extradited prisoners across Spanish territory; Mr. Evarts’ inquiries answered by a note of Mr. Elduayen, specifying the formalities necessary for the Spanish transit of criminals extradited from and to other countries; the same privilege will be extended to the United States if reciprocated. 920 [Pg. 920 includes portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580]

581 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild. Aug. 11 No. 51.—Morocco conference; the convention to be submitted to the senate for consideration with a view to ratification. 922 [Pg. 922 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582]

582 do Aug. 11 No. 52.—Alleged unwarrantable interference with American commerce in Cuban waters; American vessels fired upon by Spanish cruisers. 922 [Pg. 922 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582]

583 Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts. Sept. 4 No. 68.—Morocco conference; expresses the hope that the day is not far distant when equal toleration will be extended to all religious denominations. 928 [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 583]

584 Mr. Reed to Mr. Evarts. Sept. 23 No. 31.—Alleged firing upon American vessels by Spanish gunboats off the coast of Cuba; correspondence with the Spanish foreign office relative thereto. 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 583 and Doc. 584]

correspondence with the spanish legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

585 Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts. Apr. 26 Morocco conference: note from the Spanish minister of state to the representative of that government at Washington, proposing Madrid, and May 15, 1880, as the place and time of meeting. 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585]

586 do Apr. 26 Collisions at sea; transmitting copy of royal orders of May 27, 1879, in respect thereto. 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586]

587 Mr. Evarts to Señor Mendez de Vigo. May 4 Morocco conference: information conveyed of the designation of the United States minister at Madrid to act as the representative of that govern in ennment thereat. 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587]

588 Mr. Hay to Señor Mendez de Vigo. July 13 Collisions at sea: proposition of the government of Spain for a congress of maritime powers to discuss legislation for the international settlement of damages arising therefrom; views of the Secretary of the Treasury communicated; he deprecates any departure from established usages; the government of the United States will, however, gladly take the subject into further consideration should the same be deemed desirable. 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589]

sweden and norway.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

589 Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts 1879. Mar. 9 No. 67.—Mormon emigration: the Swedish government confirms the assurances held out to Mr. Stevens as communicated by him in a former dispatch. (Vide Foreign Relations for 1879, p. 964.) 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589]

590 Mr. Hay to Mr. Stevens Mar. 29 No. 71.—Same subject: acknowledging receipt of foregoing, and conveying thanks of this government to that of Sweden and Norway for its action in suppression thereof. 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, and Doc. 591]

591 Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts Apr. 20 No. 70–—Political change in the ministry; resignation of the Premier and his associates; cause, the defeat in the lower house of the army bill providing for the extension of the period of enrollment from 21 to 30 years, instead of from 21 to 25 years as heretofore; Count Posse, the leader of the opposition, called on by the King to form a new ministry; names and portfolios of the new cabinet: Baron Bildt, E. E. and M. P. at Berlin to take the department of foreign affairs; two only of the old ministry retained; General Björnstjerna will probably go to Berlin in place of Baron Bildt. 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, and Doc. 591]

592 do Apr. 27 No. 71.—Reception by the Swedish government to Professor Nordenskjöld, the distinguished explorer. 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592]

593 do June 16 No. 77.—Political direct issue between the King and the Norwegian parliament on the question of amending the constitution; the dual kingdom; political thought and feeling superior in Norway; a resume of the constitution. 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593]

594 do July 26 No. 82.—Mormon proselytism in Norway; circular of the Norwegian minister of justice, warning the natives against emigration with intent to violate the United States laws against polygamy; public sympathy with the efforts of the United States to repress the evil. 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594]

correspondence with the swedish legation in washington.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

595 Count Lewenhaupt to Mr. Evarts. 1880. Jan. 8 Arctic exploration; conference held at Hamburg in October, 1879, to discuss the policy of a scientific international exploration of the polar regions; views of the government of the United States requested. 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]

596 Mr. Evarts to Count Lewenhaupt. Feb. 14 Same subject; acknowledging receipt of above note; proceedings of the conference at Hamburg called for by Congress; present definite action therefrom expected; result thereof will be promptly communicated. 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596]

switzerland.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

597 Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Oct. 18 No. 219.—Transmits translated text of the Swiss civil registry and marriage law of 1874; how its regulations affect Americans marrying in Switzerland; difficulty of procuring necessary documentary records from the United States to be used in such cases; Swiss registry of births, marriages, and deaths of Americans; the system of registration pursued at the legation; inquiries of the Swiss Government on questions of marriage, &c.; how answered by Mr. Fish. 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597]

598 do Oct. 21 No. 220—Mormon emigration to the United States; representations made to the Swiss Government, in compliance with Mr. Evarts’s instructions; interviews with President Hammer on the subject; the Swiss Government disposed to do all in its power to prevent such emigration, by giving public warning through the official press. 951 [Pg. 951 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598]

599 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fish. Nov. 12 No. 120.—Property disqualification incident on Swiss expatriation vide Foreign Relations for 1879, page 973, for text of dispatch to which this is a reply; also, vide Foreign Relations for 1876, page 567, for Swiss law regulating expatriation); difficulties attending the acquisition of legal title to property in Switzerland by native citizens of that country naturalized in the United States; the action of the Swiss authorities in withholding property belonging to citizens of Switzerland so naturalized, believed to be contrary to treaty stipulations. 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599]

600 Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. Nov. 27 No. 229.—Mormon emigration to the United States; reply of the Swiss Government to Mr. Fish; note of the subject; a disposition evinced to lend moral support to the United States in checking polygamous immigration; text of the Swiss reply. 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600]

60 do 1880. Feb. 11 No. 247.—Transmits correspondence with the Swiss Government concerning its application for maintenance of George Retchel, a Badener, naturalized in the United States, and now sick at Bonjean, Berne; the request declined in conformity with precedents cited. 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 601]

602 do May 25 No. 275.—Emigration from Switzerland; probability of an increase therein. 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

603 do Sept. 30 No. 303.—Validity of marriages of citizens of the United States in Switzerland; circular from the legation at Berne inclosed. 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603]

604 do Sept. 30 No. 304.—Proposed revision of the Federal constitution; the question to be decided by popular vote. 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 604]

605 Mr. Wvarts to Mr. Fish Oct. 19 No. 170.—Expatriation and repatriation; case of Carl Gottlieb Rau; held that for a native American to put off his nationality he should (must) put on another; continued residence of a native American abroad does not per se constitute expatriation, unless he performs acts inconsistent with his American nationality, and consistent only with the formal acquirement of another nationality. 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 615]

turkish empire.

1. turkey.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

606 Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. 1879. Oct. 21 No. 351.—Protestantism in Turkey; history of Protestantism in Turkey; statement showing the present position of the Protestant community in the Turkish Empire. 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606]

607 do Nov. 15 No. 358.—Life-saving institutions in Turkey; Mr. Maynard’s endeavors to obtain information; inadequacy of the service; danger to life in the Black Sea; Sir George Thomas’s sketch of the life-boat and rocket service in Turkey. 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607]

608 do Dec. 2 No. 361.—Egyptian finances; discussion of the subject; correspondence with the foreign office. 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608]

609 do Jan. 10 No. 374.—The situation in America; efforts of American missionaries to ameliorate their condition; signs of improvement; American moral influence in the East; appeal of the Armenian patriarch for foreign relief. 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609]

610 do Feb. 19 No. 381.—Life-saving appliances in the Black Sea; meetings of foreign representatives to discuss the matter; demoralization and threatened resignation of the life-saving service; note of the representatives to the Porte, urging reforms. 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610]

611 Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts Mar. 5 No. 2.—Murder of Colonel Kummeran, military attache of the Russian legation at Constantinople; attributed to a plot of the Nihilists. 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612]

612 do Mar. 26 No. 4.—Murder of Colonel Kummeran, military attache of the Russian legation in Constantinople; trial of Yeli Mehemet, the assassin; composition of the court; the line of defense; the verdict; a meeting of the diplomatic body called by the dean to protest against the sentence of imprisonment as being tantamount to an acquittal; memorandum drawn up for submission to the Sultan, requesting him to sentence Veli to death, and that the proceedings of the court be transmitted to the Czar for his approval. 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612]

613 do Mar. 30 No. 5.—Murder of Colonel Kummeran, military attache of the Russian legation at Constantinople; memorandum of the foreign representatives to the Sublime Porte in relation to the sentence of Veli Mehemet, the assassin. 976 [Pg. 976 includes portions of Doc. 612 and Doc. 613]

614 do Apr. 22 No. 13.—Discontinuance of the Turkish legations at Washington, Stockholm, and Brussels. 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 614 and Doc. 615]

615 Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts May 8 No. 392.—Brigandage in Thessaly; abduction of Colonel Synge, an Englishman engaged in distributing charities among the needy; his fate long in suspense; heavy ransom, $50,000, demanded and paid; the result practically sets a premium on brigandage, making the country unsafe for strangers; transmits copy of Colonel Synge’s account of his captivity. 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 614 and Doc. 615]

616 Mr. Heap to Mr. Payson. June 10 No. 89.—Turkish legation in the United States: Mr. Heap executes his instructions to urge the retention of the mission; interview of Mr. Heap with Abeddin Pasha, June 9, 1880. 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

617 Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts June 22 No. 398.—Changes in the Turkish cabinet; Said Pasha and Sawas Pasha succeeded by Kadri Pasha as prime minister and Abeddin Pasha as minister of foreign affairs; Mr. Maynard’s ceremonial visits; character of the appointments; frequency of cabinet changes. 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

618 Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. July 19 No. 2.—Tribute to Mr. Minister Maynard by the American colony in Constantinople. 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618]

619 do Aug. 1 No. 3.—Murder of the Rev. Dr. Parsons, an American missionary, near Ismid, while conveying succor to the sufferers from famine; Mr. Heap’s urgent representations to the Porte; presence of an American naval vessel desirable. 983 [Pg. 983 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619]

620 do Aug. 9 No. 7.—Murder of Dr. Parsons and his servant: arrest of four of the supposed murderers; three persons only positively known to have been concerned; history of the murder. 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 619 and Doc. 620]

621 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap Aug. 21 No. 264.—Murder of Dr. Parsons and servant; history of Dr. Parsons and his career as a missionary; Mr. Heap instructed to persist in his efforts looking toward the speedy and exemplary punishment of the murderers. 986 [Pg. 986 includes portions of Doc. 620 and Doc. 621]

622 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap Aug. 23 Telegram: murder of Dr. Parsons and servant; instructed to urge upon Turkish Government prompt punishment of murderers and energetic measures for protection of American missionaries. 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623]

623 Mr. Hay to Mr. Heap Sept. 2 No. 268.—Murder of Rev. Dr. Parsons and servant; expresses the hope that the murderers may he speedily brought to justice. 987 [Pg. 987 includes portions of Doc. 621, Doc. 622, and Doc. 623]

624 Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. Sept. 13 No. 16.—Murder of Dr. Parsons and his servant; the murderers awaiting: trial. 988 [Pg. 988 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624]

625 Mr. Hunter to Mr. Heap Sept. 15 No. 272.—Murder of Dr. Parsons and servant; instructed to continue his efforts toward having the authorities of the Ottoman Government inflict speedy and condign punishment upon the murderers. 989 [Pg. 989 includes portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, and Doc. 626]

626 do Sept. 22 No. 273.—Murder of Dr. Parsons and servant; authorized to employ counsel for prosecution of murderers. 989 [Pg. 989 includes portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, and Doc. 626]

627 Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. Oct. 11 No. 31.—Murder of Rev. Dr. Parsons and his servant; sentence of the culprits. 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 627]

628 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap. Oct. 15 No. 278.—Murder of Dr. Parsons and servant; gratification expressed at the conviction and sentence of the murderers. 991 [Pg. 991 includes portions of Doc. 627 and Doc. 628]

2. egypt.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

629 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comanos. 1879. Aug. 1 “Cleopatra’s Needle”: indefinite leave of absence granted to Lieutenant-Commander Gorringe to enable him to personally superintend the transportation, from Alexandria to New York, of the obelisk. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630]

630 Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. Oct. 8 No. 340.—Rothschild domanial loan; addition of a third article to the draft of a decree proposed by the Egyptian Government for the insuring the validity of the mortgage of certain lands to the Messrs. Rothschild. 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630]

631 Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts Nov. 13 No. 344.—The obelisk; satisfactory progress of the work of removal. 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631]

632 do Nov. 27 No. 351.—Rothschild domanial loan; Khedivial decree of November 15, 1879, concerning same. 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632]

633 Mr. Farman to Mr. Pay son. Nov. 28 No. 352.—Prison facilities in Egypt; not sufficiently ample. 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635]

634 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman Dec. 5 No. 147.—Egyptian finances; the proposed decree for insuring the validity of the mortgage of certain lands to the Messrs. Rothschild assented to by the Government of the United States. 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635]

635 do Dec. 30 No. 152.—Prisons in Egypt; the United States prison at Smyrna the proper place in which to incarcerate persons sentenced by the United States consular court in Egypt to imprisonment for a term of years. 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635]

636 Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts 1880. Feb. 14 No. 371.—Rothschild domanial loan: Decree concerning same; assent of the Government of the United States requested to the payment of arrears of tribute, &c, out of balance of loan. 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636]

637 do Mar. 8 No. 372.—Proposed commission of liquidation: plan for the formation of the commission drawn up at Paris and accepted by the council of ministers; foreign representation; Russia, the United. States, and the lesser powers left out. 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

638 Mr. Eyarts to Mr. Farman Mar. 24 No. 158.—Egyptian finances; assent of the Government of the United States to the full and immediate payment of arrears of tribute, pensions, and pay of employes out of the balance of the Rothschild or domanial loan conveyed. 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639]

639 Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts Apr. 5 No. 381.—Decree of the Khedive instituting a commission of liquidation; conditions of the Rothschild loan to remain unchanged. (See Sir Edward Thornton’s note of June 12, 1880, to Mr. Evarts, page 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], supra.) 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639]

640 do Apr. 8 No. 388.—Egyptian finances; text of the Khedive’s decree of the 5th April appointing the members of the commission of liquidation, and the declaration of the 31st March, 1880, by the consuls-general of Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, Great Britain, and Italy in relation to the said commission. 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640]

641 Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts Apr. 22 No. 391.—Egyptian finances: commission of liquidation appointed to regulate same; opinion of the Russian Government expressed in a circular to the five great powers of Europe, that all the powers participating in the formation of the new tribunals should be represented; notwithstanding which, the Khedive, at the instance of England and France, issues a decree under date of 31st March, 1880, establishing a commission to be constituted only of the five great powers, giving to France and England a majority of the members, and consequently the full and complete control of its every action; formal reserve of the Russian Government declared as to every act thereof; this is deemed to be a polite form of protest; necessity for a commission of liquidation diminished by recent decision of International Court of Appeals at Alexandria; rate of interest reduced in May, 1879, from 3 to 2½ per cent., the latter being the amount of semiannual interest fixed by the Khedivial decree of November, 1876, issued under the Goshen-Joubert contract, and further lowered in November, 1879, to 2 per cent.; in a recent action brought in the court of first instance, at Alexandria, to recover balance of ½ per cent, unpaid on coupons of May, 1879, the court held that it had no jurisdiction in cases of this nature under the Egyptian code; decision confirmed by court of appeals, thus leaving the government free to reduce its rate of interest on its consolidated bonds at will without judicial interference. 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641]

642 do May 5 No. 399.—Slave-trade; arrest of thirty-five persons accused of being slave-traders at Assioût, and rescue of sixty-eight slaves. 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642]

643 do May No. 403.—The slave-trade in Egypt; rescue of slayes from a railway train from Assioût; another slave caravan surprised in the desert; action of the authorities; the British consul-general demands active measures; Count Sala appointed controller-general at Assioût; difficulties in the way of preventing the traffic; popular sympathy in favor of slavery. (See Mr. Far-man’s No. 399, of May 5, 1880, page 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642], supra.) 1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643]

644 do June 17 No. 410.—Tribunals of reform in Egypt; proposition of the Government of the Khedive to continue the same for another five years. 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644]

645 do June 22 No. 412.—The commission of liquidation; official request of the Egyptian Government for the adhesion of the United States to the scheme; the work of the commission explained; adhesion of all the powers except the United States and Russia; Mr. Farman’s views as to the action of the’ United States; text of Mustapha Fehmi’s note. 1015 [Pg. 1015 includes portions of Doc. 644 and Doc. 645]

646 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman June 28 No. 170.—Commission of liquidation; the request of the Egyptian Government for the adhesion of the United States considered; previous application by French Government for such adhesion and unfavorable response thereto; answer now made to Egyptian Government that, although American participation in the commission is not deemed essential, yet this government is indisposed to accredit in advance the decisions of the commission which may affect American interests, and reserves direct relation with the Khedive’s government in such case; this position is not regarded as interfering with the Khedive’s freedom to arrange his debt with other powers, but if it should occasion embarrassment the question will be considered favorably toward Egypt. (See Departments No. 174. of July 20. ’80, to Mr. Farman page 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651].) 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646]

647 Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts June 29 No. 416.—The obelisk; departure of Lieutenant-Commander Gorringe with the Dessoug from Alexandria and arrival at Gibraltar. 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648]

648 Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts July 13 No. 431.—Manumission, through Mr. Farman’s agency, of five negro slaves; on being freed they are assigned to the army; character of the Egyptian military service; indefinite conscription worse even than slavery; Mr. Farman obtains their release from the service. 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648]

649 Mr. Hay to Mr. Farman. July 20 No. 174.—Egyptian finances; desired adhesion of United States to commission of liquidation transmitted by cable. 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651]

650 Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. (Telegram.) July 22 The commission of liquidation; adjournment; adherence of all the powers. 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651]

651 Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts Aug. 2 No. 441.—Egyptian debt; article from the Egyptian Gazette setting forth one of the principal causes of inclosed. 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651]

652 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman Aug. 7 No. 179.—Egyptian finances; commission of liquidation; correspondence with the British minister at Washington transmitted. 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652]

653 Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts Aug. 20 No. 444.—Slave-trade in Egypt; slave-dealers arrested at Berber and Khartoum; advisability of appointing a consular agent at Sonakin for furthering the suppression of slave traffic, and also of concluding” the proposed slave-trade convention between the United States and Egypt. 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653]

3. TUNIS.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

654 Mr. George W. Fish to Mr. Hunter. 1879. July 8 No. 44.—Celebration of the one hundred and third anniversary of American Independence; international courtesies exchanged. 1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654]

uruguay.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

655 Mr. Caldwell to Mr. Evarts. 1880. Mar. 20 No. 44.—Political; resignation of President Latorre; election of Dr. Francisco Vidal to succeed him for the unexpired term of three years; the new ministry. 1027 [Pg. 1027 is part of Doc. 655]

venezuela.

No. From whom and to whom. Date. Subject. Page.

656 Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts 1879. Dec. 23 No. 186.—Case of Mr. John E. Wheelock; statement of the complainant as published by him in the Trinidad Chronicle. 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656]

657 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker 1880. Jan. 28 No. 62.—Outrage perpetrated upon Mr. John E. Wheelock; case brought to notice of President of Guayana; the United States demand the speedy and condign punishment of the authors of this atrocity. 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657]

658 Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts Feb. 16 No. 205.—Transmits copies of two decrees of President Guzman Blanco. 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658]

659 do Mar. 10 No. 209.—Becent outbreak at Ciudad Bolivar suppressed; prevalence of peace. 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660]

660 do Mar. 22 No. 210.—President Guzman Blanco’s message to Congress; text thereof transmitted. 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660]

661 do Apr. 19 No. 219.—Contract of C. J. Bandman, esq., with the Venezuelan Government for the construction and operation of two prospective railways, one from La Guayra to Caracas, the other from Puerto Cabello to Valencia. 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662]

662 do Apr. 20 No. 220.—Preliminary contract between the minister of Venezuela at Paris and M. Eugene Peneire for the development of the resources of Venezuela; probable temporary abandonment of the question owing to an alleged rupture between General Guzman Blanco and M. Delort. (Vide Foreign Relations, 1879, page 1045.) 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662]

663 Mr. Hay to Mr. Baker. July 13 No 77.—Case of Mr. John H. Wheelock; letter from Mr. Wheelock inclosed. 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

664 Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts Aug. 10 No. 258.—Projected railways in Venezuela; one from La Guayra to Caracas, the other from Puerto Cabello to Valencia. 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665]

665 do Sept. 2 No. 270.—Decree of President Guzman Blanco in relation to compacts of alliance or confederation with the other American powers. 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665]

666 do Sept. 8 No. 274.—Case of Mr. John E. Wheelock; correspondence in connection therewith. 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666]

667 Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker Oct. 15 No. 91.—Case of John E. Wheelock; a brief history of the case. 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667]

* Vide correspondence with Colombian legation in Washington, pages 335–343 [Pgs. 335–343 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219] infra.

CircularsCirculars

[1] . To the consular officers of the United States at seaports.

Department of State, Washington, February 18, 1880.

[2] . To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, June 19, 1880.

[3] . To the consuls-general, consuls and commercial and consular agents of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, July 1, 1880.

[4] . To the diplomatic officers of the United States.

Department of State, Washington, July 30, 1880.

[5] . To the consular officers of the United States at seaports.

Department of State, Washington, September 6, 1880.

No. 1. To the consular officers of the United States at seaports. No. 1.
To the consular officers of the United States at seaports.

Department of State,
Washington, February 18, 1880.

Gentlemen: Inquiries have from time to time been addressed to the Department by consular officers in regard to the legal status, rights, and liabilities of foreign-built vessels purchased abroad and wholly owned by citizens of the United States. A recent instance of this kind, brought to the attention of the Department by the consul at Panama, in regard to the steamship Honduras, suggests the propriety of a general instruction on the questions involved in that case. The vessel in question was built at Liverpool in 1871, and upon her arrival, in Panama, in September last (1879), was sold by her foreign owner to the Panama Railroad Company; soon after the railroad company sold the vessel to the Pacific Mail Steamship Company, both of these companies being American corporations. The Pacific Mail again sold the vessel to the Panama Railroad Company, which latter company now runs the steamer between Panama and the port of Champerico, Guatemala, in the common interest of both companies. Upon the facts the consul asked instruction upon two points: First. “Is such a vessel required to pay tonnage dues, as required by law of registered American vessels?”

Second. “Is her crew to be shipped and discharged in accordance with the law and regulations applicable to the crews of regularly registered or enrolled American vessels?”

The existing regulations of the Treasury in regard to this class of vessels, and bearing especially upon the points under consideration, are found in Chapter IV of the Regulations of 1874 of that Department, and for convenience are transcribed here: Art. 93. Foreign-built vessels purchased and wholly owned by citizens of the United States, whether purchased of belligerents or neutrals during a war to which the United States are not a party, or in peace, of foreign owners, are entitled to the protection of the authorities and flag of the United States, as the property of American citizens, although no register, enrollment, license or other marine document prescribed by the laws of the United States can the lawfully issued to such vessels.

Art. 94. To enable, however, the owners of a vessel so circumstanced to protect their rights if molested or questioned, the collector of customs, though forbidden by law to grant any marine document or certificate of ownership, may lawfully make record of the bill of sale in his office, authenticate its validity in form and substance, and deliver to the owner a certificate to that effect; certifying, also, that the owner is a citizen of the United States.

These facts, thus authenticated, if the transfer was in good faith, entitle the vessel to protection as the lawful property of a citizen of the United States; and the authentication of the bill of sale and of citizenship will he prima facie proof of suck good faith.

Art. 96. Before granting such certificate, the collector of customs will require the tonnage of the vessel to be duly ascertained in pursuance of law, and insert the same in the description of the vessel in his certificate.

The rulings and instructions of this Department have been in general accord with the above provisions of the Treasury regulations. It is therefore concluded that foreign-built vessels purchased abroad and wholly owned by citizens of the United States and plying in foreign waters, are to be considered subject to the exaction and payment of tonnage dues in the same manner as regularly registered or enrolled American vessels, and consuls are expected and required to collect such dues. In the case of vessels running regularly by weekly or monthly trips, or otherwise, as is the case with the Honduras, the tonnage dues are required by law to be made only for four trips a year, and this payment, in accordance with the former ruling of the Department, is to be made either at the principal port of departure or that of final destination of the vessel, and on the first four trips in the calendar year.

In regard to the second question, namely, whether the crews are to be shipped and discharged before the consul, as in the case of registered or enrolled vessels, it is found that in many instances the crews of such vessels are made up largely of men who are not citizens of the United States, and who have not acquired the character of American seamen within the meaning of the law, by service on a registered vessel of the United States. As to these, when they ship at a foreign port, whether under contract to be discharged at another foreign port or not, extra wages are not to be demanded on their account, nor are they entitled to relief as destitute American seamen under the laws providing for such relief. Seamen of this character, therefore, serving on the vessels referred to, under a contract not made in the United States, are not considered to be within the jurisdictional cognizance of the consul as to their contracts of shipment and discharge. But seamen engaging on this class of vessels who are citizens of the United States, and foreigners who have acquired the character of American seamen, within the meaning of the law, by service on registered or enrolled American vessels, and still claim and maintain that character, are to be shipped and discharged before the consul in the same manner as that provided by law and regulation for the shipment and discharge of American seamen of registered or enrolled American vessels. And this class of mariners being entitled to relief as destitute American seamen, when found under the conditions essential to such relief, are entitled to have collected extra wages on their account when discharged at a foreign port under the conditions prescribed by law, for the demand and collection of the three months’ extra wages.

It is desired, in any cases of the character referred to that may present themselves within your consular jurisdiction in the future, that you will conform your course to the suggestions of this instruction.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 2. To the consular officers of the United States. No. 2.
To the consular officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, June 19, 1880.

Gentlemen: Information has been received from the president of the National Board of Health that the fees authorized by section 6 of the act of Congress “to prevent the introduction of contagious or infectious diseases into the United States,” approved June 2, 1870, to be fixed by the Secretary of the Treasury, have been fixed at the rate of 25 cents for every person examined by the medical officer or physician, and $2.50 for each bill of health. The latter is the fee already prescribed by the Consular Regulations for the bill of health.

When it shall be necessary for you to make inspections of ships under previous instructions issued in accordance with the rules and regulations of the National Board of Health, approved by the President, you are authorized and instructed to pay all expenses thereof, including expenses of boat hire and medical examinations of passengers, officers, and crew, when necessary, out of the fund created by the charge of 25 cents for the examination of each person on the ship inspected. You are further authorized and instructed to collect from the masters of the vessels and to disburse the actual cost of cleansing and disinfecting ships when this becomes necessary, as provided for by the statute.

A separate account should be kept of all the fees received for the examinations and inspections herein referred to, and should be transmitted quarterly to the office of the National Board of Health in this city.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 3. To the consuls-general, consuls and commercial and consular agents of the United States. No. 3.
To the consuls-general, consuls and commercial and consular agents of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, July 1, 1880.

Gentlemen: Appreciating the good results of your praiseworthy efforts for the enlargement of our commercial relations in your several districts, and desirous of giving the country the fullest and most direct benefits of your labors, Congress, upon representations made thereto by this department, at its recent session, made provision “for printing and distributing more frequently the publications by the Department of State of the consular and other reports.”

This action was taken in response to the wishes of the leading commercial communities of the United States, as expressed through the chambers of commerce of the principal cities, which attested the great value of your reports, and the advantages which would accrue from their more frequent publication.

Heretofore, with the exception of short abstracts given, from time to time, to the press, the only means of giving publicity to your reports was through the annual volume of “Commercial Relations.” The delay incident hereto neutralized, to a large degree, the good which would have resulted from the immediate publication of many of your communications, while a large number of valuable reports were left unpublished altogether, and many others necessarily curtailed, in order that the annual volume might be kept within reasonable limits.

This action of Congress enlarges the field of your usefulness, and your accomplished labors are a guarantee that you will respond to the expectations of the commercial and manufacturing communities of the country, and thus prove that you fully appreciate the very high compliment embraced in this national indorsement of your efforts for the enlargement of our commerce.

You are, therefore, requested to prepare and forward to this Department reports upon all subjects which may be calculated to advance the commercial and industrial interests of the United States, bearing in mind, however, while giving yourselves the broadest field for the accomplishment of the work herein assigned you, that your principal efforts must be directed to the introduction of American trade into, and the enlargement thereof in, your several districts.

It is the wish of the Department, where such a course is practicable and does not detract from the general effect, that each of these special reports shall embrace only one subject, with its necessary connections, of course, and that while diffuseness and repetition should be avoided as much as possible, the information given should be explicit and comprehensive, so that our merchants, manufacturers, agriculturists, exporters, and importers shall fully understand the peculiarities, wants, and requirements of the several markets, as well as the best methods of reaching the same, and that as little as possible may be left to surmise or speculation.

The frequency of these proposed publications will depend altogether upon the volume and value of the reports received, and as the number of these from any one consular officer must depend wholly upon his ability and efficiency and upon the field of his labors, to some extent, it is expected that reports will be transmitted to the Department as often as each official has anything of importance to communicate.

The Department notes that while a majority of the consular officers have done their whole duty thus far in this regard, others have reported only at irregular intervals, while others again have remained totally silent. As there is no place where the United States is officially represented so insignificant as to be unworthy of commercial cultivation, the Department will henceforth expect reports from all its consular officers, nor will it further overlook the silence of any.

The Department, being anxious to lighten as much as possible this extra labor imposed upon you, will no longer require duplicate copies of these reports. It is, however, desired that quantities and values should be given in American measures and in American money.

The annual volume of “Commercial Relations” will be published as heretofore; you will continue to prepare your annual reports therefor as usual, but the publication of these special communications will enable you to dispense in the former with all extraneous matter, treating therein of subjects pertaining only to what properly belongs to annual reports, as laid down in Consular Regulations.

In conveying to you, gentlemen, the foregoing public appreciation of your official labors, the Department takes much pleasure in adding its warmest testimony thereto, and it feels assured that our ever-increasing commercial relations with the various countries will still bear evidence of your continued efforts in behalf of American commerce in your several districts.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS

No. 4. To the diplomatic officers of the United States. No. 4.
To the diplomatic officers of the United States.

Department of State,
Washington, July 30, 1880.

Gentlemen: I have to state for your information that in pursuance of a joint resolution of Congress which was approved on the 14th of May last, the President has determined to call an international sanitary conference to meet at Washington, and to invite to join in the proposed conference the several powers having jurisdiction of ports likely to be infected with yellow fever or cholera, with a view of securing the adoption by the powers in question of an international system of notification as to the actual sanitary condition of ports and places under the jurisdiction of such powers, and of vessels sailing therefrom.

I inclose herewith a memorandum in which the circumstances which have induced this government to ask those of other nations to join in the proposed international sanitary conference are set forth, and which concludes with a statement of the specific propositions which the President would desire to submit to the conference.

In view of the urgent necessity which, according to the experience of this government, exists for prompt action in reference to this matter, I have to instruct you to lose no time in calling the attention of the government of ______ _______ to this subject by transmitting for its information a copy of the memorandum above mentioned, and by asking it at the same time to take into consideration the expediency of holding a conference of the character proposed, and requesting it to communicate its views on the subject to this government at as early a date as may be convenient.

You may add that it is thought by the President that such delegates as may be appointed by the several powers to attend the proposed conference should be authorized to conclude, if deemed expedient upon consultation, an international convention, in relation to any proper subjects for international sanitary regulations to be proposed for the consideration of the governments interested.

In order that the proposed conference, if agreed to by the several foreign governments interested in the subject, may be held at as early a period as practicable, the President deems it expedient to suggest the 1st day of January, 1881, as a suitable elate for the assembling or the conference in the city of Washington. In the event, however, that the government of ______ ______ should have occasion to prefer a different date for the meeting of the conference, this government will be ready to reconsider the question with a view to an alteration in the date.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Memorandum in relation to points proposed to be submitted to an international sanitary conference.

Department of State,
Washington, July 29, 1880.

A joint resolution of the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States, approved May 14, 1880, authorized the President “to call an international sanitary conference to meet at Washington, District of Columbia, to which the several powers having jurisdiction of ports likely to be infected with yellow fever or cholera shall be invited to send delegates, properly authorized, for the purpose of securing an international system of notification as to the actual sanitary condition of ports and places under the jurisdiction of such powers, and of vessels sailing therefrom.”

This resolution has its origin in the practical difficulties which have been encountered in the administration of the regulations and rules recommended by sanitary experience and framed by the legislation of the country to the end of preventing the introduction and spread of yellow fever, cholera, and other contagious or infectious diseases in the territory of the United States. The extensive prevalence of yellow fever in certain parts of this country during the past two years, and the almost continual existence of the danger of the introduction of such contagious or infectious diseases as yellow fever and cholera, by vessels coming to this country from infected ports abroad, gave rise to such legislative measures, hut the difficulty in their application has been chiefly owing to the fact that in certain foreign ports where infectious or contagious diseases have existed, or were supposed to exist, the local authorities have shown some hesitation as to co-operating with the consular and medical officers of the United States in carrying out regulations deemed essential by this government as a sanitary safeguard.

Moreover, in consequence of the vague and untrustworthy evidence obtainable in some cases as to the sanitary condition of suspected foreign ports, vessels coming thence to the United States have, in some instances, as it has afterwards appeared, been subjected to unnecessary quarantine in the ports of this country. On the other hand, vessels from non-infected ports of the United States have been compelled to submit to like unnecessary and vexatious delays by the quarantine regulations of other countries, based upon imperfect knowledge of the sanitary condition of American ports.

The joint resolution of Congress, quoted above, contemplates only securing “an international system of notification as to the actual sanitary condition of ports and places,” and does not touch on the broader and more intricate question of the preventive sanitary measures imposed in the ports of each country, in conformity with its own laws and in proportion to the danger of outward communication and internal spread of epidemic disease at the port of introduction. The Government of the United States, recognizing the essentially local character of quarantine requirements, and their adaptability to the sanitary conditions and risks in the districts where they are applied, would not seek to propose any international code of general quarantine laws, even did the system of State and Federal governments in the United States favor bringing the sanitary precautions of the seaboard States from Texas to Maine, with all their varying conditions, under one governmental code.

But the President is of the opinion that the great inconveniences and losses which the commerce of the world has been, and is now, suffering from the delays and obstructions caused by unnecessary quarantines can, to a great extent, be relieved by the establishment, as contemplated by the Congressional joint resolution of May 14, 1880, of an international system of notification as to the actual sanitary condition of ports and places likely to be infected with communicable or epidemic diseases. And following the authorization of the resolution referred to, he has, therefore, deemed if proper to submit to the governments of the chief maritime powers the expediency of holding a conference at an early day, in this city, to consider the subject of a proper and applicable scheme of such international notification.

The specific propositions which the President would desire to submit to the proposed conference would include the following: A. The establishment of a reliable and satisfactory international system of notification as to the existence of contagious and infectious diseases, more especially cholera and yellow fever.

B. The establishment of a uniform and satisfactory system of bills of health, the statements in which shall he trustworthy as to the sanitary condition of the port of departure and as to the condition of the vessel at the time of sailing.

The discussion of these points would involve, among others, the following questions:

I.

Who should be the certifying officer or authority as to the sanitary condition of ports and places, and of vessels?

II.

How can the certifying authority obtain trustworthy information as to the actual sanitary condition of ports and places, and as to the presence of contagious and infectious diseases?

III.

When yellow fever or cholera exists at or in the vicinity of a port or place, what examination should be male of a vessel sailing therefrom to secure a trustworthy knowledge of her sanitary condition?

IV.

To what extent, and under what conditions, should a clean bill of health be considered as affording satisfactory evidence that the vessel is free from danger of conveying infectious disease?

V.

In what way can trustworthy information be obtained from ports or places in countries which have imperfect or unsafe quarantine and sanitary regulations, and which may be unwilling or unable to adhere to the proposed international system.

VI.

Whether a schedule of graduated penalties could be fixed, to be exacted from vessels for various offenses arising under the proposed international system?

No. 5. To the consular officers of the United States at seaports. No. 5.
To the consular officers of the United States at seaports.

Department of State,
Washington, September 6, 1880.

Gentlemen: It having come to the attention of the Department that it is a practice of certain masters of vessels in shipping and discharging seamen or crews in foreign ports to ship them upon new shipping articles, and to cause their discharge, at the same or at some other foreign port, to be noted on such new articles instead of upon the original articles executed at the time of the beginning of the voyage from the United States; and it having been further brought to the attention of the Department that, upon returning to the United States, the said masters are in the habit of suppressing the intermediate articles, with the object of defrauding the government of the marine-hospital tax provided for in section 4585 of the Revised Statutes, it has been deemed proper to issue the following instructions in the matter of the shipment and discharge of seamen in a foreign port, for the guidance of consular officers.

All vessels of the United States are required to carry crew lists, as issued under section 4575 of the Revised Statutes; and all vessels of the United States engaged in the foreign commerce of the United States, except those engaged in commerce with the British North American provinces, with Mexico, and with the West Indies, are required to carry shipping articles in addition to their crew lists, as issued under section 4575, and as described in section 4511, of the Revised Statutes.

These papers are open by law to the inspection of all consular officers.

Whenever hereafter a ship-master shall make application to a consular officer for the shipment or discharge of a seaman or seamen, the consular office shall demand an exhibition of the original shipping articles and crew list, or crew list alone if the vessel be trading with one of the countries within the exceptions of section 4511 of the Revised Statutes, and shall make the shipment or discharge upon the original shipping articles and crew list, or upon the crew list alone, as the case may be; but if it shall so happen that it is found to be impossible to make satisfactory entry upon such original papers of the transaction, so as to cover all of its stipulations, and it shall become necessary to extend the entry upon another set of articles, or upon a new crew list, the said consular officer is hereby directed and required to attach such paper or papers to the original shipping articles and crew list, or to the crew list alone, as the case may be, in a firm manner by ribbon and consular seal as prescribed by regulations in the matter of the attachment of the consular certificate of authentication to invoices of shipments to the United States.

It is further provided, that if it shall become necessary to discharge an entire crew, or to ship an entirely new crew, in a foreign port, and it shall be thought proper to use new shipping articles and a new crew list, the same shall be attached by the consular officer making the discharge and shipment to the original papers carried by the vessel, in the manner above indicated.

All changes in the composition of the crews of American vessels within the cognizance of consular officers of the United States are hereafter to be entered upon the above specified papers.

Consuls and commercial agents are required to instruct their subordinate officers in the line of this circular.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Assistant Secretary.

Correspondence Argentine RepublicCorrespondence
Argentine Republic

[6] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, December 18, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880.)

[7] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, January 17, 1880. (Received February 21.)

[8] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, February 11, 1880. (Received March 30.)

[9] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, February 13, 1880. (Received March 30.)

[10] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, April 7, 1880.

[11] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, February 16, 1880. (Received March 20.)

[12] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, February 18, 1880. (Received March 30.)

[13] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, February 23, 1880. (Received April 17.)

[14] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, February 28, 1880. (Received April 17.)

[15] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, May 8, 1880. (Received July 3.)

[16] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, May 11, 1880. (Received July 3.)

[17] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, June 4, 1880. (Received July 8.)

[18] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, June 14, 1880. (Received July 15.)

[19] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, June 19, 1880. (Received July 31.)

[20] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, June 22, 1880. (Received July 31.)

[21] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, July 6, 1880. (Received August 5.)

[22] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, August 14, 1880.

[23] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Hunter.

Consulate of the United States, Buenos Ayres, July 15, 1880. (Received August 28.)

[24] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, September 6, 1880. (Received October 30.)

[25] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, September 22, 1880. (Received October 30.)

[26] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Buenos Ayres, September 24, 1880. (Received October 30.)

No. 6. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 6.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, December 18, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880.) No. 259.]

Sir: The reported success of the Chilian army in the late battles with the allied forces, and the occupation of the province of Atacama by the forces of Chili, produced a profound sensation in government circles as well as among the people generally, and caused the President to daily hold secret consultations for several days with his cabinet and the most prominent men of the nation of both political parties, who had been invited by him to the conference, with the object of determining what policy this government should adopt under the existing state of affairs on the Pacific coast. I understand that the question of mediation by this government was discussed, and also the further question of armed intervention in case Chili would not accept mediation and should undertake to force Peru to the wall.

It is understood, however, that nothing was definitely settled in the conference, except that Ex-President Mitre should be invited to go to Chili on a special mission, which the general declines to accept; at least, he is still here.

This government is making every effort to meet Chili, both on the water and land, in case it should be required.

* * * * * * *

As the matter now stands, it appears to me that a strong prospect of war with Chili may reconcile the conflicting political elements and keep the country free from internal troubles, and the exhausted condition of Chili when she comes out of the war with the allies, whether victorious or defeated, and the complete preparation of this country for war, may prevent any armed conflict between the two countries.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 7. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 7.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, January 17, 1880. (Received February 21.) No. 264.]

Sir: The political situation, to all outward appearance, remains unchanged, save and except that the President has concentrated most of the regular army—eleven regiments—in this city, and the political clubs in favor of Governor Tejedor now on Sundays and feast-days parade the streets in uniform, armed with Remingtons.

The provincial legislature of this province, a majority of which is opposed to the governor as a presidential candidate, refused to vote the budget for the present year, and thereupon the governor issued a decree ordering that the old budget for 1879 be continued in effect until the chamber thought proper to sanction the new one.

In view of this decree of the executive, on the 16th instant the chamber of deputies voted a proclamation, or circular, to the people of the province, citing Art. 98, sees. 1 and 2, of the constitution, which declare that the power to decree the taxes necessary for the public administration, and to fix every year the budget or estimate of disbursements and revenues, belongs to the legislature; and declaring that under no circumstances can the executive exercise these functions, and that the decree referred to is a manifest usurpation of the rights of the legislature, granted for the protection of the people.

This breach, which has culminated on the question of the budget, between the governor and the legislature, it is claimed by political friends of the governor is a part of the programme of the Roca party to humiliate the governor and his administration, and to serve as a pretext for the intervention of the national government by placing the province under martial law until after the elections for congressmen, which take place the 1st of next month; and the leading political organ of Governor Tejedor, “La Nacion,” the editor and proprietor of which is Ex-President Mitre, declares that the President was so pledged, and that the eleven regiments of the line were brought from the frontier and concentrated in this city for that purpose.

In view of the facts that the great majority of this province is in favor of Governor Tejedor, and that the clubs or volunteers of the city are armed and equipped for any emergency, I do not believe the President will take any steps towards intervention, but rather he will yield this province without a contest, even by voting, and rely entirely for success on the other provinces.

Should this city escape trouble, and a peaceable election be held on the 1st of February, then the whole matter will depend upon the next Congress, and the party which controls Congress will declare its candidate President.

Should the candidate declared President by Congress be either Roca or Tejedor, I still believe there may be serious trouble; but the only information which has relieved the gloomy outlook within the past day or so is that brought by dispatches from Ex-President Sarmiento, who is still in the upper provinces, to his friends here, that he had secured three provinces to his support, which, if true, will probably give him the balance of power and secure his election.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 8. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 8.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, February 11, 1880. (Received March 30.) No. 265.]

Sir: The election for members of the national Congress took place on the 1st instant. The election in this city passed off quietly. The Roca party refused to vote, and all the candidates of the Tejedor party were elected.

The Roca party carried all the other provinces save Corrientes and two other provinces, which are still in doubt.

The reason given for the policy of not voting by the Roca party is that the “Tiradores Nacionales,” a corps organized, armed, and equipped by Governor Tejedor, without authority of law, appeared at the voting places in uniform with arms, and that even had the Roca party attempted, they would not have been permitted to vote. In reply, the Tejedor party claims that their opponents would not have been molested, and the course was adopted by Roca’s friends in order to have a pretext to disfranchise this province in the next Congress if they have the power.

The political situation has not changed for the better; in fact, I think the explosion must come sooner or later. The volunteer organization of this city known as the “Tiradores Nacionales,” composed of from six to ten thousand men, with its commanding general and other officers, seem to have possession of the city, while the troops of the line are encamped outside but close to the city.

The volunteer corps—“Tiradores Nacionales”—I am told is composed principally of the best young men of the city, but they cannot have the discipline of the troops of the line; but, on the other hand, it is claimed that the national authorities cannot depend upon the national troops if called into action, as many of the officers and men belong to this province and would refuse to fire upon their friends in the city.

I am inclined to think that a mistake by the authorities on either side is liable to bring on a revolution any moment.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 9. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 9.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, February 13, 1880. (Received March 30.) No. 266.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a note received at this date from the minister of foreign affairs in relation to the South American Continental Exhibition which takes place in this city in September next, accompanied by copies of the plans and regulations of the same.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

[Inclosure in No. 266.—Translation.]

Foreign Office, Argentine Republic,
Buenos Ayres, February 7, 1880.

Mr. Minister: Charged by the President of the Republic to represent him in all matters concerning the Continental Exposition, which has been placed under the patron age of the national government, I have the honor to address myself to your excellency, requesting through you the aid of your government and of its citizens in order that this great exhibition may enjoy all the significance and luster which it merits.

By the information which your excellency will have obtained from the documents in regard to the exposition, which I have had the pleasure to send to you, you will be advised of its extent and purposes and of the terms which it accords to the exhibitors who may be able to be present, together with all the assurances which, in such cases, it is necessary to have in order that the efforts which are made may not be without reward.

The national government adds, if it is possible, to their assurances its own moral guarantee, and your excellency, in recommending it, can mention this idea authoritatively to your citizens and to your government.

The Argentine Republic has already shown, in the national exposition which took place at Córdoba, that it has within its extensive and rich territory the noblest productions of universal commerce, which only need the hand of man and the presence of capital for their development and for increasing its public and private wealth.

That exposition is to be repeated upon a larger scale and with relation to the other countries of America which may send their products to this continental exposition, and with the advantage that it will take place in a city as populous as Buenos Ayres and which combines all the facilities and attractions necessary for those who may come to visit it.

It will be profitable for foreign industry and capital to know practically and while they are collected in one place all those natural resources which America contains and which are destined to meet such great necessities, and, perhaps, to remedy the social evils which all Europe is suffering from and which, as is natural, it is desirous to have disappear.

I doubt not your excellency will find worthy of consideration these observations and that you will receive them in the cordial spirit in which they are suggested, urging your fellow-citizens to come to this exposition, assured that they will find in it all the advantages which these contests of human progress afford.

I improve this occasion to salute your excellency with all consideration, and repeat myself your obedient servant,

L. GONZALES.

No. 10. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn. No. 10.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, April 7, 1880. No. 121.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 266 and incisures, relative to the “South American Continental Exhibition,” which is to be held at Buenos Ayres, in September next, and to observe in reply that, although it is not understood that the concurrence of this government in the enterprise is invited, the United States feel much interest in the same, as tending to increase the commercial and agricultural prosperity of the Argentine Republic; and publicity has been given to the notification of the enterprise through the public press and the Department of Agriculture.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 11. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 11.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, February 16, 1880. (Received March 20.) No. 267.]

Sir: The situation has become extremely critical. The city is under arms; the governors of some of the other provinces are sending all the provincial troops they can spare to this city, at the call of the President; business is almost entirely suspended, and civil war unless the counsel of the peace men prevails, is at hand.

On the 13th instant the President issued a proclamation and decree ordering the governors of the provinces to disarm the volunteers, “Tiradores Nacionales,” corps, copies of which I have the honor to inclose herewith (marked A).

To this proclamation Governor Tejedor has made no formal reply, but it is understood that he will refuse to disarm the volunteers of this province. On the evening of the 14th instant Governor Tejedor addressed a letter to some of his political friends, declining to be considered any longer a presidential candidate, on the grounds of patriotism, and the desire to give all his time to the defense of the rights of his province, and at the same time orders the “Tiradores Nacionales” to parade the next day—Sunday—in the streets of the city.

The “Tiradores Nacionales” did parade the streets and took possession of important points in the city, one of which commands the capitol building. At the same time some six regiments arrived from the other provinces, in response to the call of the President.

Intense excitement prevails thoughout the city. The President and his ministers spent last night in the office of the minister of war, and before morning all the troops and guns from the encampment were brought into the city.

It was expected that the President would to-day issue a proclamation placing this province under martial law, and I understand that he would have done so had not the peace committee, composed of some of the leading men of the city, waited on him and begged him to use moderation and give them time to procure the withdrawal of Roca as a candidate and thereby procure the peaceable settlement of the questions which disturb the public mind.

General Roca, now in the province of Córdoba, has been telegraphed to for his resignation, but as yet no answer has been received. Many declare that the resignation of Roca will not be enough, but demand that the President himself must resign; while on the other hand the partisan press of Roca demands that the President shall at once place the province of Buenos Ayres under martial law and maintain the dignity of the nation, or that he should retire from his exalted post as President of the Republic.

Unless some understanding or compromise is arrived at within the next forty-eight hours, through the medium of the peace committee, I see no other course left to the President but to put the province under martial law, in which event Ex-President Sarmiento (now a brigadier-general in the army) will be placed in command of this city.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

THOS O. OSBORN.

[Inclosure A in No. 267.]

manifesto.

Fellow Citizens: I much regret that I am compelled on this occasion to address you; but I feel bound to make an appeal to your sense of that duty which enjoins obedience to the laws, to that honor which forbids personal interests compromising the public weal, and to that patriotism which calls you to guard well the inheritance of the past and check any movement that, under insiduous titles, would take us back to the blackest periods of our history.

On all sides I hear the threats of civil war; but what, task, are those fatal or irrevocable questions which admit of no solution save the battle-field? No opposing principles are at issue; no antagonistic geographical interests divide the country, and the-miserable cry of those who seek to create disorder should never find echo or response in the hearts of true Argentines.

The only question at issue is the electoral one—a mere question of candidates, which is periodically supported and decided without bloodshed in every republican and constitutional country. Has it come to this, that we can have no change of government without a revolution, and that we proclaim to the world our incapacity for those very institutions which we ourselves have framed?

In all constitutional countries an election is a well-settled question; the law surrounds it with proper limits and establishes in Congress its proper arbitrator. Why, therefore, not await its decision? It is the same Congress that all Argentines obey, and whose laws are the supreme laws of the land and of the nation. Or is it to be supposed that Congress, which was legitimate yesterday, is to-day illegal?

Thoughtlessly, no doubt, many have exclaimed, Let us await the decision of Congress, but with arms in our hand.” But I answer “No”! and as long as there is a spark of liberty and honor left, no other arms should surround Congress save those which Congress can itself increase, diminish, or suppress by its vote.

The meeting of Congress is at present far off, nevertheless political clubs are arming, not privately, as on former occasions, but publicly, and in battalions that march through the streets with shouldered muskets and carrying the national flag. Who has placed this flag in their hands? It belongs at the moment to the three millions of men and four generations of Argentines have passed to their graves beneath its shadow! A national flag is, more than the very soil itself, the property of a nation, and nations only in trust that flag to the governments that represent them.

Let us reflect on what is passing.

Every nation maintains an army to guarantee order; but an army would be the greatest of dangers had not the foresight of all anticipated it. Whoever bears arms publicly, under an organization that makes him s; ill more powerful, is indeed in possession of a terrible might; and societies were only enabled to live by preventing the abuse of this power. No other than the soldier may bear arms under a public organization, and the life of the soldier is the barracks, his will gives way to obedience, the rule of his conduct; his tribunal is a court-martial with summary verdicts, and his code is the terrible law that claims his death for an error, an omission.

Even the national guard is mobilized—it carries arms publicly, not otherwise than the soldier, and obeys the same law.

This is the universal system followed by nations, lest they should fall victims to this power. Who will explain the presence of armed battalions in our cities, that display themselves in military reviews, the formation of which no public? authority superintends? There live with us thousands of men who come from all countries in the world, and we may ask them if there is one place on earth where an organized community exists allowing the massing of armed forces without law, without discipline, without obedience, and without commanders, with a public trust, responsible and recognized?

We must abandon this course. It is not true that we have adopted the institutions, of the most civilized countries to counteract them subsequently with practices which are incompatible with modern principles and place us as an isolated example in the world.

The error has been general; we have all committed it; some have remained silent through mistaken prudence whilst others carried the same into effect; but if this error should continue to exist, a country could hardly introduce a better element of destruction.

Let the liberty of arming individuals collectively, of forming battalions and raising an army be decreed, and a government of violence will be proclaimed. Every electoral struggle will be in future a bloody strife, and civil war will be harbored amongst the common rights. Why should a meeting to-morrow, protesting against a government measure affecting many and great interests, he pacific when the right exists to arm and enforce the claims demanded? It is not an arbitrary or distant hypothesis; it is a direct application of the doctrines proclaimed.

Meantime the evil is spreading in all directions, and strife will far more easily arise from these violent and irregular proceedings than from the rivalry of the candidates disputing in the electoral arena. No foreign enemy threatens us, no internal commotion disturbs our peace, yet the clash of arms is heard all over the republic; every Argentine city is preparing and massing new legions, which are, in reality, national guards under surreptitious names defrauding the law. I hope that in future the law will be obeyed to to the letter, and then at least we will enter a situation which will excite no alarms.

Citizens, I ask for the sake of patriotism, and I command in the name of the law, that your arms be laid aside. Let them be thrown aside that the voice of reason may be heard and calm the excited feelings; let public opinion rise and inclose the electoral struggle within its lawful limits. Ten thousand Argentines in one of our cities, peacefully addressing their countrymen in the name of common interest, can deeply move public opinion and create a new situation. Ten thousand shoulders, armed with ten thousand Remingtons, will produce a contrary effect. Valor is an Argentine virtue; if Santa Fe and Buenos Ayres boast of it, Jujuy also lays claims to it.

Citizens, I have made solemn declarations, and I uphold them before all systematic and false imputations. The jurisdiction of the government departments is purely administrative, and the constant attendance and care for all national interests eloquently prove it.

The elections throughout the republic have just been effected, and the intrusion in the electoral committees of a single agent, with irregular means of influence on the part of the national government, has not been alleged.

Two provinces are under intervention; in one no election took place, in the other both parties claim the victory loudly. These are facts, and behind these bulwarks I can quietly await more impartial verdicts.

The government will take no part in this election question. I will be the first to look for the name of my successor in the law that proclaims him, and deliver up the reins of power in peace.

This is my programme, and I affirm that I rely upon the will, the intelligence, and; physical support of the great majority of the Argentine people to carry it out.

Our country is struggling between two contrary currents of opinion—one trying at every moment to escape the grasp of law and supplant it by violence and a capricious constitution, and the other seeking a remedy for these evils by patient and secure means.

I am not with the violent party. I belong to the peaceful. It is this magnanimous patience which supports disasters bravely, and with time and Truman reason has laid the basis of free institutions, great nations, and permanent governments.

Citizens, I ask you to obey the laws, maintain order, and respect the rights of all, that we may have free elections and suppress weapons at the electoral urns.

N. AVELLANEDA.
Buenos Ayres, February 13, 1880.

decree.

Buenos Ayres, February 13, 1880.

By the fundamental laws of the republic, all its inhabitants enjoy the light to meet in public and petition, but they can neither meet nor petition the authorities with arms in their hands, the right referred to having its source and validity in a peaceable and rational manifestation of opinion. Article 14 of the National Constitution lays down that every inhabitant of the republic enjoys the right of petitioning the authorities and of joining in a meeting for useful purposes. The constitution of the province of Buenos Ayres establishes “the right of the inhabitants to meet in a peaceable way that does not violate public order” (article 12), the constitutions of all the other provinces having each an identical article.

The fundamental laws of both the nation and the provinces thus assign a limit to the right of meeting and petitioning, and that limit is that they be of a peaceful nature. Article 25, chap. 5, of the Law of National Justice, says: “A meeting of citizens, no matter what their number, shall not be considered seditions, if they are unarmed and preserve order.” The constitutions of those nations from which ours is copied lay down that the peaceable exercise of both rights (petition and public meeting) is a “sine qua non” for their enjoyment. The first article of the addenda to the Constitution of the United States says: “Congress can pass no act restricting the right of the people to meet peaceably and demand justice from the government.”

Therefore, no public assemblage of armed men can claim the right of meeting and petition which our laws accord.

The Argentine Constitution has not, in any of its articles, granted the right to bear arms or even keep them in the house, and although the latter is tolerated here as in other free countries, such a right is purely individual in its very nature. To bear arms in public, to drill, organize, and form an army of those so armed is exclusively an attribute of the government in all countries where an organized society exists.

Thus the national constitution only allows one army, the strength of which is annually determined by Congress, and which the President of the republic commands as commander-in-chief, on sea and land, of all the forces of the nation.

Article 108 of the constitution says that the provinces cannot establish customhouses, coin money, arm ships of war, or raise armies; and private individuals might as well be allowed to open custom-houses or coin money as to raise armies.

In only one case does the Argentine Constitution refer to “the armed citizen” and give him the right to bear arms:—“Every citizen is bound to arm for the defense of the country, in conformity with whatever laws Congress may pass and the decrees of the national Executive.”

In order to preserve liberty of suffrage, prevent coercion either by the governments or the political parties, suppress violence and have the election decided solely by reason and the ballot, the last act of the Argentine Congress at the close of the session was to pass the bill which prohibits the meeting of all armed forces, except the national army, until the new President assumes office; this law was promulgated last October. In its first article it prohibits not only the meeting but the calling out of the national guards, even for drill, and this law has been violated by those who meet publicly as armed volunteers, as, being Argentine citizens, they are national guards, and as such prohibited from arming themselves and meeting.

For the foregoing reasons, in fulfillment of the constitution and the laws referred to, to preserve the peace of the country, to prevent coercion and violence at the presidential election, and that this may be decided solely in a peaceable, patriotic, and common sense way—

The president of the republic, in full cabinet council, decrees: Art. 1. Throughout the entire extent of the republic, meetings of armed citizens, no matter what name they assume, are hereby prohibited, as laid down in the act of Congress of 13th October, 1879.

Art. 2. The governors of provinces are hereby charged with the execution of this decree as the natural agents of the national government in enforcing the constitution and the laws of the nation. (Article 110, National Constitution.)

Art. 3. Let this be published, &c.

AVELLANEDA.

Benjamin Zorrilla.

Lucas Gonzales.

V. de la Plaza.

Miguel Goyena.

Carlos Pellegrini.

No. 12. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 12.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, February 18, 1880. (Received March 30.) No. 269.]

Sir: The political crisis is past, the situation has improved, civil war for the time at least has been averted, the troops are returning to their encampments, and the people to their former occupations.

Through the efforts of the “peace committee,” an interview was brought about yesterday at 4 p.m. between the President and the governor of this province at the national government house.

The interview lasted one hour, and as no one was present, the result was not made public, except that the President and governor were to have another conference at 8 p.m.

At 9 p.m. the President issued the following decree as the result of the conference: Buenos Ayres, February 17, 1880.

To His Excellency the Minister of the Interior:

I have just received from his excellency, the governor of Buenos Ayres, the most perfect assurance that the law of the 13th October, 1879, will be strictly fulfilled. I have accepted this patriotic assurance from the governor of Buenos Ayres, and the national government will act in accordance with the new situation. Necessary orders will be issued for the second, third, and sixth battalions of infantry, and the second, third, and sixth regiments of cavalry of the line to suspend their march.

I learn that the interview was opened by Governor Tejedor on the interpretation of the law of October 13 ultimo, which prohibits the governors from calling out the provincial troops previous to the general election for President.

It is understood as a result of the conference, and from the movements of the troops to-day (I think it is true), that the President has agreed to withdraw all of the national troops from the city, excepting those necessary for garrison duty; and the governor on his part is to disband the volunteer corps, but the volunteers are to retain their arms, and to organize themselves into target companies under the law. No condition was made by the President that General Roca should resign his candidature. The peace committee has commissioned General Campos adjutant-general, who left late last night for Cordoba to request him to resign. From the best information that I can obtain, Roca will not resign. If he does not, the opposition to him has not obtained the object desired by the late demonstration against the general government, except, perhaps, the governor, as intimated.

If General Roca refuses to resign, but insists upon his candidature, the peace may not be lasting. The President undoubtedly believes that all is over, as he will leave the city this 2 p.m. for his country residence, some ten miles from the city.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 13. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 13.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, February 23, 1880. (Received April 17.) No. 270.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith the reply of General Roca to the request of the “peace committee,” to withdraw as a presidential candidate (marked A), and also a printed despatch addressed by General Roca, in reply to a letter, making the same request, of his personal friend Hector Yarela, editor of a morning paper in this city, “El Porteño.”

In his reply to the peace committee be claims that he is in the hands of his party and that the peace committee should address the political centers of the different provinces to free him from his candidature, but in his reply to his friend Varela he appears to believe that the governor and the province of Buenos Ayres are attempting to dominate the other provinces, and that while he feels quite sure of almost the unanimous support of the other provinces, he will not consent that tranquillity shall be purchased at the expense of honor and liberty.

Governor Tejedor’s friends now refuse to accept his (Tejedor’s) renunciation, and unless the peace committee shall be able to bring forward a candidate acceptable to other provinces, as well as Buenos Ayres, the late arrangement between the President and Governor Tejedor must result simply in a truce.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

[Inclosure A in No. 270.—Extract from the Buenos Ayres Herald.]

The following is General Roca’s reply to a letter addressed to him through Don Felix Frias, in representation of the peace committee, begging him, “in order to prevent a scandal and a scene of blood in the streets of Buenos Ayres” to resign his candidature.

“* * * Under existing circumstances I do not belong to myself, but of a political party that is in the legitimate use of its rights, and that believes itself to be following the movings of the purest patriotism, and that has, besides, from Buenos Ayres to Jujuy, in every part of the republic, an executive center to which all such petitions should be addressed asking them to withdraw my candidature and replace it by another that shall have beforehand the approbation of the governor of Buenos Ayres, who is the only one to threaten the country with the horrors of civil war, and with the rending of our constitution, before accepting the dictum of the lawful arbiter in such a contest—the ballot.

“Only those centers could free me from those obligations which honor and civic virtue impose upon me, and which make me one with the party that has proclaimed my name as a candidate for the presidency of the republic. I salute the president of the peace committee.

“JULIO A. ROCA.”

[Inclosure B in No. 270.—General Roca to Señor Varela.—Translation.]

My Dear Hector:—The “tout ensemble” of things is the better viewed from a distance. Not only is that which passes in Buenos Ayres seen, but also what is transpiring in the whole republic. What is being treated upon is not an electioneering question, but it is an effort to prove whether or not we are one of the many South American factions that are the scorn of the world.

Those who hope to quiet the raging of the monster by throwing the corpse of my candidature to it, exacting a voluntary immolation, will find themselves very much deceived, unless there be a Theseus to free the Athens of the Plata from the Minotaur that will continue purchasing for her a shameful tranquillity with the tribute of her honor, dignity, and liberties, for I am neither a virgin nor a boy.

With lasting gratitude for your noble sentiments, I thus answer your telegram of yesterday.

JULIO A. ROCA.

No. 14. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 14.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, February 28, 1880. (Received April 17.) No. 271.]

Sir: I have just received a note from the minister of foreign affairs, informing me that the time for receiving articles at the Continental Exposition, as fixed in the regulations, has been extended until the 31st of July of the present year.

The commission has determined to receive no articles outside of the South American countries except machinery and objects of art.

I have had several interviews with Mr. John Samson, agent for Messrs. Root & Tinker, publishers of the American Exporter, New York, who is acting as agent for the American interests in the proposed exposition.

We have proposed, in case the samples of American products now on exhibition at Rio de Janeiro can be brought here, and this government will pass them free of duty, of which I have but little doubt, to obtain a suitable building outside of the exposition grounds in which to exhibit them. This proposition will be opposed by the directive commission, as the exposition is under the control of, and in the financial interest of, private parties.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 15. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 15.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, May 8, 1880. (Received July 3.) No. 277.]

Sir: The past week has been one of intense political excitement in this city, and in fact throughout the whole country.

On the 1st instant Dr. Tejedor, governor of this province, delivered his annual message to the provincial chambers, a printed copy of which I herewith inclose that you may the better, understand the present political situation and the position assumed by this province and Corrientes in relation to the presidential election. As soon as the message was delivered the chamber of deputies took up and passed a bill appropriating $5,000,000, equivalent to $1,070,000 gold, to arm the whole province, and it will doubtless pass the senate.

The national Congress, in accordance with the requirements of the constitution, attempted to organize on the 1st instant, but the house of deputies failed, and has, to this date, failed to organize, for the want of a quorum.

Under the constitution, one-half of the deputies are elected every two years, and the other half hold over, and as protests are filed, by either one party or the other, against the admission of the newly elected members, from all the provinces, charging frauds and force in the election, and the “commission of powers” having the credentials in charge has not been able to agree to report in favor of the admission of the newly-elected members of a single province, hence no quorum can be obtained, and, so far as the organization of the chamber is concerned, there is a dead lock.

General Roca has left Córdoba and established his headquarters at Rosario, province of Santa Fé, with five regiments of the line. It is expected that he has sent troops further south and near the line dividing the provinces of Santa Fe and Buenos Ayres.

If this report should prove to be true, doubtless Governor Tejedor will send a force to meet them in case an invasion of this province should be attempted.

Petitions are now being circulated in the board of trade and among the business circles of this city, asking the President and governor for peace, under all circumstances, and a grand public manifestation will be made in its favor on next Monday. It is to be hoped that such influence may be brought to bear that all the disputed questions may be peacefully solved.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

[Inclosure with No. 277.—From the Standard, May 2, 1880.]

Messrs. Senators and Deputies:

For the second time I have the honor to address you on the course of the administration. It is not easy to explain what has been accomplished and what remains to be done. More than once the situation has worn a serious aspect; and the history of our country, so full of tears and sacrifices, appeared about to repeat itself. Both parties were playing with fire, and the leaders did not always exhibit that prudence and energy which, combined with patriotism, might maintain peace.

Persuaded as I am that revolution can be avoided by conciliatory means, opportunely employed, I have tried to bring the political parties together but in spite of my efforts there is still danger. Perhaps the simplest remedy is to abandon the factious party names of times long past. If it be within my province to give an opinion, I should advise the Liberal party, as a first step, to allow all honorable men to enter its ranks.

I was named candidate for the Presidency in opposition to the candidate of other provinces. I resigned in the interest of peace, provided my opponent did the same; but I was not listened to. Again requiring all my liberty of action, the better to defend the province, I resigned the second time, unconditionally, thereby breaking promises I ought to have considered sacred through gratitude. Such a step should have produced a similar one on the other side; but as yet there is nothing definite from it, and grave perils threaten the country.

A government confident in its own good intentions should have faithful administration; it should not be intemperate lest disorganization ensue. I have always acted on this conviction. The Union is in each one of the provinces, and each one of them is the Union; but the federal power is one restrained to certain defined functions. The provincial governments are before the constitution as independent and supreme as the national, which has occasionally forgotten this fundamental principle of our federal Tights, and has even threatened us.

The province of Buenos Ayres is definitely free; camp and town are bound together, and another Rosas would be at once crushed by the people.

In other provinces it is not the same; every election is a fight or an intervention. The national government has only a right to interfere when the republican form is changed in a province; when a foreign foe or other province invades; when sedition overthrows the authorities, and the latter ask for intervention.

The last is the case most abused, as it is difficult to decide which are “the constituted authorities.” The federal government must investigate the case before meddling, or it might be led to protect fraud and violence. The federal government of the Argentine Republic would be the most baneful of governments if it blindly answered the call of governments sprung from oppression.

Only when the form of government is altered can the federal government interfere. The people are sovereign in the provinces as in the nation. When the national government distributes its troops, it has a right to do so, but the provincial governments have also a right to see that no attempt be made on their liberties.

We lately saw Buenos Ayres filled with troops, and other armies forming in the provinces, and the arms in the arsenal distributed everywhere except in Buenos Ayres. In face of this, the people, fearing something, armed themselves, quietly at first, then in battalions; and the government, having the same fears, felt bound to protect these battalions. Then the national government prohibited armed assemblages in any part of the republic. Even if it had called out the national guards, and these refused to obey, it lies with the provincial, not the national, authorities to chastise the abuse. The constitution itself orders the citizens to use arms in defense of the country, be the foe domestic or foreign.

Congress may abolish the army at a stroke, if it likes, but it has only a concurrent jurisdiction over the militia.

For the above reasons, the provincial government refused to disband the volunteers, just as the volunteers of Columbia in the United States refused to disband in 1867.

The government hopes your honorable house will approve its action and declare that the armed citizens deserve well of their country. Story says that the militia is the natural defense in insurrections, usurpation of power, foreign invasion, &c.

Another thing, the national government now exacts payment of duties on arms for the province, contrary to custom. States do not pay duties, and this province has not paid, nor will it pay them. The national government has even gone further and refused to pass some percussion caps for the national guards, and keeps silence as to its reason. This is hardly polite, but, with or without permission, the government of this province is determined to introduce whatever arms it requires.

On another occasion when this government respectfully asked that some troops at Azul might be sent to the frontier, owing to two of its officers having killed a man, “Archívese” (let it be filed) was the minister of war’s answer.

Messrs. Senators and Deputies, I cannot conclude without calling your attention to the general state of the country in relation to this province.

Although the President declared he would not interfere in the elections, we have an official candidate supported by the troops of the nation. In the last session of Congress one of the ministers admitted the league of governors. Subsequent telegrams from the governor of Cdrdoba and minister of war confirmed this.

The people had, then, a right to look for something decisive from the national government to reestablish confidence, but the resignation of the minister who made these tremendous revelations was the only result. This revelation, the distribution of arms, the interferences of the army in the provinces, and the warlike preparations of all kinds, have raised alarm on every side.

Senators and Deputies, you and I know well the truth of things, but our enemies must learn it also. The people of Buenos Ayres will not allow the presidential question to he settled by force. Some of those who have become like children in the existing difficulties speak of the capital as a solution.

You cannot improvise a metropolis, and for many years to come the President, whoever he may be, will have to govern from Buenos Ayres.

A new confederation without Buenos Ayres or Corrientes is more impossible now than at any time since Buenos Ayres was founded.

The proud are against us, but the weak and oppressed are with us. In such a strait patriotism suggests an arrangement, necessity forces it on, and the men or parties who oppose it are very culpable. But it is not in our power to order it, but all must prepare for it. We must save both our rights and the nation’s unity, and, in face of the great conspiracy, Buenos Ayres alone is able to do this.

I have told you all my thoughts. I now await your decision.

C. TEJEDOR.

No. 16. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 16.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, May 11, 1880. (Received July 3.) No. 278.]

Sir: To this date, the “commission of powers” is unable to agree, and the chamber of national deputies is still at a dead-lock and unable to organize.

Late in the evening of the 9th instant a dispatch was received from Rosario, General Boca’s headquarters, that the general had left Rosario on the gunboat Pilcomayo, to have an interview with Governor Tejedor, his opposing presidential candidate, the next morning at the mouth of the Lujaii River, about twenty miles north of this city. At 9 a.m. of the 10th, Dr. Tejedor left for the Lujan on a special train to fulfill the engagement brought about, as it appears, by other parties.

I herewith inclose perhaps the best and most correct printed report to be obtained of the interview between General Roca and Governor Tejedor, which will disclose to you the fact that absolutely nothing was accomplished by the interview except to show the disposition of the two prominent candidates.

At two o’clock the same day a procession was formed in front of the board of trade rooms, composed of 20,000 of the business men of the city, who, headed by Ex-Presidents Sarmiento and Mitré, and other prominent men, marched to the President’s house and presented a petition asking for a peaceful solution of all the disputed political questions.

In reply to this petition for peace the President appeared on the balcony and addressed the assembled multitude, assuring them that under all circumstances he would use all of his constitutional power to maintain the peace of the country.

From 12 m., during the day, all the banks and business houses were closed and business suspended.

After the address of the President the hope for peace was high until later in the day, when Governor Tejedor had returned from the interview with Roca and announced that nothing had been accomplished, whereupon hope went down and gold went up.

The public manifestation of the business men will, doubtless, have a good influence on the situation, and it is quite probable that within a short time a solution will be arrived at, without any reference to the candidature of Roca or Tejedor.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

[Inclosure in No. 278.—Buenos Ayres Herald, May 11, 1880.]

Letter of General Roca to Dr. Tejedor.

Mr. Governor: I have the satisfaction of informing your excellency that I have just arrived, and, according to what has been agreed upon, I await your orders on hoard of the gunboat Pilcoraayo. Till I see you, I am, very cordially and attentively, your humble servant,

JULIO A. ROCA.

The interview as reported in the Buenos Ayres Herald, May 11, 1880.

A few moments later Dr. Tejedor arrived alongside of the Pileomayo, being received at the gangway by General Roca. The meeting was cordial; they descended to the cabin, and the interview began by Dr. Tejedor’s expressing himself in these terms: “I must recall events, general, declaring to you that this interview has not been solicited by me.”

“In my turn, doctor,” answered General Roca, “I must ask you to bear in mind that when Dr. Pellegrini advised me of this meeting, and asked me if I would have any objection to speak to you, I told him that, on the condition it were understood that you were the originator of the idea, I had no objection.”

Dr. Tejedor. “I must speak frankly, general, and tell you this is a, fraud. I have not asked for any such conference; I have nothing to say to you.”

“I am in the same circumstances,” answered the general, “and I have not anything to say to you.”

Here the official conference ended.

A moment’s pause followed, and after looking at each other for a moment, Dr. Tejedor said: “As we are both here now, I think we might do something to prevent civil war.”

General Roca. “With great pleasure, doctor; and what suggests itself to you as a means to that desirable end? That we should both resign our candidatures and leave the people and the parties to elect whom they will? But that will not answer, doctor, for my part; I have neither my friends nor my party tied up. I am rather dependent myself, seeing they have intrusted me with their political interests, their tendencies, and their aspirations, and I cannot cast these things aside like the unworthy manager of a commercial house might do.”

Dr. Tejedor. “But remember, general, that the population of Buenos Ayres and that of Corrientes, the two provinces that oppose your candidature, represent half of the population of the republic. This is what you ought to bear in mind on adopting a revolution.”

General Roca. “But you forget. Dr. Tejedor, that the statistical data you point out is not a sufficiently strong argument against the express provisions of the constitution. Buenos Ayres and Corrientes represent only 70 electors, and our constitution requires 115 in order to be elected President of the republic.”

Dr. Tejedor. “But your government is impossible in Buenos Ayres, whereas my popularity is well known. I have a large party under my orders.”

General Roca. “I do not deny your popularity, and I know how to account for it, but that weighs nothing against what I have pointed out.”

Dr. Tejedor. “And how will you enter Buenos Ayres to take possession of the presidency?”

“I suppose you sufficiently amiable,” answered the general, “not to oppose me in the performance of so high a duty.”

Dr. Tejedor. “No; I will not oppose you, but the conciliated party are determined to oppose you. If they need arms they will get them under the very nose of the national Executive. I respect the President of the republic because he represents the national sovereignty, but this will not prevent me from doing what I consider my duty. The person of President Avellaneda does not inspire me with the same feelings. I answer for the life of the President, but it would not be strange if he were maltreated. Be convinced, General Roca, you have great opposition in Buenos Ayres. How are you going to govern?”

General Roca. “We shall see, Dr. Tejedor. Having right and justice on my side, it is not difficult to foresee that a great people like that of Buenos Ayres will respect the decision of the nation.”

At this point of the conference Dr. Tejedor said, petulantly, “They speak of Sarmiento.”

“Do you propose him to me?” asked the general.

Dr. Tejedor. “No; they are official voices that proceed from the government house.”

The general shrugged his shoulders, and Dr. Tejedor continued: “You spoke last time about Sarmiento.”

General Boca. “I do not go back upon what I said to Dr. Del Valle, in the belief that if we relinquished our candidatures another one might appear.”

Dr. Tejedor. “And do you see no other solution to all this?”

General Roca. “No, sir. After this, I see no other way but abiding by the constitution and respecting the result of the elections.”

Dr. Tejedor. “Could not some man of no significance—some fool—be nominated?”

“No, sir,” answered General Roca; “the fate of the republic cannot be intrusted to a fool. Have you nobody else to propose?”

“Nobody,” answered Dr. Tejedor hurriedly; “I would not meddle with that.”

After saying this, Dr. Tejedor stood up, saying: “I think we have nothing useful to say to each other. We shall not meet again.”

No. 17. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 17.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, June 4, 1880. (Received July 8.) No. 283.]

Sir: The political situation is extremely critical * *. The President, on the night of the 2d instant, about ten o’clock, left the “Red House” and the city, and went with the national troops stationed here to a station called the “Chacarita,” about six miles outside of the city, where he now has his headquarters with the troops. His ministers of government were not advised of the withdrawal of the President from the capital until the next morning, when they followed him.

Last night, the 3d instant, a majority, perhaps, of the senators and deputies of Congress withdrew, and embarked on board of an Argentine gunboat now anchored in this port, to await the orders of the President.

This movement by the national authorities was caused by the landing, without passing the custom-house, of some 8,000 Remington rifles and several batteries of Krupp steel guns to arm this province. The national government had decreed that this provincial government should not import arms without paying duties. To this the provincial authorities demurred and declared they would import arms and would pay no duties. On the night of June 1, the national authorities learned that a vessel with a cargo of arms for the provincial government was on the way up from Montevideo, and the attempt would be made to land them at the “Boca,” the mouth of a small stream at the southern portion of the city; soon a regiment of national troops passed through the city on the double quick for the “Boca,” to capture the arms, and soon after a regiment of provincial troops followed to protect them.

Both regiments took up positions near each other, and waited till daylight, when both regiments started back for their quarters, with the regiment of the line in the advance. The provincial troops had not advanced more than a half mile from the “Boca” when the vessel with the cargo of arms was espied coming into the “Boca,” chased by a national gunboat. The provincial regiment returned; the vessel gained the landing, the guns were landed, and taken to the provincial government house.

As soon as the legislature met, the govenor sent a message to that body giving a history of the transaction, which the legislature approved. The President at the same time sent a message to Congress asking permission to put this province under martial law, and mobilize the national guards of all the provinces; but the members finding at the doors of Congress provincial troops stationed by Governor Tejedor, the members from the other provinces refused to enter, and no quorum could be obtained.

The President then withdrew his message and thereupon adopted the policy of withdrawing from the city.

* * * * * * *

A letter addressed to the people by the President has this moment appeared, with a decree declaring Belgrano to be the headquarters of the national authorities. In his address to the people he declares Governor Tejedor a rebel, and that he, the President, will not return to the city until the armed insurrection against the authority of the nation disappears. Belgrano is about live miles from the city. The national troops from the different frontiers have been ordered to Belgrano.

Dr. Gonzalez, minister of foreign affairs, has tendered his resignation, the President’s house has been abandoned, and it is probable that the provincial authorities will take possession of it to-morrow.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 18. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 18.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, June 14, 1880. (Received July 15.) No. 284.]

Sir: Public affairs here are in a state of the utmost confusion. The President and a part of his cabinet are at Belgrano with about 7,000 troops. The capitol house, post-office, and custom-house, have been abandoned by the national authorities, and possession of them has been taken by the provincial authorities.

The port has been closed by proclamation of the President; vessels are permitted to come into port and anchor, but are not permitted to discharge or load.

The President has a majority of the senate with him at Belgrano, but the Vice-President refuses to go there to preside over it. The supreme court of the nation refuses to leave this city, and in reply to the proclamation of the President removing the seat of government to Belgrano, decides that the President has no authority to remove the seat of government by a simple decree, and that his proceedings are unconstitutional. This decision has not been made public, and I understand that the court is divided in opinion.

On account of the refusal of the speaker of the chamber of deputies and a few of the Roca members to leave the city, the President has not been able to obtain a quorum of the chambers at Belgrano.

The Tejedor wing of the chamber of deputies meets every day at the chambers in this city, but as it cannot obtain a quorum it transacts no business.

The governor prevented the removal of the records of Congress and furniture to Belgrano.

The governor has declared this city in a state of siege. All communication by telegraph and rail with the outside has been cut off. The national troops have destroyed the railroad tracks running out of the city, and the telegraph lines. The provincial troops are making intrenchments about the city and barricading the streets.

On the 9th instant, after a conference of Ex-President Sarmiento and others with the President, a commission composed of one of the justices of the supreme court, one cabinet minister, and a member of the commercial board, was appointed, and left for Rosario, to have a conference with General Roca and to make a final effort to bring about some arrangement to preserve the peace and to prevent civil war and bloodshed. As no communication by telegraph with Rosario is possible, a steamer, on the 11th instant, brought us the first and most hopeful news; but since then, although the commissioners have not returned, a steamer arrived here on the 12th, bringing the report that in all probability no arrangement will be accomplished.

On the 12th, the electors in all the provinces save this voted for President and Vice-President. The report is that the vote was cast for Roca as President, and Madero, a citizen of this province, as Vice-President.

* * * * * * *

The reports from the upper provinces are that revolution and anarchy exist in, almost all of them.

As yet there has been no fighting between the national forces and the forces of this province, although the governor has about 6,000 under arms, and the picket lines are not more than one mile apart.

On the 10th instant, I telegraphed Admiral Bryson, commanding our squadron, at Montevideo, that a state of revolution existed, and that the presence of his vessels in this port may become necessary any hour. The admiral arrived in this port on the 12th instant, and is with me now. We have had an interview with the President and his ministers to-day at Belgrano; arrangements were made by the admiral to salute the Argentine flag on the 16th instant at 12 m., and the salute to be returned, gun for gun.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 19. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 19.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, June 19, 1880. (Received July 31.) No. 286.]

Sir: Actual war began on the 17th instant with an engagement of the provincial forces of Buenos Ayres, under the command of General Arias, and a body of about 4,000 of the national troops under General Racedo, near Merlon, about 20 miles west of the city.

The governor had sent Arias to Mercédes, a town on the Western Railroad, about 60 miles from this city, and of much importance, to gather, at this point, all the forces possible and to march for Buenos Ayres. Arias had gathered about 10,000, partly armed, and was on the march for Buenos Ayres, when he was attacked by a column of about 4,000 troops from the province of Santa Fé, Arias lost about 100 killed and wounded, and probably 1,000 prisoners.

It is impossible to get at the exact facts at this time, but it is undoubtedly true that Arias has opened communication with the city.

On the day of the battle I was with the secretary of war, who has his headquarters with the troops at the Chacarita, west of the city, and I learned from him that it was the intention of the national authorities not to bombard the city if Arias should be defeated, but to inclose and reduce it to submission. I have given notice to our citizens and they are making all provisions possible to stand a siege.

The governor has declared this a free port for all necessary articles of consumption.

As the post-office is closed and we have no regular mail service, I have made arrangements to send my mail, as long as possible, to the French mail steamers.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 20. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 20.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, June 22, 1880. (Received July 31.) No. 287.]

Sir: A bloody battle took place yesterday a few miles southwest of the city, in which it appears the national forces were victorious, as the provincial forces fell back upon the city and caused a great panic among the inhabitants.

General Arias, after his battle with General Racedo, on the 17th instant, fell back within three miles of the city, when he was re-enforced by the provincial troops of the city.

On Sunday, the 20th instant, a body of national troops attacked the south part of the city and a very sharp engagement took place, in which some 20 on the part of the provincial troops were killed and wounded. This engagement was the result of mistaken orders.

General Levalle, with the force from the southern frontier, arrived. Supposing the city surrounded by the national forces, he advanced in this direction on the city. Having surprised the city forces, as well as finding himself surprised, he fell back and joined the national forces sent to meet him at Lanús. On Monday, with the additional force, he attacked General Arias, and, after fighting the whole day, drove him back into and surrounded the city.

The losses, as reported, on both sides amounted, in killed and wounded, to about 1,000. The general feeling is, even in the city, that the provincial forces have been worsted, and that the national forces have the advantage and are probably the masters of the situation and, in all probability, will soon force a peace, as the city cannot stand a siege for any great length of time.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 21. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 21.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, July 6, 1880. (Received August 5.) No. 288.]

Sir: I have just sent you a telegram saying, “Peace. General government supreme.”

* * * * * * *

And, more in detail, I have now the honor to inform you that hostilities between the national government and the provincial authorities of Buenos Ayres have absolutely ceased. Governor Tejedor has resigned as governor, and the legislature has accepted his resignation. The lieutenant-governor is acting governor, and accepts the situation. This port was opened this morning. The provincial troops are being disarmed, the barricade removed, and the streets repaired.

On the 22d of June, after it was found that the battle of the 21st, referred to in my No. 287, was much more decisive than at first supposed, that the provincial forces had been badly defeated and driven into the city, and that the city had been absolutely inclosed by the national forces, a committee called on me and presented a petition, signed by a large portion of the commercial community, asking me to mediate between the contending parties in behalf of the lives and property of the citizens of all nationalities.

After giving the petition due consideration, and knowing that while it would not be offensive to the national government it might afford the provincial authorities a way out of their desperate situation, I addressed a note, a copy of which I have the honor to inclose herewith, marked A, to the minister of foreign affairs, and at the same time I addressed the same note unofficially to the government of the province, tendering my good offices, copies of the reply of the minister and governor to which I have the honor to inclose herewith, marked B and C.

After the battle of the 21st, General Mitré was appointed by Governor Tejedor commander-in-chief for the defense of Buenos Ayres. On the 24th, Mitré proceeded to Belgrano with a letter from Tejedor to the president, offering to surrender, and asking for terms. The president refused to see General Mitré, but his minister of interior received him and replied that the national authorities demanded that Governor Tejedor should resign as governor; that the provincial forces should be disarmed and the arms deposited in the national arsenal, and absolute submission on the part of the provincial authorities to the general government under the constitution, and all questions relating to the presidential election to be submitted to Congress.

These terms were finally accepted and are now being carried out.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

[Inclosure A with No. 288.]

Mr. Osborn to Don B. Zorrilla.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, June 22, 1880.

Sir: The undersigned, minister of the United States, has the honor of addressing your excellency, with no spirit to interfere with the domestic affairs of the country, hut with the object simply of tendering his good offices in the present conflict between the provincial authorities of Buenos Ayres and the national government. In so doing he is prompted not only by the sentiments of humanity inherent in all, quickened not only by the blood already spilt, by the traditions of his country’s policy, and by a conviction that a further sacrifice of life and property may be avoided by an arrangement honorable to both parties, but also by a direct appeal in writing to him by a large and an influential part of the commercial community of all nationalities.

Your excellency is earnestly desired to give such attention to these communications as its object, in your estimation, warrants. Its prompt consideration may probably avert further bloodshed—bloodshed of Argentine citizens by Argentine citizens—and re-establish the harmony of the powers of the nation on a constitutional basis.

At such a moment as your excellency may consider proper and designate, and with the consent of both conflicting parties, to whom the present note is simultaneously proffered, he shall have the greatest satisfaction in making effective this offer of friendly mediation.

The undersigned has the honor to remain, &c., &c., &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

His Excellency Dr. Don B. Zorrilla,
Minister of the Interior and Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure B.]

Señor Zorrilla to Mr. Osborn.

[Translation.]

National Executive,
Belgrano, June 26, 1880.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your excellency’s note under date of 22d instant, by which you are kind enough to tender your good offices in the present conflict between the government of the nation and the authorities of this province.

It is very agreeable to me to communicate to your excellency that the national government, giving due weight to the kindly sentiments of your excellency, will always bear in mind your agreeable offers, and will accept, whenever opportunity offers, your friendly mediation.

At the same time that I thank your excellency in the name of the President of the republic for your spontaneous offer and the interest you manifest in behalf of the peace of these countries, I have the satisfaction of reiterating to you the expressions of my extreme and distinguished consideration.

B. ZORRILLA.

His Excellency General Thos. O. Osborn,
Minister of the United States.

[Inclosure C.]

Governor Tejedor to Mr. Osborn.

[Translation.]

Government of the Province,
June 23, 1880—8 a.m.

Mr. Minister: I believe with you that further bloodshed can be avoided by an honorable arrangement. Therefore, I accept, on my part, the friendly mediation to which you refer in your note of yesterday—22d.

Late yesterday Mr. Mattera, senior member of the diplomatic corps, accompanied by the minister of the German Empire, approached me with the same intent, and I replied to them in identical terms. They even went further. They proposed a suspension of hostilities and the nomination of commissioners, one on each part, with the character of arbiters, which I also accepted.

Whatever the result may be, I shall always thank you for the sentiments which have impelled you to address me the note under reference, and I subscribe myself, with every consideration,

Your excellency’s, &c.,

CÁRLOS TEJEDOR.

No. 22. Mr. Hay to Mr. Osborn. No. 22.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, August 14, 1880. No. 131.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 288, in which you communicate details of the cessation of hostilities between the government of the Argentine Republic and the province of Buenos Ayres.

In reply, I have to request that you will express to the Argentine minister of foreign affairs the extreme gratification of the Government of the United States at the receipt of this intelligence. It had not been doubted by this government that the administration and the people of the republic and the authorities of the province would shortly reach the termination of those misunderstandings which had brought about a situation of affairs in the territories of the republic so much to be deprecated, not only by its own citizens, but by the people of all other countries interested in the prosperity of the Argentine Government.

From this result of the internal dissensions which have threatened the stability of our sister republic, the President is glad to conclude that the principle of national life, as opposed to the spirit of disintegration, will continue to animate its people; and he desires that you will convey his sincere congratulations upon the fortunate issue of the late contentions to the President of the Argentine Republic, through the proper channel.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 23. Mr. Baker to Mr. Hunter. No. 23.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Hunter.

Consulate of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, July 15, 1880. (Received August 28.) No. 381.]

Sir: Since my dispatch No. 378, of the date of the 6th instant, announcing the end of the rebellion, there has been a steady progress towards the establishment of a better public feeling. The national government, however, seems determined to accept no half-way surrender, but to fix the settlement upon a basis which will prevent future complications on the part of the province of Buenos Ayres. To this end martial law (estado de sitio) throughout the province has been declared until the 30th of October, a period subsequent to that on which the Presidentelect is to be inaugurated.

The new governor of the province appears to be laboring in good faith in the interests of conciliation, and his movements are in accord with the views of the national government. But much surprise has been expressed by the public press of this city on discovering that, after all, no conditions were conceded to the revolutionists upon laying down their arms, except that they would not be prosecuted in the criminal courts or by court-martial for their treason. The names of all officers, however, in the civil or military service, who took part in the rebellion, have by the President’s decree been dropped from the rolls. The present political situation can be better judged from the message of the President to the national senate in response to its interpellation, a copy of which I inclose as it appears translated in the Buenos Ayres Standard.

The great stumbling-block in the way of a return to a normal condition of affairs is the anomalous attitude of the national Congress. Upon the commencement of hostilities, in response to the decree of the President, the senate and a minority of the chambers (the majority acting in the interests of the rebellion) retired to Belgrano to hold their sessions. The majority continued to meet in this city. Thereupon the minority voted that all such members were aiding and abetting the resistance to the general government, and, declaring that by their action they had abandoned their seats, they have now proceeded to call new elections to fill the vacancies. Against this the majority have issued a public protest, and propose, as I understand, to test the matter in the courts. But as each housed is judge of the elections of its own members, I presume they can make no case there. Until, however, there shall be a quorum in the chambers, the Congress is powerless to accomplish any legislation which the political situation requires. Among other pending schemes, is one to permanently remove the national capital from Buenos Ayres or to federalize that city, i. e., place it under the exclusive control of the general government as Washington City is. This move has created considerable public feeling among the people of Buenos Ayres.

As a consequence of the disturbed condition of the country, there is yet no revival of business, and probably there will be none until there is greater confidence in the peace settlement. There is no doubt, however, that the national government is master of the situation.

I have, &c.,

E. L. BAKER, Consul.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 381.]

From the Buenos Ayres Standard.

the interpellation.

The following questions were last week put to the national Executive, and the answers to these questions we now give a most important state paper: 1. What are the bases of the arrangement for the surrender of Buenos Ayres, and whether the Executive considers them satisfactory to the dignity and laws of the nation?

2. If the ignoring of the act of the chamber of deputies, declaring the absent members unseated, is part of the arrangement; and if this resolve has been communicated to the governors of provinces, in order to fill up the national representation in Congress?

3. If it is part of the arrangement that the rebellious authorities of the province of Buenos Ayres remain in power, and in what light the Executive regards that legislature and its present composition?

4. What steps have been taken for the judicial suppression of the crime of rebellion?

5. Why have the prisoners captured been released, and is it intended to let them go unpunished?

6. What is the position of the superior officers who have tired on the national flag, and ave they been arraigned before a court-martial?

7. If the rebels will hand over their arms to the national government, and whether the disarming of the army is a part of the arrangement?

8. What guarantee has the Executive for the preservation of peace in the future, so that war may not break out again, and necessitate fresh sacrifices?

9. How long does the Executive intend to remain in Belgrano with the national authorities if

10. Should the national authorities return to Buenos Ayres, what security will they have, what jurisdiction will they exercise there, and what will be the bases of the relations between the national and provincial authorities, until a definite law, establishing the capital of the republic, be passed?

answer of the national government.

Belgrano, July 10, 1880.

To the honorable Senate of the Nation:

The Executive hastens to answer the questions put, awaiting further opportunities to dwell further on them.

Answer to the first question. There is nothing reserved. No other notes have been exchanged except that of the new governor, and the short one of the minister of the interior. The submission to the government is absolute and complete within the limits of the constitution.

The attributes of the President of the republic have been entirely recognized, subject to no private or public arrangement.

The President of the republic has announced, through the minister of the interior, that he will not arouse any political or military trials, in order to stop animosities and secure peace. When making these declarations, the President used a faculty conferred on him by the constitution, exclusive of the privileges he enjoys as commander-in-chief of the war operations, and of the circumstances tending to their termination.

It is inopportune here to answer the seventh question.

The commanders and officers who did not obey the summons of the government, and those who served in the rebellion, have been struck off the army roll.

The same happens to the employés of the government who have lost their positions through a deliberate and spontaneous decision of their own. Strictly speaking, no dismissals have been made. When the government officers were removed to Belgrano, all the employes were summoned to occupy their respective posts. Each chief of department personally notified them of this resolution. A subsequent decree accorded to them a further term to present themselves, after the expiration of which they were considered to have abandoned their posts.

As regards the second question, the answer is simple. Whatever concerns the internal arrangement of Congress is not within the jurisdiction of the Executive; therefore nothing could be decided upon in this matter.

The third question finds its answer in the recent events. The Executive has recognized as governor of the province of Buenos Ayres the president of the senate, which signifies the recognition of this body and of the legislature.

The fourth question is already answered; the fifth and sixth ditto. The President of the republic has liberated the prisoners, according to his faculties as commander-in-chief of the armies of the republic. This has been done without conditions, and not conditioned on the disarming of the rebel forces, taking on himself all the responsibility of the act.

The eighth and ninth questions are quickly answered.

The arms of the rebel forces shall be deposited in the arsenal of the nation, comprising, naturally, those which were violently landed on the 2d of June ultimo.

The joint disarmament of the national army could not be stipulated, as its formation and numbers depend on the laws of Congress.

As regards the national guard mobilized, it will remain in arms as long as deemed necessary by the Executive, or until a law of Congress dissolves it.

In reference to the tenth question, the executive power declares emphatically that there is no truce, but peace. The republic has not been convulsed to its very confines, nor has the noble blood of its sons flowed in vain; it has been spilt to guarantee its prosperity and existence from future commotions. It would be a crime to render these great efforts barren of the essential condition of our existence—peace for the province of Buenos Ayres and for all.

The Executive trusts to the honor and patriotism of the governor of Buenos Ayres, and thinks that he will soon give a definite policy to his government, basing it on pacific and sound elements, and especially in the sentiment of peace, which is the aspiration of all and a supreme necessity.

Up to the present the internal situation of the province has changed but slightly, and the public peace remains in the same hands which opposed the government of the nation.

The Executive wishes the province of Buenos Ayres to return to its former normal condition, and will make every effort towards this result, hoping that prudent and peaceful measures will open the road to facilitate action.

The eleventh question refers to a determination which entirely depends upon the turn of events. It is difficult to fix the day of the return of the government to Buenos Ayres, since up to this moment no communication has been received as to the disarming of the forces. The trenches are not even yet leveled.

The twelfth occasion depends on the deliberation of Congress.

The Executive might have refused to answer several of the questions put to it, but it prefers that on this occasion its conduct may be known by all.

God preserve your honors.

N. AVELLANEDA.

B. ZORRILLA.

No. 24. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 24.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, September 6, 1880. (Received October 30.) No. 296.]

Sir: The national interventor, General Bustillos, having taken possession of the provincial chambers, while the legislature was taking a recess, with an armed force, by orders of the President, and prohibited the legislature from assembling again, on the 1st instant, Governor Moreno and his ministers, with the municipal authorities of the city and the chief of police, resigned their offices. Governor Moreno issued an address to the people of the province—a printed copy of which I inclose herewith—giving his reasons why he and his ministers can no longer retain their offices.

It is said the President will also issue an address denying many of the statements in the address of the governor, and at the same time will set forth that since the close of the rebellion the provincial legislature has been guilty of acts both treasonable and revolutionary. The national interventor has summoned the people of the province to elect a new legislature on the 26th instant. The complexion of the new legislature will undoubtedly be in conformity with the desire of the national government, as the opposition will very probably refuse to vote.

At any other time the sweeping changes of the provincial authorities would probably have led to serious consequences, but as a result of the suppression of the late rebellion, the people accept the situation with becoming silence and resignation. Gold in the market has fallen, Argentine stocks have advanced, and business men look forward to the administration of President Roca with confidence.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

[Inclosure with No. 296.—From the Standard, February 2, 1880.]

address of the executive to the people of buenos ayres.

When the vice-governor assumed power on July 1, circumstances clearly traced his line of action. After the bloody events of June, negotiations for peace, the details of which the people already know, were opened with the President of the republic, who, as constitutional commander-in-chief, commanded the army operating against Buenos Ayres.

The reciprocal obligations contracted in those negotiations included the submission and obedience of the province to the national government, the city forces to be disbanded, and their arms to be deposited in the arsenal, the President, on his part, recognizing the existing public powers of the province, and refraining from any civil or military prosecutions, without prejudice, however, to his administrative and military faculties.

The details of the due execution of the foregoing bases were arranged privately, as the people already know.

The government at once adopted every means to loyally carry out the obligations entered into, and to insure complete pacification. The vice-governor officially announced the submission of the province to the national authorities, and this was fully accepted by the President of the republic in documents already published. All measures necessary for disbanding and disarming the city forces were subsequently taken, and the details set forth in a note to the national government, stating that each and every one of the obligations entered into by the province had been duly fulfilled, according to the bases agreed on with the President of the republic.

(Here follows the governor’s note to Minister Zorrilla, the contents of which are already known.)

To this hour no answer has been received to this note. On the contrary, a national commissioner has ruled in the camp districts, since the 18th June, whose chief duty was to protect life and property while the governor of Buenos Ayres was in armed resistance and the war lasted, and whose authority should have ceased when the circumstances to which it was due had disappeared.

The Government of Buenos Ayres was made every effort, privately and officially, to induce the national government to fulfill its obligations, but every day there was some delay, while the public authorities of the province were curtailed in their attributes, and at last the legislature was dissolved by an act of congress, declaring it in rebellion, although since peace was made it had done no legislative act to warrant such a declaration, and without congress having any legal or constitutional right to make it.

Buenos Ayres has laid down its arms, disbanded its forces, submitted to the national government, and resumed the regime of peace, relying on arrangements which, although wanting the formality of a treaty between political entities, were not the less solemn and binding on Argentine honor and the good faith of the nation.

The president has twice corroborated this, first in congress, when he said that in recognizing the vice-governor he recognized the legislature; and, again, when he declared that, as commander-in-chief, he had accepted the submission of the Buenos Ayres revolutionists, while leaving the public authorities of the province intact. This included the legislature and condoned its previous acts.

These declarations, which are in exact conformity with the agreement made, show that the act of congress maintaining the intervention and dissolving the chambers is in direct opposition to them, disclosing quite; a different system of pacification, tending to a dissolution and reconstruction of the public bodies of the province.

To this end a special commissioner has summoned the people to elect a new legislature, ignoring the provincial executive and riding rough-shod over article 105 of the constitution, which allows the provinces to elect their own governors, legislators, &c., without any interference by the federal government. In this way the basis on which the government that succeeded Governor Tejedor’s was to restore order and its regular institutions to the province has disappeared: and the dignity of the province, with which is linked the dignity of its government, imperiously demands that the, latter should abandon a post which they can only consent to retain on the conditions stipulated with the national government.

The legislature has been dissolved by national troops, without any intimation to either chamber: and, as no public body now exists in whose hands the members of the executive can place their resignation, and it being impossible for them to fulfill their constitutional duties, we hereby declare before the people of Buenos Ayres that we leave our posts with the consciousness of having done our duty in the present critical times, with regret at not being able to accomplish the task set us by public opinion and necessity, and with the hope that more elevated ideas of justice and political honesty may soon produce happier days for the province and for the country.

JOSÉ M. MORENO.

F. ALCOBENDAS.

F. L. BALBIN.

Buenos Ayres, September 1, 1880.

No. 25. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 25.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, September 22, 1880. (Received October 30.) No. 300.]

Sir: On the 17th instant, Col. W. P. Tisdel, the agent of Mr. Roach’s line of American steamers from New York to Rio de Janeiro, arrived in this city, for the purpose of examining into and reporting upon the feasibility of extending the line of steamers to this city. After the colonel had had conferences with our merchants, I had the pleasure of presenting him to the minister of the interior, and Acting Minister of Foreign Affairs B. Zorrilla, on the afternoon of the 20th instant, and in the evening to the President and the other ministers, at the President’s private residence and at the President’s request.

In the interview at the executive mansion, the President said that under the administration of President Sarmiento the Argentine Congress had voted a standing subsidy of $20,000 a year to any company that would place a line of steam vessels from Buenos Ayres to any port of the United States, and that during his administration, on the 19th of June, 1878, after an interview with me on the subject (see my dispatch No. 193), he sent a message to congress asking for $25,000 as a subsidy for such a line, and that congress did not hesitate a moment to vote it. The President further stated that not only he and the authorities, but the people of the Argentine Republic, felt the liveliest interest in the project to draw closer the commercial and social ties between the two countries through the medium of steam communications, and that if Colonel Tisdel—although his administration would go out of power in a few days—would present a petition, he would send it to congress at once, with a message asking that the subsidy be increased, and that if congress could reach it before the close of its session, it would undoubtedly be passed.

The present administration closes the 12th of next month, when General Roca will be peacefully inaugurated the next President. He probably understands the wants of this country and is as progressive in his views as, if not more so than, any President this Republic ever had.

In view of these facts, Colonel Tisdel will postpone the presentation of his petition until the next administration is under way.

In this view of the matter, I am in full accord with him. From our merchants and shippers in the River Plate, Colonel Tisdel has received good and strong encouragements in favor of extending the line to this port. The extension of Mr. Roach’s line to this city will doubtless meet with strong opposition. Lamport & Holt now dispatch, and have for the past year, two steam vessels per month with cargo direct for New York, but the steamers so dispatched return by way of England; hence our products which would and should find a direct route to the River Plate are shipped to England and reshipped to this market as English products.

It is a notorious fact here that American hams, cheeses, and many other articles of American products find their way to this market as English products, simply for the want of steam communication between this port and New York, or some other port in the United States.

It is believed here that if Mr. Roach will extend his line to this point, and it can live for one year, it will be a success.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

No. 26. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 26.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Buenos Ayres, September 24, 1880. (Received October 30.) No. 301.]

Sir: On the 21st instant the national chamber of deputies, after a discussion of several weeks, passed a bill declaring Buenos Ayres the permanent capital of the Argentine Republic, subject to its previous, cession for that purpose by the provincial legislature, to be elected the 26th instant.

A bill known as the convention bill, which provides that in case the new provincial legislature should refuse to cede the city, a national convention shall meet in February next at the city of Santa Fe to change article 3 of the constitution, so as to make the settling of the capital at Buenos Ayres without the consent of the provisional legislature legal was also adopted. Both bills had previously passed the senate.

The election of deputies to Congress for the province of Buenos Ayres, to replace those who were unseated during the late rebellion, took place on Sunday, the 19th instant, without any disturbance whatever. The deputies elected are some of the most distinguished and prominent men of the province, and in full accord with the incoming administration.

Congress returned from Belgrano to this city on the 22d instant. The President, his ministers, and Congress all have returned to their old quarters occupied before the rebellion.

I have, &c.,

THOS. O. OSBORN.

Austria-HungaryAustria-Hungary

[27] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State, Washington, November 28, 1879.

[28] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, November 29, 1879.

[29] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, December 18, 1879. (Received January 6, 1880.)

[30] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State, Washington, December 19, 1879.

[31] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, December 24, 1879. (Received January 12, 1880.)

[32] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, January 17, 1880. (Received February 2.)

[33] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, February 9, 1880. (Received February 25.)

[34] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, February 13, 1880. (Received March 1.)

[35] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, February 14, 1880. (Received March 1.)

[36] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, February 18, 1880. (Received March 4.)

[37] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State, Washington, March 9, 1880.

[38] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, February 25, 1880. (Received March 15.)

[39] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, March 1, 1880. (Received March 22.)

[40] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, April 14, 1880. (Received April 29.)

[41] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, May 5, 1880. (Received May 19.)

[42] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, May 13, 1880. (Received May 26.)

[43] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, May 29, 1880. (Received June 14.)

[44] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, July 6, 1880. (Received July 21.)

[45] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, July 26, 1880. (Received August 12.)

[46] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, August 4, 1880. (Received August 23.)

[47] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, August 7, 1880. (Received August 23.)

[48] . Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Vienna, August 7, 1880. (Received August 23.)

No. 27. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson. No. 27.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State,
Washington, November 28, 1879. No. 138.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 256 of the 31st ultimo, inclosing the reply of of His Highuess the Prince of Roumania to the letter which the President addressed to him on the 15th of August, 1878, has been received. In connection with the subject of Roumanian recognition, I inclose for your consideration a copy of a letter under date of the 30th ultimo, from Mr. Myer S. Isaacs, president, and other officers of the board of delegates on civil and religious rights of the Hebrews, asking that the government of the United States may exert its influence towards securing for the Hebrew subjects and residents in Roumania the equality of civil and religious rights stipulated in Article XLIV of the treaty of Berlin.

As you aware, this government has ever felt a deep interest in the welfare of the Hebrew race in foreign countries, and has viewed with abhorrence the wrongs to which they have, at various periods, been subjected by the followers of other creeds in the East. This Department is therefore disposed to give favorable consideration to the appeal made by the representatives of a prominent Hebrew organization in this country in behalf of their brethren in Roumania, and while I should not be warranted in making a compliance with their wishes a sine qua non in the establishment of official relations with that country, yet any terms favorable to the interest of this much-injured people which you may be able to secure in the negotiations now pending with the Government of Boumania would be agreeable and gratifying to this Department.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in No. 138.]

Mr. Isaacs to Mr. Evarts.

New York, October 30, 1879.

Sir: It is stated in the newspapers of this date, upon the authority of a dispatch from Bucharest, that “the United States minister at Vienna is expected at Bucharest shortly, to formally recognize Roumanian independence and establish diplomatic relations between that country and the United States.”

While disavowing our belief in the accuracy of this statement, we respectfully ask the State Department to communicate with the ministry at Vienna, to the end that this government may not be committed to an act of recognition of Roumanian independence while it appears that the condition precedent upon which, by the treaty of Berlin in 1878, Roumania was to become an independent state, has not been complied with, and pending the recognition of Roumania by the powers which conditionally created her a state.

The Department will recall the effort made last year, with undue haste, upon the part of the Roumania authorities to secure, from the newly arrived United States consul at a Danubian port, formal recognition of the new state. At that time (October, 1878) the representative of this board was courteously advised at the Department that the consul would exceed his authority if he undertook to commit the United States in the manner so confidently declared on the part of Roumania.

The Government of Roumanians straining every nerve to secure from Europe a modification of the condition imposed by the Berlin Congress—a condition that simply demands civil and religions liberty for all the inhabitants of the new state. The oppressive laws enacted and enforced in Roumania since 185(1, and relating exclusively to Jewish inhabitants, have so of ten resulted in persecution and outrage affecting liberty and life, that the representatives of foreign governments accredited to Bucharest have unitedly protested against the crimes committed in the name of law, the odious discrimination against inoffensive and industrious inhabitants whose single “fault” was their religious belief. The cordial co-operation of our government in this international defense of a persecuted class was signally beneficial, and the United States consul at Bucharest from 1870 to 1876 had the opportunity of rescuing many fugitives from persecution, while his intelligent performance of duty at an extraordinary crisis received the warm approval of the Secretary of State. (Letter of Mr. Fish to Mr. Peixotto, May 13, 1872. Ex. Doc. No. 75, p. 14.)

We shall not dwell upon the unhappy record, which is familiar to the Department, of Jewish persecution in Roumania. The congress of European powers at Berlin solemnly enacted, as the basis of Roumanian independence, the recognition of the principle of civil and religious liberty. The Roumanian executive and legislative authorities have, after repeated and ineffectual attempts to move the governments of Great Britain, France, Germany, and Italy, undertaken a perfunctory performance of the condition by appearing to consent, “as a compromise between the views of the prince and the chambers,” that about one thousand Jews shall be entitled to enfranchisement, each individual of the other 250,000 Hebrews, the great mass of whom are natives, to continue without civil rights, unless hereafter, by favor of the chambers, they shall be permitted to make separate application for naturalization, which will not be granted save at an expense and after delay tantamount to the denial of justice. This subterfuge is the outcome of over a year’s study, and is supposed to satisfy the civilized world, and to comply with the condition of the Berlin treaty.

Such being the facts, if Roumania asks direct recognition, we do not doubt for an instant the decision of our government, which first in the annals of mankind “proclaimed liberty throughout the land unto all the inhabitants thereof.” We are anxious, however, that the persistent effort of Roumania to obtain what is so dearly prized, active diplomatic and commercial relations with the United States, may not, even in appearance, be attended with success.

We are assured that the Department would profoundly regret if, by inadvertence, the powerful moral support of the United States should seem to be given to Roumania in her effort to enjoy the fruits of independence while evading its obligations. We therefore present these views for the consideration of the Department.

Very respectfully,

MYER S. ISAACS,
President Board.

S. WOLF, Resident Member.

ADOLPH L. SANGER,
Secretary.

No. 28. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 28.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, November 29, 1879. No. 265.]

Sir: The journals have recently announced a decision by the United States Supreme Court declaring the national trade-mark law unconstitutional.

I beg to be advised whether this decision will give occasion to modify your instructions touching a trade-mark convention with Servia and Roumania, and also what information on the subject I shall be authorized to give in answer to inquiries which interested parties here may address to me.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 29. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 29.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, December 18, 1879. (Received January 6, 1880.) No. 269.]

Sir: When Civil Engineer J. B. Eads, of the Mississippi River Commission, appointed under authority of Congress, was recently in Vienna, he desired the intervention of this legation to obtain certain information touching the river improvements of this empire.

In partial response to that request, I now transmit to the Department, by way of the United States consul at Hamburg, a package embracing certain printed documents in the German language, relating to this improvement, together with a map of the river Danube, showing the nature of the improvements, as I received them from the foreign office. Accompanying this dispatch is a translation of the note from the foreign office, which was brought to this legation with the documents. The address of the package is to the president of the Mississippi River Commission—wherever the office of the commission maybe—and is forwarded under cover to the Department of State.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

[Inclosure in No. 269.]

The Foreign Office at Vienna to Mr. Kasson.

[Memorandum (received by Mr. Kasson December 15, 1879).—Translation.]

As is known to the honorable legation, Mr. James B. Eads, a civil engineer from Saint Louis, employed at the regulation of the Mississippi River, was ordered by the Government of the United States of America to study the water-works and river regulations in Austria-Hungary, especially to visit Theiss and Szegedin. In September last Mr. Eads was presented personally through the secretary of legation, Mr. John F. Delaplaine, and a letter of recommendation to the royal Hungarian minister, President de Tisza, was given him. At the same time the ministry of foreign affairs requested the imperial and royal ministry of commerce to give Mr. Eads such books, papers, and plans of water-works constructed in this part of the empire as would be of use to his high government. As we now hear that the civil engineer, Mr. Eads, has, after finishing his studies, returned to his country, the ministry of foreign affairs has the honor to transmit to the honorable legation the following papers, which it has just itself received, with the request to send them to Mr. Eads, viz: (1.) A map of the river Danube, from Stein to Theben, in Lower Austria, showing the water-works constructed up to the end of 1878.

(2.) Report and motions of the committee appointed in 1868 by the commission for the regulation of the Danube.

(3.) “The Regulation of the Danube near Vienna,” published May 30, 1875, at the time of the solemn opening of the navigation in the new river-bed.

(4.) “The Regulation of the Danube near Vienna,” a Lecture delivered the 18th March, 1876, before the Society of Austrian Architects and Engineers, by the Chevalier Gustav von Wex.

(5.) “Collection of Reflections on the running, blocking, and breaking up of the ice in the river Danube and in the Danube Canal at Vienna in the months of January and February, 1876,” by Baron Wm. von Engerth.

Vienna, December 13, 1879.

No. 30. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson. No. 30.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State,
Washington, December 19, 1879. No. 142.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 265, relative to the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States (October term, 1879), declaring the legislation of Congress, contained in sections 4937 to 4947 Revised Statutes, concerning trade-marks unconstitutional; and, referring to the proposed conventions on the subject, which you were instructed by my communication of July 30, last, to negotiate with Servia and Roumania, I accordingly inclose a copy of the decision.

You will see by one of the latter clauses of the decision that the court desired “to be understood as leaving the whole question of the treaty-making power of the general government over trade-marks, and the duty of Congress to pass any laws necessary to carry such treaties into effect, untouched.” But Congress is at present occupied in the consideration of the law of trade-marks as affected by the decision of the court. Several means of meeting the questions raised by that decision have been suggested, one by an amendment of the Constitution and another by a modification of the enactments above referred to. Under the circumstances, therefore, it is considered the better course to delay the proposed negotiations on the subject with Servia and Roumania.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVAKTS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 142.]

unconstitutionality of the trade-mark law.

United States Supreme Court. October term, 1879.

Nos. 705, 711, and 719.

The United States, plaintiffs,

v.

Emil Steffens.

The United States, plaintiffs,

v.

Adolph Witteman.

On certificates of division in opinion between the judges of the circuit court of the United States for the southern district of New York.

The United States, plaintiffs,

v.

W. W. Johnson, T. E. McNamara, and N. S. Reeder.

On a certificate of division in opinion between the judges of the circuit court of the United States for the southern district of Ohio.

Defendants being indicted for violations of the civil and criminal statutes of the United States for the protection of trade-marks, the circuit judges of the courts where the indictments were pending were divided in opinion as to the constitutionality of those laws, and certified that division to the Supreme Court Held by that court: 1. That property in trade-marks has long been recognized and protected by the common law and by the statutes of the States, and does not owe its existence to the act of Congress providing for their registration in the Patent Office.

2. That a trade-mark is neither an invention or discovery, nor the writing of an author, within the meaning of the clause of the Constitution in regard to securing to authors and inventors the exclusive use of their writings and discoveries.

3. That as a regulation of commerce, if trade marks can in any case be the subject of Congressional action, that action is limited by the Constitution to their use in “commerce with foreign nations, among the several States and with the Indian tribes.”

4. That the legislation of Congress in regard to trade-marks contains nothing in its terms or in its essential character which looks to a regulation thus limited, but in its language it embraces and was intended to embrace all commerce, including that between citizens of the same State.

5. As the statute is so framed that it is impossible to separate that which has reference to commerce within its control and that which is not, and as Congress certainly did not intend to pass the limited registration law which such a construction would imply, the whole legislation must fall as being void for want of constitutional authority.

Mr. Justice Miller delivered the opinion of the court:

The three cases whose titles stand at the head of this opinion are criminal prosecutions for violations of what is known as the trade-mark legislation of Congress. The first two are indictments in the southern district of New York, and the last is an information in the southern district of Ohio. In all of them the judges of the circuit courts in which they are pending have certified to a difference of opinion on what is substantially the same question, namely, are the acts of Congress on the subject of trade-marks founded on any rightful authority in the Constitution of the United States?

The entire legislation of Congress in regard to trade-marks is of very recent origin. It is first seen in sections seventy-seven to eighty-four, inclusive, of the act of July 8, 1870, entitled “An act to revise, consolidate, and amend the statures relating to patents and copyrights.” The part of this act relating to trade-marks is embodied in chapter two, title sixty, sections 4937 to 4947 of the Revised Statutes.

It is sufficient at present to say that they provide for the registration in the Patent Office of any device in the nature of a trade-mark to which any person has by usage established an exclusive right, or which the person so registering intends to appropriate by that act to his exclusive use; and they make the wrongful use of a trademark, so registered, by any other person, without the owner’s permission, a cause of action in a civil suit for damages. Six years later we have the act of August 14, 1876 (19 U. S. Statutes, 141), punishing by fine and imprisonment the fraudulent use, sale, and counterfeiting of trade-marks registered in pursuance of the statutes of the United States, on which the informations and indictments are founded in the cases before us.

The right to adopt and use a symbol or device to distinguish the goods or property made or sold by the person whose mark it is, to the exclusion of the use of that symbol by all other persons, has been long recognized by the common law and chancery courts of England and of this country, and by the statutes of some of the States. It is a property right for which damages may be recovered in an action at law, and the violation of which will be enjoined by a court of equity, with compensation for past infringement. This property and the exclusive right to its use were not created by the act of Congress, and do not now depend upon that act for their enforcement. The whole system of trade-mark property and the civil remedies for its protection existed long anterior to the act of Congress and remain in full force since its passage.

These propositions are so well understood as to need no citation of authorities or elaborate argument to prove them.

The property in trade-marks and the right to their exclusive use, resting on the laws of the States in the same manner that other property does, and depending, like the great body of the rights of person and of property, for their security and protection on those laws, the power of Congress to legislate on the subject, to establish the conditions on which these rights shall depend, the period of their duration, and the legal remedies for their protection, if such power exists at all, must be found in some clause of the Constitution of the United States, the instrument which is the source of all the powers that Congress can lawfully exercise.

In the argument of these cases this seems to be conceded, and the advocates for the validity of the acts of Congress on this subject point to two clauses of that instrument in one or in both of which, as they assert, sufficient warrant may be found for this legislation.

The first of these is the eighth clause of section eight of the first article of the Constitution. That section, manifestly intended to be an enumeration of the powers expressly granted to Congress and closing with the declaration of a rule for the ascertainment of such powers as are necessary by way of implication to carry into efficient Operation those expressly given, authorizes Congress, by the clause referred to, “to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times, to authors and inventors, the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries.”

As the first and only attempt by Congress to regulate the right of trade-marks is to be found in the act to which we have referred, entitled “An act to revise, consolidate, and amend the statutes relating to patents and copyrights,” terms which have long since become technical as referring, the one to inventions and the other to writings of authors, it is a reasonable inference that this part of the statute also was, in the opinion of Congress, an exercise of the power found in that clause of the Constitution. It may also be safely assumed that until a critical examination of the subject in the courts became necessary, it was mainly if not wholly to this clause that the advocates of the law looked for its support.

Any attempt, however, to identify the essential characteristics of a trade-mark with inventions and discoveries in the arts and sciences, or with the writings of authors, will show that the effort is surrounded with insurmountable difficulties.

The ordinary trade-mark has no necessary relation to invention or discovery. The trade-mark recognized by the common law is generally the growth of a considerable period of use, rather than sudden invention. It is often the result of accident rather than design, and when under the act of Congress it is sought to establish it by registration, neither originality, invention, discovery, science, nor art is in any way essential to the right conferred by that act. If we should endeavor to classify it under the head of writings of authors, the objections are equally strong. In this, as in regard to inventions, there is required originality. And while the word writings may be liberally construed, as it has been, to include original designs for engravings, prints, &c., it is only such as are original, and are founded in the creative powers of the mind. The writings which are to be protected are the fruits of intellectual labor, embodied in the form of books, prints, engravings, and the like. The trade-mark may be, and generally is, the adoption of something already in existence as the distinctive symbol of the party using it. At common law the exclusive right to it grows out of the use of it, and not its mere adoption. By the act of Congress this exclusive right attaches upon registration. But in neither case does it depend upon novelty, upon invention, upon discovery, or upon any work of the brain. It requires no fancy or imagination, no genius, no laborious thought. It is simply founded on priority of appropriation. We look in vain in the statute for any other qualification or condition. If the symbol, however plain, simple, old, or well known, has been first appropriated by the claimant as his distinctive trade-mark, he may by registration secure the right to its exclusive use. While such legislation may be a judicious aid to the common law on the subject of trade-marks and may be within the competency of legislatures whose general powers embrace that class of subjects, we are unable to see any such power in the constitutional provision concerning authors and inventors and their writings and discoveries.

The other clause of the Constitution supposed to supply the requisite authority in Congress is the third of the same section, which, read in connection with the granting clause, is as follows:

“The Congress shall have power to regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several States, and with the Indian tribes.”

The argument is that the use of a trade-mark—that which alone gives it any value—is to identify a particular class or quality of goods as the manufacture, produce, or property of the person who puts them in the general market for sale. That the sale of the article so distinguished is commerce. That the trade-mark is, therefore, a useful and valuable aid or instrument of commerce, and its regulation by virtue of the above provision of the Constitution belongs to Congress, and that the act in question is a lawful exercise of this power.

It is not every species of property which is the subject of commerce, or which is used or even essential in commerce, which is brought by this clause of the Constitution within the control of Congress. The barrels and casks, the bottles and boxes in which alone certain articles of commerce are kept for safety and by which their contents are transferred from the seller to the buyer, do not thereby become subjects of Congressional legislation more than other property. (Nathan v. Louisiana, 8 How., 73.) In the case of Paul v. Virginia, 8 Wallace, 168, this court held that a policy of insurance made by a corporation of one State on property situated in another was not an article of commerce, and did not come within the purview of the clause of the Constitution we are considering. “They are not,” says the court, “commodities to be shipped or forwarded from one State to another, and then put up for sale.” On the other hand, in the case of Almy v. The State of California, 24 How., 169, it was held that a stamp duty imposed by the legislature of California on bills of lading for gold and silver transported from any place in that State to another out of the State was forbidden by the Constitution of the United States, because such instruments were a necessity to the transaction of commerce, and the duty was a tax upon exports.

The question, therefore, whether the trade-mark bears such a relation to commerce in general terms as to bring it within Congressional control, when used or applied to the classes of commerce which fall within that control, is one which, in the present case, we propose to leave undecided. We adopt this course because when this court is called on in the course of the administration of the law to consider whether an act of Congress, or any other department of the government, is within the constitutional authority of that department, a due respect for a co-ordinate branch of the government requires that we shall decide that it has transcended its powers only when that is so plain that we cannot avoid the duty.

In such cases it is manifestly the dictate of wisdom and judicial propriety to decide no more than is necessary to the case in hand. That such has been the uniform course of this court in regard to the statutes passed by Congress will readily appear to any one who will consider the vast amount of argument presented to us assailing such statutes as unconstitutional, and will count, as he may do on his fingers, the instances in which this court has declared an act of Congress void for want of constitutional power.

Governed by this view of our duty, we proceed to remark that a glance at the commerce clause of the Constitution discloses at once what has been often the subject of comment in this court and out of it, that the power of regulation there conferred on Congress is limited to commerce with foreign nations, commerce among the States, and commerce with the Indian tribes. And while bearing in mind the liberal construction that commerce with foreign nations means commerce between the citizens of the United States and the citizens and subjects of foreign nations, and commerce among the States means commerce between the individual citizens of different States, there still remains a very large amount of commerce, perhaps the largest, which, being trade or traffic between citizens of the same State, is beyond the control of Congress.

When, therefore, Congress undertakes to enact a law which can only be valid as a regulation of commerce, it is reasonable to expect to find on the face of the statute, or from its essential nature, that it is a regulation of commerce with foreign nations, among the several States, and with the Indian tribes. If it is not so limited, it is in excess of the power of Congress. If its main purpose be to establish a regulation applicable to all trade, to commerce at all points, especially if it is apparent that it is designed to govern the commerce wholly between citizens of the same State, it is obviously the exercise of a power not confided to Congress.

We find no recognition of this principle in the chapter on trade-marks in the Revised Statutes. We would naturally look for this in the description of the class of persons who are entitled to register a trade-mark, or in reference to the goods to which the trade-mark should be applied. If, for instance, it described persons engaged in a commerce between the different States, and related to its use in such commerce, it would be evident that Congress believed it was acting under the clause of the Constitution which authorizes it to regulate commerce among the States. So if, when the trade mark has been registered, Congress had protected its use on goods sold by a citizen of one State 10 another, or by a citizen of a foreign State to a citizen of the United States, it would be seen that Congress was at least intending to exercise the power of regulation conferred by that clause of the Constitution. But no such idea is found or suggested in this statute. Its language is: “Any person or firm domiciled in the United States, and any corporation created by the United States, or of any State or Territory thereof,” or any person residing in a foreign country which by treaty or convention affords similar privileges to our citizens, may by registration obtain protection for his trade-mark. Here is no requirement that such person shall be engaged in the kind of commerce which Congress is authorized to regulate. It is a general declaration that anybody in the United States, and anybody in any other country which permits us to do the like, may, by registering a trade-mark, have it fully protected. So, while the person registering is required to furnish “a statement of the class of merchandise, and the particular description of the goods comprised in such class, by which the trade-mark has been or is intended to be appropriated,” there is no hint that it is goods to be transported from one State to another, or between the United States and foreign countries. Section 4939 is intended to impose some restriction upon the Commissioner of Patents in the matter of registration, but ho limitation is suggested in regard to persons or property engaged in the different classes of commerce mentioned in the Constitution. When we come to the remedies provided by the act for infringement of the rights of the owner of the registered trade-mark, there is no restriction of the right of action, or suit, to a case of trade-mark used in foreign or inter-State commerce.

It is, therefore, manifest that no such distinction is found in the act, but that its broad purpose was to establish a universal system of trade-mark registration, for the benefit of all who had already used a trade-mark, or who wished to adopt one in the future, without regard to the character of the trade to which it was to be applied or the locality of the owner, with the solitary exception that those who resided in foreign countries which extended no such privileges to us were excluded from them here.

It has been suggested that if Congress has power to regulate trade-marks used in commerce with foreign nations and among the several States, these statutes shall be held valid in that class of cases, if no further. To this there are two objections: First, the indictments in these cases do not show that the trade-marks which are wrongfully used were trade-marks used in that kind of commerce. Secondly, while it may be true that when one part of a statute is valid and constitutional and another part is unconstitutional and void, the court may enforce the valid part where they are distinctly separable so that each can stand alone; it is not within the judicial province to give to the words used by Congress a narrower meaning than they are manifestly intended to bear in order that crimes may be punished which are not described in language that brings them within the constitutional power of that body. This precise point was decided in the case of the United States v. Rees (97 U. S. R., 221). In that case Congress had passed a statute punishing election officers who should refuse to any person lawfully entitled to do so the right to cast his vote at an election. This court was of the opinion that, as regarded the section of the statute then under consideration, Congress could only punish such denial when it was on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude.

It was urged, however, that the more general description of the offense included the more limited one, and that the section was valid where such was in fact the cause of denial. But the court said, through the Chief Justice: “We are not able to reject a part which is unconstitutional and retain the remainder, because it is not possible to separate that which is constitutional, if there be any such, from that which is not. The proposed effect is not to be attained by striking out or disregarding words that are in the section, but by inserting words that are not there now. Each of the sections must stand as a whole or fall together. The language is plain. There is no room for construction, unless it be as to the effect of the Constitution. The question, then, to be determined is, whether we can introduce words of limitation into a penal statute so as to make it specific, when, as expressed, it is general only. * * * To limit this statute as now asked for would be to make a new law, not to enforce an old one. This is no part of our duty.” If we should, in the case before us, undertake to make by judicial construction a law which Congress did not make, it is quite probable we should do what, if the matter were now before that body, it would be unwilling to do, namely, make a trade-mark law which is only partial in its operation, and which would complicate the rights which parties would hold, in some instances under the act of Congress and in others under State law. (Cooley on Cons. Limitation, 178, 179; Commonwealth v. Hitchings, 5 Gray, 485.)

In what we have here said we wish to be understood as leaving the whole question of the treaty-making power of the general government over trade-marks, and the duty of Congress to pass any laws necessary to carry such treaties into effect, untouched.

While we have, in our references in this opinion to the trade-mark legislation of Congress, had mainly in view the act of 1870, and the civil remedy which that act provided, it was because the criminal offenses described in the act of 1876 are, by their express terms, solely referable to frauds, counterfeits, and unlawful use of trade-marks which have been registered under the provisions of the former act. If that act is unconstitutional, so that the registration under it confers no lawful right, then the criminal enactment intended to protect that right falls with it.

The questions in each of these cases, being an inquiry whether these statutes can be upheld in whole or in part as valid and constitutional, must be answered in the negative, and it will be so certified to the proper circuit courts.

No. 31. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 31.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, December 24, 1879. (Received January 12, 1880.) No. 271.]

Sir: In acknowledging your No. 138, with the inclosed copy of the application made in behalf of the Hebrews of Roumania, I beg to advise you of the principles of my action on the same subject in the case of Servia.

* * * * * * *

According to the information of this legation, there are some inaccuracies of statement in the memorandum submitted to the Department in behalf of the “Union of American Hebrew Congregations.” It is not necessary, however, here to review that paper. I will only say that Italy is already satisfied with the action of Roumania, and has by her plenipotentiary recognized Roumanian independence. Austria had previously done so. France is about to do the same. Germany is held back by altogether different considerations.

Knowing the sympathies and interest of my government in the condition of this race in the principalities, I have followed the progress of diplomatic intervention and of local legislation with constant attention. I am convinced that, with the exception of always possible isolated instances of injustice, such progress has been made that the only branch of civil rights which now gives just cause of anxiety is that relating to the extent and the mode of granting to the Hebrews the rights of citizenship. It would appear that the equal protection of person and property under the laws has been assured. The principle of naturalization embraces them in common with other races, without distinction. Its practical application is a question so peculiarly pertaining to interior administration as to render foreign judgment upon it almost inadmissible.

It has been my intention to follow in negotiations with Roumania the text of my propositions to Servia. These were intended to secure to American citizens, of all faiths, protection of person and of property, equally with that given to natives, full rights of trade, and full liberty for the exercise by them of the rights of religious faith and of public worship. The stipulations on the latter point follow the language of the article relating thereto in the Treaty of Berlin. Copies of the same are inclosed.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

[Inclosure in No. 271.]

Art. IV. There shall be entire liberty of commerce between the persons belonging to the jurisdiction of the principality of Servia and those of the United States of America.

The citizens of the contracting states may, while conforming to the laws of the country, freely reside in all parts of the territory of the other, may traverse this territory, or establish themselves there in business. They shall enjoy in all that concerns their person and property the same security enjoyed by the natives.

They may exercise their industry or their commerce, wholesale or retail, in every part, city, port, or place whatever of the territory of the other state, and to this end they may lease the necessary locations, houses, and stores.

The citizens of Servia in the United States, and the citizens of the United States in Servia, whether they establish themselves or take up temporary residence, shall not be subjected, either in respect to person or property, or in the exercise of their commerce or their industry, to the payment of taxes, general or local, of imposts, or of whatever other impositions or charges, higher than those which are or may hereafter be collected from the natives themselves.

Art. VI. The liberty of religious faith and the open exercise of their worship shall be assured to the persons belonging to the jurisdiction of each of the contracting states in the territory of the other, and no restraint shall be imposed either upon the ecclesiastical organization of the different communions or upon their relations with their spiritual chiefs.

No. 32. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 32.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, January 17, 1880. (Received February 2.) No. 282.]

Sir: In continuation of the subject of my No. 269, I have now to advise the receipt, from the foreign office at Vienna, of final replies to the interrogatories which I addressed to it in furtherance of the wishes of the Mississippi River Commission, as represented by Captain Eads upon the occasion of his recent tour of investigation in Eastern Europe.

Herewith are full copies of the correspondence. I send that of the Austro-Hungarian Government only in the translations which were made in this legation. As the originals do not relate to any question between the two governments, it does not appear necessary, or even useful, to transmit for the commission copies of the German text.

From these replies to my request for information, it appears that this government began the systematic improvement of the Austrian Danube—377⅓ kilometers in length—in the year 1850.

The plan was to cut off the lateral arms of the river and confine the stream within embankments, giving to the river “an equal normal breadth, according to its nature.” It will require many years yet to complete the work proposed.

Upon the Austrian Danube have been already expended 45,350,000 florins. But of this sum, 30,600,000 florins have been devoted to the Vienna stretch of the river, of which sum only one-third is furnished by the general government; one-third by the provincial and one-third by the city governments, as having a more special interest in the local improvements. It is estimated that at least 15,000,000 more will be required in the prosecution of the work along the Danube.

Upon the affluents of the Austrian Danube, in the same period, have been expended 4,370,000 florins.

The work of systematic improvement of the Hungarian Danube was commenced in the year 1871, upon the stretch of river at Bud a Pesth. Here and elsewhere have already been expended 13,300,000 florins by the Hungarian Government; and the expenditures are to be continued on the plan already adopted—of closing lateral channels and the erection of embankments—for which 44,000,000 florins additional are estimated.

Upon the Hungarian affluents of the Danube have been expended already over 9,930,000 florins, chiefly to prevent inundations. The effect of these expenditures towards the reduction of rates of transportation in both parts of the empire appears as yet to be conjectural. While they have given increased facilities to commerce, it would seem that wherever rates have been lowered it is rather attributable to railroad competition than to the improvements of river navigation. In connection with this subject is also to be considered the fact that a wealthy chartered corporation almost exclusively controls the navigation of the Danube.

Begging that the Department will cause the commission, through Captain Eads, to be advised of the reception of these papers—

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 282.]

Mr. Kasson to the Vienna Foreign Office.

Dear Baron Callice: Referring to our conversation on Monday, and your courteous offer to obtain for the use of a commission of the American Government, engaged in examining special questions of river improvement, certain information desired respecting like works in Austria, I submit to your kind mediation the following questions:

How many years have the Austrian and Hungarian Governments been engaged in systematic and permanent improvements of the Danube River to facilitate navigation?

What amount of money has been expended by the two governments for these permanent improvements?

What affluents of the Danube have been in like manner improved?

Has it resulted from these improvements that the expense of transportation of merchandise by the river has been perceptibly diminished? If so, what is the estimated percentage of such diminution of the charges as compared with charges previously made?

If the projected system of improvements of the Danube is incomplete, what further amount of money is it expected will be required for their completion?

If this information can be obtained in time to be communicated in December, it will especially meet the exigencies of the government commission.

I render in advance the acknowledgments due for your excellency’s kind intervention, and pray you to accept the assurances of the high consideration with which I remain, always—

Your excellency’s most obedient servant,

JOHN A. KASSON.
United States Legation,
Vienna, November 25, 1879.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 282.—Translation.]

The Vienna Foreign Office to Mr. Kasson.

In response to the esteemed note of the 25th of last month, the imperial and royal ministry of foreign affairs has the honor to communicate to the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, Mr. John A. Kasson, the following preliminary information, obtained from the imperial and royal ministry of the interior, about the river regulations and other works which are designed to improve the navigation of the Danube and its tributaries in the Austrian part of the empire.

I. The systematic and permanent works for regulation of the river Danube between the Bavarian and the Hungarian frontier, a course of 377.335 kilometers in length, have only been commenced in 1850, and have, therefore, up to the end of 1879, continued for fully thirty years. These, aiming at closing the existing old lateral arms of the Danube, and at giving to the river an equal normal breadth, according to its nature, by concentrating the stream through means of embankments (erected along the side of the river), have not yet been completed, and will have to be continued for many years to come.

II. These expenses, exclusively defrayed by the State, including those for the regulation of the Danube Canal, amount to 14,750,000 florins in the stated period of thirty years.

For the improvement of the Danube near Vienna, a special undertaking of concurring interests, an amount of 30,600,000 florins has been granted, of which each of the three jurisdictions, state, province, and the municipality of Vienna, has undertaken to defray one-third. Including this last sum, the works for the regulation of the Danube would amount to a total of 45,350,000 florins.

In the 14,750,000 florins borne by the state alone are also included those sums expended in 1854 and 1855 for the improvement of the Danube at the so-called “Whirlpool” and “Eddy” (Strudel and Wirbel) by blasting rocks which impeded both ship and raft navigation, the same amounting to 396,000 florins.

III. Excepting the river Danube, the only works executed by the State for improving the rivers of Upper Austria are those for facilitating navigation on the Inn, the Salzach, and the Traun, whilst it expends smaller sums for improving raft navigation on the inferior streams Enns, Agger, and Vokla.

IV. Upon these rivers, during the above-mentioned period of thirty years, the sum of 960,000 florins was expended on the Inn from the mouth of the Salzach to the Austro-Bavarian frontier, a distance of 70.170 kilometers; 610,000 florins for the Salzach, a distance of 36.412 kilometers; and 1,800,000 florins for the Trannfrom Gmunden to the Danube, a distance of 73.963 kilometers, whilst 210,000 florins were spent in improving the Enns, 790,000 florins in regulating the Agger and the Vökla. As to the works for regulation of the Inn, which river represents the frontier between Austria and Bavaria, they have, according to convention, been executed in common with the Royal Bavarian Government, so that the improvements on the right bank have been defrayed by Austria, those on the left bank by Bavaria.

V. According to the observations made during the period since the completion of the river regulation works, especially of those on the Danube, it may be regarded as certain that the improvement of the river has occasioned an essential amelioration of the character of the stream, and very essential increase of facility in river traffic has been produced, so that towing navigation could be introduced without delay, and has been successfully carried on between Vienna and the Hungarian frontier at Theben. These improved conditions of navigation must, doubtless, have occasioned a diminution in the cost of the transportation of goods by water. We will later be enabled to communicate this in statistical form.

VI. As mentioned above, the Danube regulation works in Upper and Lower Austria, down to the Hungarian frontier at Theben, have not been ended. The completion of the improvements yet necessary for the furtherance of the navigation depends on the yearly appropriation. How large a sum will be required can, of course, not be stated at present with any degree of accuracy. Still, from the experience hitherto gained at the works for the regulation of the Danube, the conclusion has been drawn that to complete the Danube regulation works in Lower and Upper Austria according to the system now in use—that is, the prosecution of the works in the not yet regulated parts of the river and the completion of the works not yet finished—a further sum may be required, which may considerably exceed the amount of about 15,000,000 florins expended during the last thirty years.

The not yet received exposé of the Hungarian Government, as well as statistics concerning the reduction of rates of transportation occasioned by improving the river, for which the ministry of foreign affairs has applied to the Danube Steamship Navigation Company, will, as soon as obtained, be communicated without delay.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to the minister the assurance of his distinguished consideration.

Vienna, December 23, 1879.
For the minister of foreign affairs,
SCHWEGEL.

To the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America,
Mr. John A. Kasson.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 282.—Translation.]

The Vienna Foreign Office to Mr. Kasson.

In pursuance of the very respectful note of December 23, the imperial and royal ministry of foreign affairs has the honor to place at the disposition of the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, Mr. John A. Kasson, the following information relative to river improvements in Hungary, which has been communicated by the royal Hungarian ministry of public works and communications.

A systematic regulation of the river-bed of the Danube has only been undertaken near Bada-Pesth, from Newpesth to Promontor, a distance of 20 kilometers. The cost of this regulation amounts at present to 8,700,000 florins. The work was commenced in 1871, and still continues. At other parts of the Danube the only works done are those for riparian protection to hinder the enlargement of the river-bed and thus to promote navigation. These works stretch along a distance of 60 kilometers, and cost about 4,400,000 florins.

During the year 1879 six lateral arms of the Danube have been closed between Dévény and Gönyö. These closures, costing about 100,000 florins, form part of a projected systematic regulation of that part of the river, which will in time be completed. On the Lower Danube, from Ordas to Tajsz, the systematic regulation has also been begun and 100,000 florins expended on it. As regards the regulation of the tributaries of the Danube— 1. One hundred and twenty-two channels were cut in the Theiss and the river Bodro, which have till now occasioned an outlay of 8,700,000 florins, the Theiss alone requiring 111 cuttings in a distance of 133 kilometers, at a cost of 8,300,000 florins.

2. Twenty-nine cuttings in a distance of 37 kilometers have been made on the river Maros. These works were executed by the authorities with the aid of that working force which the inhabitants have to furnish in kind, according to a fixed reckoning, for the building and repairing of roads. The cost can, therefore, not be accurately ascertained. The other works undertaken for the riparian protection of the Maros cost 80,000 florins during the last ten years.

3. The river Körös, formed by the unites White, Black, and Golden Körös, shows 49 cuttings from Békés downwards, a distance of 43 kilometers, the cost of which amounts, to 500,000 florins.

4. For the maintenance of the navigability of the Béga Canal half a million of florins have been expended during the last ten years.

5. From Botos downwards 28 cuttings have been made in the river Temes, the works along a river line of 16 kilometers in length costing, up to the present time, 150,000 florins.

As general systematic river-regulation works for improving navigation have not yet been commenced in the countries of the Hungarian crown, and the improvements undertaken, although they are included in the project of general regulation, yet are only designed for riparian protection or to prevent the river-bed from becoming wholly wild, they have had only, so far, an influence upon traffic that they have facilitated it in a slight measure, without, however, exercising an influence in diminishing the rates of transportation.

The Theiss is the only river in Hungary that has been subjected to a systematic regulation in its entire length. This was mainly done for averting the danger of inundations, and was of very little advantage for navigation, as the regular traffic on the Upper and Middle Theiss is so small in consequence of the railway not existing there that it scarcely deserves being taken into consideration. On the Lower Theiss, where the traffic is indeed much more animated, the regulation works could not duly assist navigation, because the cuttings can mostly only be used by vessels during high-water, so that here, also, a diminution in the rates of transportation could not be realized.

If the present tariff of transportation by water is much lower than it was fifteen or twenty years ago, this progress is not to be attributed to the river regulations, but to the lively competition maintained by the railways completed since that date, with the transportation by water.

The regulation of the Danube at Buda-Pesth has not yet been completed. As the works to be accomplished are just now the subject of deliberation, the necessary cost cannot be stated.

The projects for regulating the course between Dévény and Gönyö on the Upper Danube, a distance of 100 kilometers, are now ready, 30,000,000 florins being proposed for the improvement of the river-bed, and 6,000,000 for the erection of the necessary embankments. The works which have been begun between Ordas and Tajsz (32 kilometers) will require about 2,000,000 florins.

Besides, there is a project for the regulation of the Lower Danube from Old Moldava up to the Iron Gate; the distance is 106 kilometers; the expenses estimated at 6,000,000 florins.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to the envoy the expression of his high consideration.

Vienna, December 27, 1879.
For the minister of foreign affairs,
SCHWEGEL.

To the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America,
Mr. John A. Kasson.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 282.—Translation.]

The Vienna Foreign Office to Mr. Kasson.

In supplement to the very respectful notes of the 23d and 27th of last month, concerning the river regulations in our empire, the ministry of foreign affairs has the honor to transmit to the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, Mr. John A. Kasson, the explanation of the Danube Steamship Navigation Company as to the influence of the existing regulations on the rates of transportation. The really regulated part of the Danube from Passau to Krems could make little use of the advantages which a regulated river affords to navigation and commerce on account of the railways which have in the mean time been built and run in a parallel line along the Danube.

The later regulation of the stream, begun after 1860 between Nussdorf and Fisoha-mend, is in its extent much too insignificant to have any influence on the rates of transportation. The advantages which the regulation of the Danube in the immediate vicinity of Vienna have afforded to the commerce of the metropolis are not the result of the facilitation and cheapening of transportation through this regulation, but rather of the fact that more favorable landing places and quays in the vicinity of the city enabled the building of works which were the preliminary condition in assuring to the port of Vienna a position due to its rank. These works, especially the landing places and grain warehouses of the Imperial and Royal Danube Steamship Navigation Company, as well as the storehouses of the city of Vienna, have enlivened the traffic on the Danube near Vienna in an extraordinary degree and have mainly occasioned the increase in the Vienna grain traffic.

The regulation of the Danube near Vienna, being for a short distance (3½ German miles), could have no influence on the cost of transportation. On the other hand, it is beyond question that the regulation of the Danube for the distance between Pressburg and Gönyö, a distance of 11½ German miles, where in the fall the numberless shallows have very often entirely interrupted the navigation, must exercise a direct important influence on the cost of transport, provided the regulation shall entirely remove all the obstacles which now hinder navigation over this stretch of river.

The shallows in the stretch Pressburg-Gönyö compel the navigation companies in the season of unfavorable condition of the water, annually recurring, to expensive unloading of all the freight-boats, and to the frequent requirement of three times as much cargo-room and three times as much power as are adequate in a normal condition of the water. In like manner, if not more prejudicial, is the effect on the navigation of the stretch of rapids, unregulated, between Moldava and Turn-Severin, 15 German miles. The Imperial and Royal Danube Steamship Navigation Company, which principally, not to say exclusively, traverses this stretch with its steamers, is compelled to keep in readiness a large number of light-draught steamers and lighters in order to maintain the regular movement of navigation, so that at the time of low-water in midsummer they can keep up the navigation at all.

The undersigned avails himself of this occasion to renew to the envoy the assurance of his high consideration.

Vienna, January 8, 1880.
For the minister for foreign affairs,
SCHWEGEL.

To the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America,
Mr. John A. Kasson.

No. 33. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 33.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, February 9, 1880. (Received February 25.) No. 291.]

Sir: The increase in ownership of railroads by the States of Europe has rendered necessary a new clause in commercial treaties. The adjustment by the governments of railway transportation tariffs has become of like importance to the adjustment of the tariffs upon the importation of merchandise. The acquisition of trunk lines of railway by Prussia has given to that government an important influence over the foreign commerce of Austria-Hungary, much of which finds inlet and outlet across Germany, at the ports of Bremen and Hamburg, especially the Austrian commerce with the United States.

Most of the great lines of Austria-Hungary are, or will soon be, under, the control of the state, as reported in my No. 195. Hence arise new questions to be adjusted in the commercial treaty at this moment pending between the two empires, and upon the terms of which they have not yet found it possible to agree.

You will have already observed that there is a marked tendency on the continent of Europe to secure to the governments either the absolute ownership or the right of control of all important railroads; and this not merely with reference to military considerations, but peculiarly with reference to the point d’appui it affords in establishing and regulating international commercial relations. Transit countries especially utilize this as means to force concessions from the countries of destination, as Austria-Hungary from Servia, and Germany from Austria, and vice versa.

It seems to merit your attention because the movement is based upon a system of state railways which is always growing, and because it may seem to you necessary to take steps by revised treaties, or other new arrangements, to guard against embarrassments which are likely to come upon American exports in transit, arising from the marked vigilance with which European governments are observing the increase of American competion in the markets which they have hitherto largely controlled.

If Canada were excluded from direct access to the Atlantic Ocean, and the United States Government owned all the railway lines, it will be seen how easily the Canadian exports and imports, would be placed in a condition of inferiority to the American by the simple expedient of a transportation tariff. A control of this sort is sought now by the continental powers of Europe.

Slight as its importance may be to us in our relations to the Danubian principalities, where also the state will own the railways, I have introduced expressions into the projected treaties to guard American merchandise in transit against the prejudice to which it might otherwise be exposed.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 34. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 34.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, February 13, 1880. (Received March 1.) No 292.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 130, respecting the collection of recruits in Europe for the polygamous practices of Mormanism in the United States, and my 231 in response to the same, I inclose herewith a note from the ministry of foreign affairs, relating to the subject and to their willing action in furtherance of your views, and translation of same.

I have, &c.

JOHN A. KASSON.

[Inclosure in No 292.—Translation.]

The Vienna Foreign Office to Mr. Kasson.

The imperial and royal minister for foreign affairs has not omitted to communicate to the competent ministries the contents of the esteemed note which the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, Mr. John A. Kasson, had the goodness to transmit, under the date of September 3, of last year, and to submit to them for such proceedings as under the laws of the country might be prosecuted against the attempts at recruiting by agents sent by the sect of Mormons. In pursuance of this, the proper authorities of the country have been instructed to watch strictly over the eventual appearance of such agents, and to bring immediately every apparent case to the knowledge of the higher magistracy.

According to the reports now before us, only a single case has been stated up to this time. It has been notified to the imperial and royal governor of Carinthia that there appeared about two months ago a Mormon agent in an inn in Olsach, district Spittal, in Carinthia, who, after his efforts proved fruitless, immediately disappeared, without their subsequently coming upon his track.

The undersigned reserves to himself the communication to the envoy of any new occurrences of this class which may come eventually to his knowledge, and avails himself of this occasion to renew to the envoy the expression of his distinguished consideration.

Vienna, February 7, 1880.
For the minister for foreign affairs,
KALLY.

No. 35. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 35.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, February 14, 1880. (Received March 1.) No. 293.]

Sir: The Austrian authorities, who are engaged in the work of administration in what may be fairly called the new annexed provinces, have completed a census of their population, which is probably more accurate than any previous enumeration effected by the Ottoman Government. It presents the following summary for Bosnia and Herzegovina combined: Masculine population 599,026

Feminine population 543,121

Total population 1,142,147

This shows an augmentation of 90,662 above the figures of the Ottoman authorities in 1876.

The distribution according to religion is as follows: Christians, Greek Oriental 487,022

Christians, Roman Catholic 208,950

Mahommedans 442,500

Israelites 3,496

Various 249

Of the total number there are— Unmarried 627,414

Married 446,138

Widowed 68,595

The list of occupations shows that— The landed proprietors and fund-holders (rentiers) amount to 94,393

Formers i. e. working the lands of properties 83. 402

Various manufactures 10,876

Laborers and servants 54,779

There are 37 cities; and the number of villages reaches 4,894; the number of houses, 187,510. The largest city is Serájewo, with 21,377 inhabitants. The Mahommedans predominate in the population of the towns; the Christians in that of the country. Nearly all the Israelites are found in the towns.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 36. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 36.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, February 18, 1880. (Received March 4.) No. 295.]

Sir: A telegram from Mr. William Paine, the commercial agent of the United States at Bucharest, addressed to me, was yesterday received at this legation, as follows: Recognition of Roumania by England, France, Germany, takes place Friday next. Have been asked by minister foreign affairs what our government intends doing. Please instruct me.

WILLIAM PAINE.

To this telegram I have replied as follows: Await instructions from Washington. Are you yet recognized as consular officer?

KASSON.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 37. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson. No. 37.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Kasson.

Department of State,
Washington, March 9, 1880. No. 158.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 295, reciting a telegram which you had received from the commercial agent of the United States at Bucharest, to the effect that the Government of Roumania would be recognized on the 20th ultimo by Great Britain, Germany, and France, and stating that the minister of foreign affairs of his highness had asked of him what were the intentions in this regard of the Government of the United States.

In reply, I observe that in a recent note from the minister of the Netherlands in Washington, this government was informed that the principality of Roumania had been recognized by His Majesty the King of the Netherlands, and on the 28th ultimo the President caused the proper committees of Congress to be addressed on the subject of establishing diplomatic relations with the government of his highness at an early day. Meanwhile it is hardly necessary to observe that so far as the Executive Government of the United States could recognize that of Roumania without actual diplomatic representation, it was done by the letter of the President of August 15, 1878, to Prince Charles, touching the appointment of Mr. Timothy C. Smith as consul of this government at Galatz. You can, therefore, inform Mr. Paine that nothing seems now to be wanting to the full establishment of relations between the principality of Roumania and the United States but the desired action of Congress, which it is believed will not be long delayed.

Observing that the minister of the Netherlands has received similar information. I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVAETS.

No. 38. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 38.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, February 25, 1880. (Received March 15.) No. 297.]

Sir: You will have been already advised of the complete recognition of Roumanian independence by the remaining parties to the Berlin treaty, which I advised you in my No. 271 was pending. It took place on the 20th instant at Bucharest, by means of identical notes delivered to the princely government on that date by the agents of England, France, and Germany. The English agent immediately afterwards presented his credentials as minister plenipotentiary.

Germany having delayed the recognition in order to force the execution of the railroad convention, this unacknowledged motive was retired behind the screen which Austria set up in the form of a mediatory dispatch to the three dilatory powers. I inclose herewith an English translation of the Austrian note above mentioned, which persuades the outstanding governments to accept the precedent action touching the Jewish question as satisfactory. The reasons suggested deserve your attention.

I also transmit herewith a copy of the identic note of recognition communicated to the Roumanian Government.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 297.—Translation.]

Baron Haymerle to the governments of Berlin, Paris, and London.

Vienna, February 7, 1880.

The envoy extraordinary of Roumania at Vienna, Mr. de Balatchano, has asked us, In the name of his government, to be pleased to initiate proceedings near the cabinets of Berlin, London, and Paris, with the view of engaging them no longer to delay the acknowledgment of the independence of the principality and to establish with it, through the nomination of a diplomatic representative, regular relations.

The Roumanian envoy insisted that Roumania, in proceeding to the revision of Article VII of the Roumanian Constitution, and in applying without delay the principle of religious equality by the naturalization of a considerable number of Israelites, has conformed to the Treaty of Berlin, and believes that she has consequently become entitled to the favorable regard of the powers which have signed the treaty.

Called, like the other powers, to watch over the application of the principle contained in Article XLIV of the Treaty of Berlin, we have examined with the greatest care the successive communications of the Roumanian Government relative to the measures which have been adopted by it, with the view of putting the legislation of the country in harmony with this principle.

If we consider the situation of Roumania, and take note of the difficulties, political and social, by which the government of the prince was unquestionably surrounded, in the accomplishment of its task, we cannot avoid acknowledging that by the law upon the revision of Article VII of the constitution, as well as subsequently by the naturalization of a certain number of Israelites, the Roumanian legislation has taken an important step in advance, and that the princely government has given evidence of its sincere intention to satisfy the unanimous desire of Europe.

Without doubt, much still remains to be done in order that this satisfaction can be regarded as full and complete; we, however, entertain the opinion that this result can only be attained by degrees and by fresh and constant efforts. We think that the Roumanian Government, which in the circulars of Mr. Boeresco of the 12–24 October and of the ______ November of last year, has promised to complete the work begun and to prosecute the application of the principle recently established in the Roumanian constitutions, will find in the recogniton of its independence, and in the presence of the diplomatic representatives of all the signatory powers at Bucharest, a fresh encouragement and valuable support. Animated by a sincere sympathy for Roumania, we have believed it to be our duty to favorably regard its proposition, and we do not hesitate to address to the cabinet of _____ ___ the request that it would be pleased to take into serious consideration the desire of the princely government. Be pleased to advise us of the appreciation which the contents of this dispatch will have found near the ____ government.

Receive, &c.

HAYMERLE.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 297.]

Identic note from Germany, France, and England, to the Government of Roumania, delivered February 20, 1880.

[February 20, 1880]

My government has, through the agent of his royal highness the Prince, been informed of the official promulgation on the 25th of October, 1879, of an amendment passed by the constituent assembly of Roumania, to make the letter of the constitution of the , principality conform with the stipulations contained in the forty-fourth article of the Treaty of Berlin. My government cannot, however, look upon this constitutional amendment, brought to its knowledge as above mentioned, and especially those clauses by which individuals belonging to non-christian creeds residing permanently in Roumania, and not subjects of any foreign government, are compelled to undergo the formalities of individual naturalization as perfectly corresponding with the ideas which actuated the signatory powers at the Congress of Berlin. Trusting, however, that the Prince’s government will, in putting these changes in the constitution into effect, approximate continually to the liberal ideas which prompted the great powers, and taking into consideration the positive assurances conveyed in that sense, my government, desirous of giving to the Roumanian nation an evidence of its friendly sentiments, has decided to recognize the independence of the principality of Roumania without further delay, and declares itself prepared to inaugurate regular diplomatic relations with the government of the Prince. The undersigned, in communicating the decision of his government to the minister of foreign affairs, has the honor to renew the assurances of his most distinguished consideration, &c.

No. 39. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 39.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, March 1, 1880. (Received March 22.) No. 298.]

Sir: A recent number of the leading journal at Pesth calls attention to the ever increasing emigration to the United States from Upper Hungary. Since last autumn, it says, about 2,000 persons have emigrated from the counties of Ober-Zemplin and Saros, where famine was feared by reason of the failure of the potato crop and want of work. Since the new year, it adds, a great number of the inhabitants of manufacturing districts in the counties of Zipsc and Abazzy have quitted their homes to establish themselves in America. Among these emigrating artisans and miners are also many Germans. It is also reported that several hundreds have emigrated from the counties of Trentsehin and Neutra.

That journal recommends the Government of Hungary to take steps to prevent this regrettable condition of things, by offering to poor people who cannot, or will not, stay in their villages, homes on the public domain of Hungary. This is the first indication I have observed in Europe of a plan at once humane and practicable to diminish emigration.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 40. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 40.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, April 14, 1880. (Received April 29.) No. 310.]

Sir: No election in recent times has produced so pronounced an effect upon other European governments as the late triumph of the liberals in the Parliamentary elections of England, under the leadership of Mr. Gladstone. The feeling in Austria is that of a political crisis. One of the government organs utters this cry: The fall of the Tories is also a misfortune for Austria. We have founded all our hopes upon the treaty of Berlin, and this treaty has just lost its best protector. The fall of Mr. Disraeli is in effect the death of the treaty of Berlin.

The feeling against Mr. Gladstone is strong, and rests not only upon his published criticisms of Austrian affairs, but upon his assertion of the principles of international justice and his known sympathy with all the people included in the general term of oppressed nationalities. This feeling touches Austria in too many points not to attract attention and create apprehension.

The existing alarm justifies my previous observations on the Berlin treaty, for it is equivalent to an admission of the violent and transient character of many of its provisions, which rest upon no law of nature and no law of international justice, only upon the bargained majority of the strongest powers. Under such conditions a treaty must depend largely for its force upon the continuing power of the statesmen who were personally responsible for its execution.

Since the date of its signature, have disappeared from their places at the head of their respective governments, Caratheodori Pasha, Count Corti, Count Andrássy, M. Waddington, and now Lord Beaconsfield. Remain only of the chief signatories and premiers Prince Gortsehakoff, apparently now near his end, and Prince Bismarck, who represents no special national interest in the treaty, and who acted simply in the role of mediator.

Under such circumstances you will not unreasonably find justification of the fears existing here respecting the duration of the Berlin convention and the future division of the spoils of European Turkey.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 41. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 41.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, May 5, 1880. (Received May 19.) No. 320.]

Sir: The condition of affairs in Montenegro and Albania is again attracting attention here and causing anxiety. In that region east of the Adriatic, without a press, situate outside of the limits of foreign travel, without correspondents even, other than those connected with the dipplomatic and consular service, popular movements and military events take place, without the knowledge of foreigners, which may involve other nations in war.

You are already aware that it has been necessary, through Italian mediation to eliminate from that very imperfect mosaic called the “Berlin Treaty” a section which ceded Albanian territory to Montenegro, and to substitute another cession which was supposed to excite in a less degree the hostility of the warlike Albanians. The action of the Turkish officials has prevented the peaceful delivery of the ceded district. Troops are assembling by thousands on both sides. The honor of the great powers seems to be pledged to this new cession. Meantime, Albanian determination to keep every acre of their territory seems to increase. They are inclined to cut loose from the Porte.

The following proclamation has been for some time moving that people toward independence. It is also designed to check Austria in her aspirations for extension of her power from the Herzegovina to Saloniea. I translate it from the French: Albanians! Europe has for the Bulgarians erected a principality; has subjected Bosnia and Herzegovina to the power of Austria; has given territories and independence to Montenegro and to Servia; has accorded autonomy to Roumania; and to us—what have we received? Nothing; absolutely nothing! We others, we Albanians, who are no immigrants, but the veritable original inhabitants of this land, who were already in possession of our independence ages ago, we must reclaim for ourselves the right to form a state. Thessaly, Epirus, and Albania proper—behold there a country of three millions of Albanians; and this country we wish to be free, independent, and governed by a prince. This is what we wish, or death! We will no longer support a shameful existence.

I transmit it for your information as showing a new and really important factor in the coming readjustment of territory and of government in what was lately European Turkey but what is now a seething region of conflicting aspirations of various nationalities, all with aversion from the Turkish authority, and all looking for local independence and national unity.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 42. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 42.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, May 13, 1880. (Received May 26.) No. 322.]

Sir: In a previous dispatch (No. 320) I advised you of a growing cloud of war east of the Adriatic, which might bring trouble to the Austrian part of the Berlin treaty and seriously disturb the purposes of other powers. The development of events has been more rapid than was expected, and covers a larger field. It is not merely to retain the strip of territory given away without their consent that the Albanians have taken up arms. They have taken their national destiny into their own hands, and have asserted the independence of their race and territory against all comers. The Government of the Porte is repudiated, and the anti-Albanian decrees of the great powers are rejected.

The recent course of events, so far as the facts can now be gathered from a region so little in communication with Europe, is as follows: In a general assembly of Albanians held at Scutari about the 19th of April, to consider their situation and decide their line of action, there were many fierce and revolutionary speeches. One of the orators, an old chief named Hodo Bey, addressed the responsive audience in a speech of which only this outline has reached Vienna, whither it was sent by an Albanian of Scutari: Honored Brothers of the Baschkini Skipetaris: The ministers assembled at Berlin acted from real or feigned ignorance of our country and its inhabitants when they sold us, us, the purest race and the most noble of the world, to a people of the mountains (Montenegro) which is found in the lowest degree of civilization, which has lived until now only upon the alms which it has demanded from the princes of Europe. We, the direct descendants of the king of the Arnauts, Iskander, [i. e., Alexander the Great], abandoned by all the world, surrounded by a band of hungry wolves lying in wait for their prey, we shall know how to defend ourselves and to honor the tombs of our fathers. We suppressed our grief and did violence to our most sacred sentiments when we delivered over to our enemy our brothers of Podgoritza and of Spucz. We will not now do anything to change by force the actual condition of things. But that was the last concession which we are ready to make. To-morrow our brothers, the Hotti, the Kastrati, and the Klemetti are to be delivered to the mercy of their enemies. Will you permit it? [The cry of “No!” from a thousand voices made response to this question. The old man continued:] No longer will I; I do not wish it. I, Hodo Bey, have for fifty years served the Sultans faithfully, but now, to day, that I know the resolution of the Sultan, I separate myself from him, and I recognize no longer neither Padishah nor Stamboul!

As he pronounced these words the fiery old man tore off the gold fringes of his uniform, tore off his numerous decorations, and threw them on the ground. The report says that many Turkish officers who were present at the assembly followed the examble of old Hodo Bey, tearing off the insignia of their rank, and their medals, and stamping upon them. The orator had not finished but proceeded.

We have no longer anything in common with the Padishah and those effendis of Stamboul. We will show, then, to the country what we really are. Bairaktar [standard bearer] of the tribe of Hotti, do your duty!

At this moment appeared upon the balcony a warrior of lofty figure and bronzed visage. They saw the glitter of a yataghan. He struck the cord by which the banner of the crescent was suspended, and slowly the standard of the Sultan descended to the dust. Then the old standard bearer of the Hotti with his vigorous arms threw out the new national colors, which bear upon a red field the springing lion of Albania. At sight of this wild acclamations burst out. Immediately the old Hodo Bey again spoke. He presented a picture in words equally seductive and eloquent of the situation, and enumerated their chances for success in the straggle in which they were about to engage. He said: “Of arms we have a profusion, and we will find enough hands to wield them. Of munitions we have sufficient to fight for several years. Money alone is wanting to us, for the Albanian is brave but poor.” Thereupon the chief of the corporation of merchants rose and announced that a syndicate of bankers at Scutari declared themselves ready to pay over each day 500 gold napoleons* into the hands of the commander-in-chief for the men actually under arms. The names of the bankers were given. It became then a question of choosing a commander-in-chief. Philip Seismit-Doda, brother of the Italian politician of the same name, proposed to avoid all religious dissension by choosing two commanders-in-chief, one Christian and one Mussulman. This was adopted, and Prenk Bib Doda was chosen for leader of the fighting Christians, and the old Colonel Hodo, above mentioned, for chief of the Mussulman combatants.

News from Scutari of the 7th of this month states that the official sheet Skodra was on that date for the first time published in Albanian as well as Turkish, and contained at the head of its columns a long proclamation of the league, and of the committee, proclaiming that Albania has ceased to be under the domination of the Sultan. All Turkish functionaries who are not of the Albanian nationality are deprived of their offices, and obliged to quit the country, with the exception of those who show themselves to be friends of the Sklipetares. The Albanian people, it is declared, henceforth owe obedience only to the orders of the league, and to the ancients of their clans who remain, as heretofore, their only lawgivers. The proclamation is signed by the military and religious chiefs, as well Mussulman as Christian, in the name of the notables and of the people.

Another dispatch of the same date states that one entire cantonment of Turkish troops has passed over to the league, and that the Albanians have seized the public bureaus, and turned out the Ottoman employés. Large numbers of Turkish troops are said to be deserting and going over to the Albanians.

If these relations are correct, and they appear to be authentic, as well as the logical sequence of prior events, a new state has risen with some vigorous elements of national life out of the chaos of Turkish Europe, It should not be regarded as one of the frequent insurrections against Ottoman rule. The proclamation of which I sent you a copy under date of the 5th instant shows how thoroughly the Albanian leaders appreciated their hopeless political situation. They had seen the aspirations of Greece, Roumania, Servia, and Montenegro ratified by Europe, and their territories augmented. They had seen the national individuality of the Bulgarians recognized, a prince given to them, and autonomy conferred upon Roumelia, and reforms stipulated for other provinces. For themselves they saw only neglect, and their territory on the north severed and assigned to the principalities, and on the south to Greece. The Porte consented to all this with an apparent weakness which nullified their hopes for future protection. The Ottoman Government, reduced to financial distress, and bound by its own engagements to Europe, connived at the local organization of the Albanians to resist the decrees of the Congress, and helped to supply them with arms and munitions for their operations. Now, in presence of Ottoman weakness and of the menacing pressure of Europe for the transfer of territory to Greece and Montenegro, the Albanian league turns these weapons against Turkey, stands at bay, and seeks to prove by its action that the Porte is powerless to execute the last demand of the allied powers; and, instead of relying, like the Christian nationalities, on European support, defies alike Europe and Turkey. They will challenge the sympathies if not the open friendship of the liberal world, even while increasing greatly the embarrassments of the signatory powers at Berlin.

Since the foregoing was written, news has arrived here from Scutari, under date of the 11th, which says that the movement of the tribes so far is not for absolute independence, but for a prince of their own, and an autonomous principality of which the Sultan shall be the Suzerain. At the same time the commander of the Turkish forces has withdrawn into the citadel at Scutari with his remaining troops to await re-enforcements, and this rather confirms the tenor of the previous dispatches.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

* About $2,000.

No. 43. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 43.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, May 29, 1880. (Received June 14.) No. 327.]

Sir: In my No. 298 I advised you that the increasing emigration to the United States from certain counties in Hungary was attracting public attention, and had inspired a humane proposition to check it by the grant of public lands in Hungary to the destitute.

The subject has now been brought before the Hungarian Diet by a petition from the county of Saros, which is alarmed at the depopulation going on. It is stated that the people of that region are emigrating en masse, and that the agents who are selling the tickets for the voyage have difficulty in satisfying the demands for them This spring the number of the emigrants from one county is over 3,000, of whom 1,007 have left their families, and 560 were held to render their military service.

This county demands the restriction of emigration by the examination of passports at the frontier, and by a control to be exercised by means of an international convention; and that they should, through the medium of the consulates, make provision for the return home of such of these people as may desire it, after they shall be “undeceived.”

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 44. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 44.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, July 6, 1880. (Received July 21.) No. 340.]

Sir: It is only a few days ago that I received, in answer to a former request from the Servian minister in Vienna, a memorandum (in German) embracing the statistics which are reported in this dispatch, and which are now translated and transmitted for the use of the Treasury Department, in obedience to your circular of the 11th of February, 1880.

1. To the first inquiry, his excellency promises me a copy (in French) of the mintage law of Servia, as adopted on the 10th of December, 1878; but he has not yet received it from his government. When it shall be received I will forward it.

2. His statement respecting the coinage presents the following facts:

Prior to 1868 Servia had no coinage of its own. In that year they caused to be minted copper coins, respectively equal in value to 10.5 and 1 centimes (“paras”), to the value in all of 600,000 francs (“dinars”). In the year 1875 they caused to be minted silver pieces of 2, 1, and ½ dinars (francs), to the value in all of 6,000,000 dinars (francs).

According to the law of the 10th December, 1875, there were to be thereafter minted as follows: Dinars,

250,000 coins of gold at 20 dinars (frances) 5,000,000

500,000 coins of gold at 10 dinars (frances) 5,000,000

200,000 coins of silver at 5 dinars (frances) 1,000,000

750,000 coins of silver at 2 dinars (frances) 1,500,000

800,000 coins of silver at 1 dinars (franc) 800,000

600,000 coins of silver at ½ dinars (franc) 300,000

9,000,000 coins of copper at 10 paras (centimes) 900,000

600,000 coins of copper at 5 dinars (centimes) 300,000

Authorized amounts in all 14,800,000

Prior mintage in silver 6,000,000

Prior mintage in copper 600,000

Total coinage now provided for by law 21,400,000

Very small amounts of the gold coins, however, have yet appeared.

3. The fineness and descriptions of both gold and silver coins correspond exactly with the fineness and descriptions of the like French coins, substituting only dinars for francs and paras for centimes.

Servia, having no mint of its own, has procured its mintage to be done at Paris and Vienna. (Query: Could not the United States advantageously offer to do the mintage, especially in silver?)

The metrical decimal system of the “Latin Union” has been by law adopted for the coins of Servia.

The minister was unable to inform me respecting the legal-tender quality of the respective coins. I have requested further information on that point.

4. The coins, of both gold and silver, from the mints of Austria, France, Italy, Switzerland, Belgium, Greece, Roumania, Germany, England, Russia, and Turkey circulate to some extent in Servia. The most abundant, however, are the gold coins of Austria-Hungary known as ducats (for value, &c., see inclosure 3 to my dispatch No. 299). After these come the gold coins of France, Italy, and Belgium, and then those of the other countries named in less quantities.

5. Paper money does not exist in Servia.

6. Prior to 1876 Servia had no state debt. During this year, however, and during the succeeding war for independence, the state contracted the following debts: Dinars.

1. The forced loan in the country pursuant to the law of January 19, 1876 12,000,000

2. Subsequently, under law of July 10, 1877 2,800,000

Total issued at par, payable in five years, interest 8 per cent., bonds each for 50 dinars 14,800,000

3. Loan in Russia, 8 per cent., at 21 years 8,000,000

Total 22,800,000

Owing to the wars of 1876 and 1877 the interest remains unpaid, and larger figures are, therefore, required to represent the total debt.

The foregoing statement is made in accordance with the exhibit given to me by the Servian minister here. But I beg to refer to my dispatch No. 261* for the debt statement, which I obtained on the occasion of my visit to Belgrade, and which I believe more accurately represents the total debt of Servia, including the floating obligations.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

* See F. R. 1879, pp. 82–86.

No. 45. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 45.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, July 26, 1880. (Received August 12.) No. 343.]

Sir: The harvest this year in Hungary, according to the statistics gathered at Pesth, promises to be sufficient for home consumption, and further to yield for export a quantity not less than 20,000,000 metric quintals.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 46. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 46.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, August 4, 1880. (Received August 23.) No. 350.]

Sir: During the brief sojourn which you were pleased to allow me outside of Vienna, in the month of March last, I found myself in that part of Austrian territory bordering on Montenegro.

The limited knowledge of that mountainous country which is accessible in books, as well as its remarkable history and its recent admission into the family of nations, induced me to make the difficult but not long journey into the interior, where its capital is situated, in order to acquaint myself personally with its features, its character, and its resources.

A young American, voluntarily attached to this legation, and who had rendered me aid in my official work, accompanied me.

The arrival of a stranger in that mountain-defended country is an unusual event. So after my return to Vienna there appeared in the columns of the city journals a communication respecting my visit there, of which the following is a translation: Cettinje, April 6.

During these days our little city has harbored an interesting guest. The American minister at the court of Vienna, accompanied by one of his secretaries, has passed two days here, and was received by the Prince with great distinction, and very sympathetically by the people. The diplomat from beyond the great ocean caused himself to be accurately informed in respect to our conditions, especially touching the present differences with the Porte, and gave special attention to Antivari, our harbor on the Adriatic.

News of my coming had preceded me from Cattaro, and I found myself expected. I called on the minister for foreign affairs, Mr. Stanko Radonics, with whom I had an interesting conversation.

The Prince invited me to pass an evening and to take tea with him, having also asked the diplomatic representatives residing near him. With his highness, also, I had a long conversation. None of the officials whom I met spoke English. Several of them spoke French well, and that language is the one employed in conversation with strangers.

At the hour of my departure, I found the Prince’s carriage and horses (presented to him by the Emperor of Austria) at the door to take us across the valley to the mountain road. At that point his own saddle-horse awaited me for the ascent, with two soldiers of the guard on foot to escort us over the mountain. At the frontier I dismissed them with presents, and descended the formidable mountain by the precipitous foot-path used by the natives, many of whom, both men and women, were met conveying heavy burdens on their backs.

population and organization.

The minister of foreign affairs estimated the population of Montenegro at about 200,000; but added that’ there had been no accurate census taken. The organization is tribal, and the elected tribal chief acts as magistrate in peace and commander in war. The assemblage of these tribal chiefs forms the skuptschina, whom the prince consults on important occasions. There is also a senate, more frequently consulted, composed of sixteen members. To this body any Montenegrin is eligible; but, in fact, the members are chiefly taken from the most distinguished and best-known families—a sort of untitled aristocracy. Practically, the government is patriarchal, and the power of the Prince nearly absolute.

religion and education.

The established church to which the mass of the people firmly adheres is the “Orthodox,” and is affiliated with the Russian Church. The number of adherents of the Roman Church and of the Moslem faith, originally small, has been increased by some thousands since the additions of territory and population resulting from the treaty of Berlin. The ecclesiastical and temporal power were formerly united in a prince-bishop (vladiha). From that one—Petrovic Njegos—who liberated the Mon-tenegrines in 1697 from the dominion of the Turks, the present prince is descended. His successors continued to be heads of church and state until 1851, when Danilo I renounced the ecclesiastical jurisdiction with its title of vladika, and assumed that of hospodar, or Prince. The center of the priesthood and seat of the church is at Cettinje, where a large monastery and diocesan residence exists.

The two forms of social life which most interest the people are the fetes and ceremonies of the church on the one hand, and on the other the operations of war against the Turks. Schools are now, however, introduced into the country, and better instruction appears to be the object of increasing interest.

Up to this time a good soldier has been more important for the safety of the principality than a good school-master. With the adjustment of its new frontiers there is hope for a change in the direction of governmental action toward the internal and peaceful development of the country.

character of the country, its products, and commerce.

The mountain range fronting the Adriatic Sea presents a bold and most forbidding aspect, which justifies its name of “Black Mountain.”

It is lofty, precipitous, rugged, and without foliage or verdure. The Austrian Government has built up the mountain face, a little to the south of Cattaro, a fine zigzag road intended to be practicable for wagons, and probably, I ought to add, for artillery also. It cost much labor and money to build it, and would have been useless without an extension into Montenegrin territory.

The poverty of the principality being a good reason to excuse the Prince from undertaking it, the Austrians gave him an annual subsidy to continue the road to Cettinje. This has nominally been done. On my return I passed over the whole extent of this route in Montenegro, and found it often nearly impracticable for wagons, and at strategical points suspiciously imperfect and easily destroyed.

A justifiable suspicion exists that the Montenegrins were quite willing to receive the money for the work, but took good and wise care that a nominally commercial road could on short notice be made impracticable for the military movements of a powerful neighbor. Their savage mountain walls form their best lines of defense, and the agility and courage of their mountaineers, rifle in hand, make them more than a match for mountain howitzers or heavier artillery along a difficult and obstructed road. The inhabitants continue, however, to take the old and steep paths of their fathers, utterly neglecting the longer and smoother road constructed in aid of foreign interests, which they leave to the waste of time and the elements.

The valleys between the rough mountain summits have no appearance of fertility, but rather that of being forced to yield a cold and stingy product for the support of man. Often were seen old pool basins among the rocks, in the bottom of which the disintegration of stone and other waste had formed something like a soil mixed with small rocks. These were laboriously removed, in order to provide a little spot where some vegetable product could be raised. The valley of Cettinje itself, which is four or five miles long and belongs to the Black Mountain, has great spaces which cannot be made productive. It is also a basin without a stream or water outlet through its surrounding ledges of wild rock. From one of the summits on the way I had a distant view of a better country to the northeast and eastward, where there are streams and good ground for cultivation, and forests and game.

The region about Podgoritza, newly acquired from the Turks, and the Lake of Scutari were more distinctly visible. For the last two years the crops were bad and the people have suffered for necessary food; and I met numbers of them carrying sacks of grain up the steep road. Two-cargoes of grain had arrived on the orders of the Prince from Odessa, one at the port of Cattaro and one at Bagusa, and these were portioned out to the poor Montenegrins. They have some herding of sheep and goats, and further eastward than Cettinje cattle are raised with advantage. As principal exports the minister mentioned skins, wool, sheep, cheese, wax, fish, sumac, and fruit. There are a few other articles exported, but the total value of exports is probably less than $800,000 per annum, and most of it not passing beyond the neighboring countries.

They have little money to expend for imports—some arms and hardware, a little clothing, some house furniture, and supplies for the wealthier families, and food in a season of bad crops.

The Prince has established a small arsenal with foreign workmen at his capital, with a view to make and repair small-arms, and to teach the art to his own people.

The commerce of the principality can never be large, by reason of the hard conditions of its industry. But it will be essentially increased when a peaceful frontier shall be secured and border wars shall cease.

the ports for their exterior trade.

Before I had seen the country, believing that the port of Antivari, which was ceded to Montenegro in the Berlin adjustment, remained substantially as it had been, I ventured the recommendation that the United States should have a consul there. I must revoke that recommendation. The town was almost utterly destroyed and depopulated, as the result of the military operations immediately preceding the treaty of San Stefano, and hardly any use is now made of its port. The old port of Ragusa (Austrian) is used for northern and the Bocche de Cattaro (Austrian) for Central Montenegro.

Nothing will probably be done for Antivari till a complete settlement of frontier shall be effected on the Albanian side. If Dulcigno shall be acquired (as now in negotiation), that also will effect the value of Antivari as a national port, and will be its rival.

foreign representation in montenegro.

Turkey and Austria have legations at Cettinje, the former an envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary, the latter a minister resident, both of whom were obliging enough to lend every aid to the objects of my visit. England has appointed her consul-general for Albania, who still resides at Scutari, as the British chargé d’affaires for Montenegro. France and Italy have also appointed chargés d’affaires near the government of the Prince; but they reside outside the principality, at Ragusa, for the greater comfort and convenience of living. Russia has a minister resident, who also resides at Ragusa.

The expense for strangers of living at Cettinje with any degree of comfort is very considerable, for all articles classed as comforts and conveniences must be brought chiefly on the shoulders of women up the mountain from Cattaro, and many of these articles must come from a distance by sea to that port.

I have only to add that His Highness Prince Nicolas appeared to be gratified with this first visit of an American representative at his capital, and spoke with interest of the small colony of his people who had settled themselves at San Francisco. He was himself educated at Paris, and is interested in the movements of civilization outside of his principality. His people are devoted to him, and he to their welfare. No one can know him or his people, and the difficult conditions under which they are seeking to develop a national existence, without a warm and friendly sympathy for both.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 47. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 47.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, August 7, 1880. (Received August 23.) No. 351.]

Sir: From the tabular report of the city magistracy in charge of the bureau which controls the provisioning of the city of Vienna, I translate the following statistics, which ought to be interesting to the corresponding official control in the great American cities, where unfit food so often causes disease.

The entire annual consumption of beef in the city amounted to 435,320 meter-centner (a meter-centner is 100 kilograms). This represents 119,200 kilograms per day, 58½ kilograms per capita and per annum, or 160 grams per day for each person. This includes the inconsumable waste.

The qnantities of food confiscated from the market as unfit for food is reported as follows: 60 beeves, 359 calves, 193 sheep, 83 lambs, 778 hogs, 58 horses, 27, 181 kilograms beef, 9,330 kilograms veal, 482 kilograms mutton, 1,906 kilograms pork, 432 kilograms sausage, J,784 kilograms fish, 13,600 crabs, 56 geese, 83 ducks, 1,055 chickens, 43 stags, 177 kilograms venison, 23 hares, 284 wild birds, 7,132 eggs, 2,418 liters of milk, 57,048 kilograms of fruit, 329 bottles of mineral water; 133 false measures, 29 false wagons, and 76 false weights also paid the penalty of dishonesty.

Such a record bears strong testimony to the vigilance of the inspection, and to its useful results in guarding the population against the deceptions which lead to disease or reward dishonesty in trade.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

No. 48. Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts. No. 48.
Mr. Kasson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Vienna, August 7, 1880. (Received August 23.) No. 352.]

Sir: In my No. 2931 reported in part the results of the late census of Bosnia-Herzegovina; since then, the Austrian authorities have completed the revision of the enumeration, and the new statement makes some corrections of the former figures, and affords some additional information. The following figures are said to be exact: There are reckoned 43 towns and 1 suburb; 31 boroughs and 5,154 villages, with a total of 189,662 houses and 1,158,440 native inhabitants; of whom are males 607,789, and females 550,651.

Religions:

Mahomedans 448,613

Greek Orthodox 496,761

Roman Catholics 209,731

Israelites 3,426

Various 249

Statistics of wealth taken at the same time show the following results: Horses 158,034

Asses 2,721

Mules 413

Cattle 761,312

Buffaloes 775

Sheep 893,998

Goats 522,123

Hogs 430,354

Bee-hives 111,148

No statistics are yet given of the quantity or value of either wild or cultivated land, or of the crops produced.

I have, &c.,

JOHN A. KASSON.

BelgiumBelgium

[49] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, July 24, 1879. (Received August 6.)

[50] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, August 4, 1879. (Received August 18.)

[51] . Mr. Wilson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, February 16, 1880. (Received March 1.)

[52] . Mr. Wilson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, February 28, 1880. (Received March 15.)

[53] . Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brtissels, April 1, 1880. (Received April 14.)

[54] . Mr. Putnam to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, July 26, 1880. (Received August 9.)

[55] . Mr. Putnam to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Brussels, July 27, 1880. (Received August 9.)

[56] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Putnam.

Department of State, Washington, September 7, 1880.

Contents

Correspondence with the Belgian Legation in Washington. (Documents 57-60)

No. 49. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. No. 49.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, July 24, 1879. (Received August 6.) No. 78.]

Sir: In my No. 58, after speaking of the excitement in political and religious circles concerning the much-talked-of withdrawal of the Belgian legation from Borne, I closed my dispatch with the remark that I would not be surprised if Baron d’Anethan, who had been in Brussels all the winter, never returned to his post. I was, however, to be very soon surprised, for Baron d’Anethan reached Rome before my dispatch did Washington. This solution of a question which had from the beginning been surrounded by a Belgian fog, was the culmination of a coquetry between His Holiness and the Belgian premier, which had lasted through the winter.

The ministers, prior to the election, having pledged a suppression of the Roman legation in case of success, most persons looked naturally to a fulfillment of their promises, and the more extreme wing of the Liberals clamorously demanded immediate action. The excitement and violent opposition occasioned by the introduction of the common school bill (now a law), eliminating from secular education all priestly interference, was as much, probably, as the ministry felt inclined at onetime to combat. It looks very much as if the concessions from Rome hinted at, but not defined by the minister of foreign affairs, were made in the vain hope of defeating the school bill. And, on the other hand, the temporary forbearance of the Belgian Government toward that of His Holiness * * * was perhaps but an expedient to lessen somewhat the violence of clerical opposition to the school bill, which was, after all, the great question between the parties.

The final passage of this bill seemed to have aroused the worst blood in the land. The priesthood promulgated a manifesto directing Catholics to withdraw their children from such schools, else, forewarning them that perdition would be their lot. The wealthy members of the laity avowed their determination to build school-houses and supply teachers of their own. The more violent announced publicly their determination to refrain from any participation whatever in the festivities of 1880 in honor of the fiftieth anniversary of Belgian independence, for the reason given that the country was no longer entitled to their regard.

When, however, such brave talk was brought to the test, as was foreseen by cooler heads, every position has in succession been abandoned.

Catholic children, or rather children whose parents belong to or sympathize with the Catholic political party, do not withdraw from the public schools; wealthy Catholics have been slow to respond to the appeals for pecuniary aid; and Catholics who are now teachers in the public schools refuse to give up their situations unless they are secured in every advantage they now have, and are given 500 francs in addition. Among the other securities they require is a pension equal to that guaranteed by the government.

The refusal to participate in the festivities of next year was so manifestly absurd, working, as it would, injury only to those who held aloof, that it has been wholly abandoned.

The violence of party language and the heat of religious discussions, however little pure religion was involved, has, as might have been expected, culminated in all sorts of idiotic and insane threats against the life of the King; the man above all others in the kingdom, perhaps, who has had the least to do with the enactment of the school law. It is true that, in order to be effective, it required his signature, but that was given exactly as he would sign its repeal to-morrow were the Catholics again in power.

Undue attention has been given outside of Belgium to irresponsible threats of violence against the King, and the publicity that has followed has given rise doubtless to the belief that his life is in serious and continual jeopardy. It is true that the King may at any time be slain by a madman, but certainly there is nothing here that would indicate the possibility of such a crime coming from any other source. The Catholics as a party are as free from the contemplation of such a crime as any other like number of His Majesty’s subjects, and it looks very much as if some of those opposed to them were using for political purposes the fact that placards had been posted in a few places threatening the King’s life. There was a man arrested about ten days ago who was heard by several openly threatening the King, but after the shortest examination he was at once declared to be insane. Another was arrested, however, a few days since—an ignorant and uneducated man—who admits that he posted placards threatening the life of the King, and declares that he was paid and instigated by an inmate of the Jesuit College here in Brussels. Of course this charge occasions unusual remark when it is known that the superior of this college is Père Malou, the only son of the Catholic party’s leader, and recently minister of finance and chief of the cabinet. Certainly the word of Père Malou, and that of his subordinates, one of whom was specified as the guilty party, who deny ever having heard of the man before, should outweigh the unsupported testimony of the arrested person. Furthermore, a thorough search of the house by the police failed to find any paper or other thing in anywise implicating Père Malou or any of his household.

Other notices have been placarded in several towns of the kingdom in the past twenty-four hours, all breathing the same spirit of vengeance against the King. If His Majesty should unfortunately receive any violence it could only, in my judgment, proceed from someone whose brain has been overheated by constantly hearing and reading of threatened assassination. From all other sources he is as safe as any one. The King’s early retirement to his country seat, his absence from the fête of Long Champs and from his frequent and accustomed rides on the Boulevards, all, of course, are the subject of gossip and comment. A stranger, on the contrary, would only remark the freedom with which the King moves among his people, and the frequency of his rides to the “Bois,” notwithstanding his summer palace is on the extreme opposite side of the city.

I have, &c.,

WM. OASSIUS GOODLOE.

No. 50. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. No. 50.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, August 4, 1879. (Received August 18.) No. 79.]

Sir: Up to a week ago it seemed as if this entire country would become a vast lake. So incessant and heavy have been the rainfalls that the local journals declare the inundation to be greater than that of 1850, which I judge from the comparison must have been up to that time unprecedentedly disastrous. Even a few cellars in the lower part of this city have been filled with water, but out of the city, up and down the Senne, the fields and meadows have been deluged and great damage already done to the crops. Along the valley from Charleroi, from Forest to Ruysbroeck, all the lands were submerged, presenting the appearance of an immense lake with agricultural products floating on the surface, and fruit trees uprooted and destroyed. In not a few instances farmers have been compelled to abandon their homes; the gas works of Forest have been flooded and many manufactories have stopped work.

Having occasion to go to Mons, I observed myself the fearful ravages of the water. At points on the prairie land, as far as the eye could reach on either side of the train, was an almost unbroken expanse of water. The tops of grain only could be seen, hay-cocks were more than half submerged, and the water was on the first floor of many peasants’ houses. The floods had reached the water-works, and, deranging the machinery—the citizens of Mons were like men shipwrecked—water everywhere and none to drink. Cattle stood breast-high in water; hay, when it could be reached, was dragged to higher points and thrown across clothes-lines to drip and dry. The waters gathered so rapidly in many places that no preventive measures could be employed, and the floating crops dammed the natural outlets of the water, forcing it back to spread additional desolation. At Liege the waters rose so high as to justly alarm the people, and at Jemappes, St. Ghislain, Boussu, Namur, Huy, and Maestricht the destruction is said to have been fearful.

The weather changed a week ago, and since then, instead of pouring rains, there have been sunshine and warmth. Indeed, so marked has been the change for the better, that any estimate of the exact loss of agricultural products would at best be only conjectural, though in general terms it would be safe to say the injury has been very great.

Farmers are proverbially such grumblers that 50 per cent, as a rule may be added in their estimates, but it did look a week ago as if everything was hopelessly destroyed.

These rains have been pronounced “unprecedented,” and in order to enable you to have a perfect understanding of what that word signifies in a Belgian sense, I will give you the particulars of the extraordinary weather of Belgium during the year 1878, as taken from the “Annuaire de l’Observatoire” of Brussels, viz, 206 rainy days, 17 days hail, 19 snow, 17 severe frost, 24 thunder storms, 47 foggy weather, 33 very cloudy weather, and finishing with 2 days only of clear sky.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

No. 51. Mr. Wilson to Mr. Evarts. No. 51.
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, February 16, 1880. (Received March 1.) No. 3.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a pamphlet containing specific information in relation to the opening and management of a permanent exhibition of arts, science, commerce, and industry in this city.

Although this exhibition will not in any way be connected with the strictly national one intended to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the independence of Belgium, it is the intention of the council of administration to open it to the public about the same time, in order that it may contribute to the ensemble of attractive spectacles with which Brussels proposes to celebrate the approaching anniversary of the national independence.

As this, however, is intended to be a permanent exhibition of international products of the character indicated in the title-page of the inclosed pamphlet, I cannot but think it would afford a fine opportunity of keeping permanently before the eyes of the people of this city and many others on the continent, who frequently visit Brussels, our new and ingenious products of mechanical art and science.

I have long advocated the establishment of sample rooms in the larger cities of Europe, as the most efficient mode of introducing our manufactures, but this has been attended with so many difficulties in the selection of proper persons to take charge of them, and the securing of a sufficient number of consignments, that the experiment has not yet been fully tested. But here is an opportunity of exhibiting and offering for sale the work of our artists and artisans, in a most attractive building, and upon reasonable conditions, which, it seems to me, ought not to be disregarded. The central position of Brussels secures to it annually a large number of persons from other portions of the continent, who either come here on business, or are passing through to other cities, and this, with the character of the projectors of this scheme, and their published conditions of exhibition and sale, ought to induce many of our manufacturers, who wish to extend their trade, to embrace this opportunity of entering into a competitive exhibition of the merits of their wares with the manufacturers of Europe. For the permanent exhibition of a vast number of our small ingenious inventions used in the daily life of every householder, I think it an admirable opportunity, and if a number of inventors or exporters of these articles were to join and rent a given space together in which to exhibit their wares, the cost to any one of them would be but trifling.

I am, &c.,

JNO. WILSON,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

No. 52. Mr. Wilson to Mr. Evarts. No. 52.
Mr. Wilson to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, February 28, 1880. (Received March 15.) No. 6.]

Sir: On the 10th instant I inclosed to you a pamphlet relating to an international exhibition of arts, science, and industry, soon to be opened in this city, and I now have the honor to report that since the date of that inclosure I have been informed by the council of administration that they have secured from the government the free entry of all samples of whatever character intended for this exhibition.

I have, &c.,

JNO. WILSON.

No. 53. Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts. No. 53.
Mr. Goodloe to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brtissels, April 1, 1880. (Received April 14.) No. 98.]

Sir: Referring to your circular of date August 9, 1879,* I have the honor to inform you that immediately upon its reception I communicated its substance to the minister of foreign affairs and asked the friendly co-operation of the Belgian Government in preventing, so far as the law would allow, any accessions being made to the Mormon colony in Utah. I asked that recruiting in Belgium for such an unlawful purpose be discountenanced, and that every discouragement be given to those who from any quarter sought a Belgian port of embarkation. The minister of foreign affairs assures me that what can be done lawfully will be done gladly to check an object so unhallowed as these misguided people have in view, and that the Government of the United States may rely upon all being done under the laws of Belgium consistent with that amity and comity so happily existing between the two governments.

Further than this, the minister of foreign affairs caused to be published in the Moniteur, the official organ of the government, the laws of the United States applicable to polygamy, that all might be warned of the punishment a violation of the statutes would entail.

My return to America on leave at the time of this publication caused the delay in transmitting to you my action in the matter.

I have, &c.,

WM. CASSIUS GOODLOE.

* See Foreign Relations 1879, p. 11.

No. 54. Mr. Putnam to Mr. Evarts. No. 54.
Mr. Putnam to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, July 26, 1880. (Received August 9.) No. 7.]

Sir: The current week has been one of special interest to Belgians-The entire season is largely appropriated to commemorative ceremonies and festivities, and the city of Brussels is ever in holiday attire.

The national exhibition which opened on the 16th of June, a rich display of the products of the agriculture, of the arts, and the industries in all their branches, and of the educational methods of the kingdom, is but a part of the semi-centennial celebration of the epoch which introduced this kingdom into the family of states.

The present week has been one of extraordinarily commemorative character and has called forth the most enthusiastic expressions of pride, gratitude, and reverence. It opened with a grand review of about 30,000 troops by the King. The Queen and other members of the royal family, except the King, occupied a portion of the balcony of the palace, another portion being occupied by public officials and the diplomatic corps. The review was brilliant as a military display, and called forth repeated demonstrations of loyal feeling toward the reigning family.

Wednesday, the 21st instant, had been set apart for a commemorative religious and civic ceremonial. At twelve o’clock, a solemn Te Deum was performed at the cathedral to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the inauguration of the Kingdom of Belgium by Leopold I, founder of the present dynasty. The cathedral was splendidly decorated, yet in harmony with the place and occasion. The entire diplomatic corps was present, each member of it, with a single exception, in full court dress and emblazoned with all their decorations, personal and official, of dignity and honor. The leading municipal, the civil, military, and judicial authorities, the ministers of state, and many members of the House of Representatives and of Senate were present. It was a pageant of great brilliancy. After the entrance of the King and Queen and other’ members of the royal family, the execution of the Te Deum was commenced. It oocupied about an hour. This was preliminary to another ceremony which must become historic, and was an occasion of repeated manifestations of the affection and gratitude with which Belgians cherish the memory of the founder of their kingdom. I refer to the inauguration at Lachen, near the summer palace of the King, of the monument erected in memory of Leopold I. The inspiration of this magnificent tribute of an entire people was happily expressed in one of the addresses to Leopold II, on this occasion. Two or three sentences will illustrate my idea: The ceremony of to-day is also a fête of the people. The monument we inaugurate is born of a popular inspiration and the penny of the people has erected it; when on the 10th of September, 1865, death struck the august host of that palace now within our view, Belgium was plunged in universal mourning. In the humblest hamlet, as well as in our great cities, in the home of the artisan and the laborer, as well as in the highest ranks, the grief was profound. It seemed as if all were struck down by the same blow which had lost us a friend and a father. We remembered that reign of thirty-five years, years of liberty and peace. We recalled all his great, beautiful, and useful acts. Lamentations were in every heart, on every tongue.

Public gratitude was too intense not to seek its expression in some durable and striking manner. From every quarter at once came the thought to erect a monument which should consecrate the memory of the great king and the nation’s gratitude. Committees were formed, subscriptions were opened, where the poor man could give his humble offering, the true gift of his heart. This is the monument decreed, so to say, by the voice of the people, which now stands erect before you.

These words, it was easy to see, interpreted the universal feeling among the vast mass assembled to witness the ceremonies.

There were present, as at the Te Deum, municipal and state and military officials and the diplomatic corps. These occupied positions near the royal family. The equipages and decorations were gorgeous.

The King and Queen, accompanied by the Princess Stephanie, betrothed to Rodolph of Austria, were also present. The Count and Countess of Flanders and family arrived about three o’clock and were received with enthusiasm.

The ceremonies opened by an address by Mr. Rolin Jacquemyns, minister of the interior, to the King and Queen. It was a condensed review of the circumstances which gave birth to the nation, and brought Leopold to its throne. It spoke in terms of grateful appreciation of the service of that ruler as the head of a constitutional monarchy. It said of him, “this wise prince, the true head of a nation of freemen, did more than deserve the love and admiration of his subjects. He rendered a distinguished service to the cause of popular liberty.” Its closing words were received with long-continued applause.

Every Belgian heart beats in unison with our hearts, and their voices unite with our voices; and there shall echo from one end of Belgium to the other the cries, a thousand times repeated, Vive King Leopold II! Vive the Queen! Vive the royal family!

To the two addresses the King responded, expressing his profound gratitude for this demonstration of affection and honor in memory of his father, “whose life was consecrated to Belgium.”

At the close of this reply the statue of Leopold I, which is in marble and of heroic size, was unveiled amid the plaudits of the multitude. An original poem, interpreting the just pride of Belgians in their nation and its royal founder, and representing the national aspirations for liberal institutions under their chosen form of government, was sung by a choir of several hundred performers.

The statue of Leopold is in the center of an open Gothic marble structure of singular grace and beauty.

This occasion, pre-eminently national in its spirit, can hardly fail to give new guarantees of stability to the institutions and interests which have been developed during the last half century.

I have, &c.,

JAMES O. PUTNAM.

No. 55. Mr. Putnam to Mr. Evarts. No. 55.
Mr. Putnam to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Brussels, July 27, 1880. (Received August 9.) No. 8.]

Sir: Referring to dispatch No. 3, I have the honor to state that I at once conferred with Mr. Wilson, our consul, and for a time acting chargé d’affaires. He read me his consular dispatch of April 8 last, No. 141, also his consular dispatch No. 123, of date May 27. * * * lad-dressed myself at once to the authorities requesting further copies, but have since learned that the edition was exhausted. There have been some changes in detail, not in substance, which will undoubtedly be published in a new edition. I shall keep myself informed on the subject and report anything further of interest that comes to my knowledge. I send a catalogue I obtained to-day at the exposition, showing the nationality of the exhibitors.

I can but confirm Mr. Consul Wilson’s dispatch No. 123, fully concurring with him in his general statements and suggestions.

This vast building, admirably adapted to the uses of such an exposition, having been rented for a term of years (eighteen, I think), the exposition must become institutional in the country, and a well known center of samples of the great industries of the world.

While Belgium, as the national semi-centennial exposition now in full operation reveals, has made creditable progress in many of the arts, and discovers great skill in many of the branches of mechanics, I cannot but feel with Mr. Wilson that it would compensate them should some of our manufacturers place here specimens of their wares and productions. I thought at first that our agricultural machinery would be highly appreciated, but I am inclined to think that, owing to the very small land-holdings, and the great abundance of common labor here, they are not a necessity. Belgium is an infinite series of little agricultural gardens, so to say, rather than large farms, and it does not seem well adapted to the use of that machinery which so dominates the agriculture of our farms and prairies.

I notice what Mr. Wilson speaks of in his dispatch, that American exhibits come from England, and while labeled as products of the United States, are exhibited by English houses. I noticed our grass-mowers, made in Philadelphia but exhibited by an English house.

China is here in large force with the most exquisite workmanship in house furniture, as well as in articles of ornament and luxury.

I shall endeavor to further inform myself on the general subject, and shall advise the department of anything of interest that comes to my knowledge.

I have, &c.,

JAMES O. PUTNAM.

No. 56. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Putnam. No. 56.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Putnam.

Department of State,
Washington, September 7, 1880. No. 13.]

Sir: A note has been received from the chargé d’affaires ad interim of Belgium in this country, conveying an invitation to this government to nominate one or more delegates to attend the international congress of commerce and industry which assembles this month at Brussels. No provision having been made by Congress to meet the invitation by a direct appointment associated with compensation, I have simply to state that you will be and are hereby authorized to take part in the proposed congress (at your own discretion) in sufficient representation of the United States, and to associate with you therein Mr. Wilson, consul at Brussels, should he consent. If preferred, Mr. Wilson can act as the sole delegate.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Correspondence with the Belgian Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the Belgian Legation in Washington.

[57] . Mr. Neyt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium, Shelter Island, N. Y., July 22, 1880. (Received July 24.)

[58] . Mr. Neyt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium, Washington, July 23, 1880. (Received July 26.)

[59] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Neyt.

Department of State, Washington, August 13, 1880.

[60] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Neyt.

Department of State, Washington, September 8, 1880.

No. 57. Mr. Neyt to Mr. Evarts. No. 57.
Mr. Neyt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium,
Shelter Island, N. Y., July 22, 1880. (Received July 24.)

Mr. Secretary of State: Under date of the 19th of June last you were pleased to inform Mr. Delfosse that the Senate of the United States had authorized the exchange of the ratifications of the consular convention, signed March 9, 1880, between Belgium and the United States, proposing merely the suppression of the word “alone” in the second paragraph of Article XII.

I have the honor to beg you, Mr. Secretary of State, to be so kind as to let me know the motives which have been invoked in order to justify the striking out of this word, which is found also in the previous consular convention of 1868.

The Government of the King has expressed to me the desire to be informed as to these motives, to the end of being enabled to appreciate the importance of the proposed change.

I would be very grateful to you if you could communicate to me at the same time the minutes or report of the debate which doubtless took place in this relation in the Federal Senate.

Accept, &c.,

G. NEYT.

No. 58. Mr. Neyt to Mr. Evarts. No. 58.
Mr. Neyt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Belgium,
Washington, July 23, 1880. (Received July 26.)

Mr. Secretary of State: lam charged with the honorable mission of informing you that the Syndical Union of Brussels is organizing an international congress of commerce and industry on the occasion of the festivals to be held in celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the independence of the kingdom.

The King has been pleased to lend his patronage to the work of the Syndical Union, and the minister of public works has accepted the honorary presidency of the congress. This will meet at Brussels on the 6th of September next, and the committee of organization expresses the hope that the Government of the United States will be represented therein by one or more delegates.

I inclose herewith a copy of the programme* of the operations of this association, which will serve to show the place which international questions will hold in the labors of the congress.

Accept, sir, &c.,

G. NEYT.

* Omitted from the present publication owing to its length.

No. 59. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Neyt. No. 59.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Neyt.

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 22d ultimo, writ ten from Shelter Island, New York, in relation to the exchange of the ratification of the consular convention between the United States and Belgium, signed by Mr. Delfosse and myself on the 9th of March last, wherein you make special reference to the action of the Senate of the United States in qualifying its approval of that instrument by suppressing the word “alone” in the sixteenth line of the XIIth article, and at the instance of your government request to be informed of the motives for the omission of that word, which is found in the previous convention of 1868. You also desire, if possible, to be furnished with the minutes of the debate which took place in the Senate respecting this change in the text of the convention.

In reply I hasten to inform you that, in view of the independent and co-ordinate function of the Senate of the United States, under the Constitution, in the completion of treaties, the proceedings of that high body in executive session are held under the seal of secresy, and the results alone of its deliberations are communicated to the executive branch of the government. Hence my inability, which I regret, to communicate to you the information you desire. To understand, however, the motive for the omission of the word “alone” from the XIIth article of the present convention, it can only be necessary to go back to the like article of the previous convention of 1868 and examine the respective contexts. We find that formerly the word “alone” was qualified by the addition of the phrase, “without the exaction of any oath from the consular officers,” showing that no formality was needed save the written request, without other support, in order to secure the return of deserters from national ships. In the revised convention, among other modifications suggested by experience, the qualifying clause quoted above was omitted as redundant. This redundancy extends to the word “alone,” which, besides being superfluous to the sense of the clause where it occurs, is, in the English text, ambiguous. It will be perceived that, as it now stands, it may mean either that such written request, so supported, will be sufficient warrant for surrender, or that any other mode of procedure is inadmissible; and it follows that, while the first of these readings conforms with the sense of the French equivalent, either interpretation is redundant. It is, therefore, in my judgment, apparent that the motive for the action of the Senate, in striking out the word “alone” from the clause in question, is found in the desire to remove, not merely a redundancy, but an ambiguity which had persisted, unnoticed before, from the previous redaction now abandoned, and thus to leave the article free from all obscurity of interpretation as to the sufficiency or necessity of the formality prescribed.

If, as I take it, the equivalent word “seule” in the Belgian text is redundant merely, without ambiguity, the question of its retention or suppression may very properly be left to the good judgment of your government. Speaking in behalf of the Government of the United States, I, for my part, cannot perceive that in either case; whether “seule” be retained or suppressed, any question as to the proper interpretation of the clause under consideration could arise.

Trusting that the explanation thus tendered may be entirely satisfactory to your government, and remove all obstacle to the speedy exchange of the ratifications of the convention, I avail myself of this opportunity to renew to you, sir, the assurances of my high consideration.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 60. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Neyt. No. 60.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Neyt.

Department of State,
Washington, September 8, 1880.

Sir; I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 23d July last, and to say in reply that in the absence of any special action by Congress providing for an appointment of a delegate to represent the United States at the international congress of commerce and industry to be convened this month at Brussels, an instruction has been sent to the minister of the United States at that capital enabling either himself or the consul of the United States at Brussels (and in a contingency both these officers) to act for this country at that congress in a proper representative capacity.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

BoliviaBolivia

[61] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis.

Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1879.

[62] . Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, La Paz, Bolivia, September 15, 1879. (Received October 20.)

[63] . Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, La Paz, Bolivia, September 29, 1879. (Received November 15.)

[64] . Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, La Paz, Bolivia, October 9, 1879. (Received November 24.)

[65] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis.

Department of State, Washington, October 24, 1879.

[66] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Adams.

Department of State, Washington, April 19, 1880.

[67] . Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States to Bolivia, Lima, Peru, June 14, 1880. (Received July 29.)

[68] . Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States to Bolivia, Lima, Peru, June 22, 1880. (Received July 29.)

[69] . Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, La Paz, August 5, 1880. (Received October 5.)

No. 61. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis. No. 61.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis.

Department of State,
Washington, August 8, 1879. No. 17.]

Sir: I transmit herewith for your information copy of a dispatch from Mr. Ernest Dichman, United States minister resident at Bogota, reciting the causes which have moved Colombia to proffer mediation for the settlement of the war between Bolivia, and Peru and Chili, and announcing the appointment of Dr. Arosemena, the former secretary of foreign relations of Colombia, to visit La Paz, Lima, and Santiago, on a special mission for the purpose of tendering such mediation.

Although abstaining from any direct indorsement of, or co-operation in, this apparently laudable effort of Colombia in the interest of peace and reconciliation, this government, which feels lively solicitude for the prosperity and tranquillity of the South American States, cannot but watch Dr. Arosemena’s mission with especial attention. In personal intercourse with the doctor, when he visits La Paz, you will probably find a fitting occasion to express to him the warm interest taken by the United States in this tentative step, and the friendly solicitude of this government as to the result.

I am, &c.,

WM M. EVARTS.

No. 62. Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts. No. 62.
Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
La Paz, Bolivia, September 15, 1879. (Received October 20.) No. 29.]

Sir: It becomes my painful duty to communicate to you the death of his Excellency Pedro J. de Guerra, minister of foreign relations, president of the executive council of the government, and Acting President of the Republic of Bolivia, which took place upon the night of the 11th instant in this city, as will be seen from an official note received by me upon the following morning, a copy of which in translation I inclose and mark Inclosure 1, as well as a copy of my answer thereto, marked Inclosure 2.

I also inclose a copy of a note received from the same source, upon the 13th inst., marked Inclosure 3, requesting my presence at the official attendance and ceremony of the removal of his mortal remains, which, of course, I complied with.

The funeral took place yesterday, with imposing ceremonies, the diplomatic corps forming a part of the funeral cortege, and the occasion was truly a very imposing one.

I have not as yet been advised who will succeed Dr. Guerra in the administration of the affairs of the government. He was seventy years of age, and largely enjoyed the confidence of the people of the republic, and it is difficult to predict the effect his death may have upon the fortunes of the country. He died of pneumonia.

I have, &c.,

S. NEWTON PETTIS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 29.]

Mr. Medina and Mr. Mendez to Mr. Pettis.

La Paz, September 12, 1879.

The undersigned, ministers of the executive council of the republic, comply with the painful duty of communicating to his honor S. Netwon Pettis, resident minister of the United States of America, the painful loss which the nation has suffered in the death of Senor Dr. Pedro J. de Guerra, president of the council and minister of foreign affairs, who passed away last night at 12 o’clock, after a sickness of some days.

On this painful occasion the undersigned offer to his honor the resident minister of the United States of North America the expressions of their most distinguished consideration.

EULOGIO D. MEDINA.

JULIO MENDEZ.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 29.]

Mr. Pettis to Mr. Medina and Mr. Mendez.

Legation of the United States,
La Paz, September 12, 1879.

The undersigned, minister resident of the United States of America, has had the honor to receive the note addressed to him which their Excellencies Eulogio D. Medina and Julio Mendez, ministers of the executive council of the republic, did him the honor to write him under date of this day, announcing the sad intelligence of the death of Senor Dr. Pedro J. de Guerra, president of the council and minister of foreign affairs, last night at twelve o’clock, after a sickness of some days, and having previously been apprised of the very unexpected and melancholy event, which the republic of Bolivia has great reason to; and will, deplore. As an evidence of the expression of sorrow which he knows his government will feel, and that the undersigned, does feel, at such a national affliction, he caused the flag of this legation to be placed at half-mast, where it will remain during the day, assuring their excellencies of his own most sincere sympathy in this hour of sorrow, and begs them to accept the assurance of his most distinguished consideration.

S. NEWTON PETTIS.

No. 63. Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts. No. 63.
Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
La Paz, Bolivia, September 29, 1879. (Received November 15.) No. 35.]

Sir: I have the honor to be in receipt of your dispatch of the 8th ultimo, No. 17, with inclosure, consisting of a copy of a dispatch from Mr. Minister Dichman, United States minister resident at Bogota, under date of June 20 (last), No. 100, and have considered both carefully, and shall bear in mind your suggestions if the occasion which your dispatch contemplates presents itself.

* * * * * * *

I have been informed that the Bolivian authorities here had been in formed of the action of the Colombian Congress to which Mr. Minister Dichman refers, and have information that Doctor Arosemena visited Presidents Daza and Prado at Arica, in pursuance of the object of his appointment and in furtherance of the object of his special mission, but that his mediatory offer upon the part of Colombia was rejected by both. Whether he visited Chili or not, I have no information.

The failure of the special mission of Doctor Arosemena strengthens me in the opinion I have for some time entertained, which is that neither of the then belligerent powers desire the mediation or interference of any power but the United States.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

S. NEWTON PETTIS.

No. 64. Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts. No. 64.
Mr. Pettis to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
La Paz, Bolivia, October 9, 1879. (Received November 24.) No. 43.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose a translated copy of a communication this day received from the minister of foreign relations of Bolivia, in reply to mine to him with reference to the subject matter of your dispatch No. 12,* which is marked inclosure 1.

The delay in answering mine upon the subject, doubtless arose from the sickness and death of Mr. Guerra.

I am, &c.,

S. NEWTON PETTIS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 43.—Translation.]

Mr. Ortiz to Mr. Pettis.

La Paz, October 9, 1879.

Mr. Minister: The executive council of this republic has had the honor to receive and take note of the dispatch your excellency favored us with on the 25th of last August, with the object of advising us that your excellency has been informed by official note from Washington, that the Government of the United States has learned that the British Government has been informed of a decree issued by this government, authorizing the use of privateers and the capture of Chilian property in neutral ships, and that to this effect Bolivia has sent agents to the United States.

In consequence of this, your excellency calls the attention of my government to the treaty celebrated between the United States and Bolivia in 1838, and very particularly to the 16th article of said treaty, which expresses that the effects or goods belonging to citizens of a belligerent nation are protected on board neutral ships, with the exception of contraband articles.

Answering the question which thereby arises, and which your excellency has the honor to put to me, whether the information received by the United States as to the decree given out by Bolivia is or is not true, I am gratified to inform your excellency that, in fact, my government, in the exceptional circumstances in which Bolivia finds itself as to the other states, for it absolutely does not count upon a; single ship at sea, and in order to counteract the aggression of Chili, which possesses a powerful navy, has thought convenient to authorize in its defense the use of privateers, by the supreme decree published on the 26th of March, of the present year.

Your excellency will understand the perfect right that pertains to Bolivia, as she has not adhered to the treaty of Paris, which prohibits the fitting out of privateers; having besides respected the exceptional case which, by the treaty of 1858, exists with the United States, as, allow me to inform your excellency, in the decree issued by my government authorizing the privateers to seize all cargo of Chilian property found on board a neutral vessel, whether a contraband or not, are excluded those cargoes sailing under the United States flag.

With this declaration I have, &c.,

SERAPIO REYES ORTIZ.

His Excellency S. Newton Pettis,
Minister Resident of the United States, &c.

* See Mr. Evarts’ instruction to Mr. Pettis, of June 23, 1879, For. Rels. 1879, page 125.

No. 65. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis. No. 65.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Pettis.

Department of State,
Washington, October 24, 1879. No. 34.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 29, of the 15th ultimo, conveying the sad intelligence of the death of His Excellency Pedro J. de Guerra, minister of foreign relations of Bolivia, and Acting President of the republic.

The demise of this illustrious man and distinguished statesman, who during his public career manifested a constant and warm friendship for this country, is a source of sincere regret to the United, States, and doubtless a national calamity to the people of Bolivia. It is hoped, however, that the loss thus experienced by that people may be measurably repaired by the judicious selection of a worthy successor.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 66. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Adams. No. 66.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Adams.

Department of State,
Washington, April 19, 1880. No. 3.]

Sir: I transmit herewith copy of a dispatch received from Mr. Thomas A. Osborn, United States minister to Chili, relative to the proposed exchange of prisoners of war between Chili and Bolivia. You will perceive that Mr. Osborn reports having written to the legation at La Paz on the subject. I have replied to Mr. Osborn that a change had been made in the incumbency of the mission, and that the person who had taken charge of the archives of the legation and consulate-general had not been invested by this government with any official functions, and could not, consequently, act in a diplomatic capacity toward the furtherance of the desired end.

The suggestion made in reference to the exchange of prisoners of war, like all others of a broadly humane character, has the sympathies of this government, and if the exercise of your good offices within their proper sphere will promote such a result without disparagement to the belligerent rights of any of the combatants, and especially of Peru, as the ally of Bolivia and presumably equally interested with her in such an arrangement, you are authorized to do what you can to promote the interests of humanity in the conduct of this unhappy war.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 67. Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts. No. 67.
Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States to Bolivia,
Lima, Peru, June 14, 1880. (Received July 29.) No. 3.]

Sir: I have the honor to report my arrival at this place yesterday, the 13th instant. I was enabled to land at the blockaded port of Callao and reach this city without detention, through the assistance of Captain Brown, U. S. N., commanding the United States ship Alaska, whom by good fortune I met in the harbor of Chimbote, and who kindly placed his vessel at my disposal on its return trip from Chimbote to Callao. On entering the latter port I called with Captain Brown upon Admiral Rivera, commanding the blockading squadron of Chili on the coast, in order to inform him that in a few days I should land at Mollendo, a blockaded port further south, and request that the railway train which I would take there to proceed to La Paz be not fired upon from his ships, which request was granted readily and most willingly.

Captain Brown has informed me that in about a week he will be ready to take me to Mollendo, and I consider it really fortunate to have met him, as it would have been out of the question for me to visit Lima at all and place myself in communication with Minister Christiancy, which you considered advisable and of importance in your last verbal instructions, and which would have necessitated a land journey of several hundred miles through a desert, for which I was not prepared.

I will not endeavor to report upon events that have lately taken/place here, as without doubt you will be advised by those who, being on the ground, have had better facilities to know. I will only state that after the defeat of the allies at Tacna on the 26th ultimo, General C ampere, Provisional President of Bolivia, having lost half his army killed in the battle, separated from the Peruvian forces and with the remnant of his own soldiers took the road to Bolivia, promising however, that he would return with a larger force. On the evening before the battle, General Campero had resigned the chief command of the allied forces, which had fallen to him by virtue of the treaty with Peru, stipulating that if the President of either republic should be with the troops, he should be commander-in-chief of the troops of both republics, and had said when surrendering his command that on that day he ceased to be Provisional President of Bolivia, as the Congress of that country, called together to elect a constitutional President that day, had no doubt fulfilled its mission. The latest news from Bolivia, however, up to the 28th ultimo, is that, while said Congress had met on the 25th for the purpose of electing a President, it had failed to take a vote, adjourning from day to day and occupying the time with making patriotic speeches; evidently waiting for some news from the army. What may have happened in La Paz since that date it is impossible to say, and will be unknown probably for some time, but that perhaps another revolution with or without bloodshed has taken place may be imagined, when the hurried departure of General Campero from Tacna, his own candidature before the Congress for election as constitutional President, and the hesitation of this Congress to proceed to a vote, are considered.

I am anxious to reach my post, and shall wait no longer than the Alaska is obliged to remain off Callao before proceeding to La Paz, although perhaps no time would be lost by remaining here until such time as some result of the action taken by the diplomatic corps should be apparent.

Should the action taken have any result, and possible proposals of peace from Chili be not entirely rejected by the Government of Peru, the latter could not act without also considering the status of Bolivia, and in that case it may be advantageous for me to know the wishes, ideas, and actions of the neutral representatives here, in order to co-operate with them in Bolivia after my arrival. I shall be guided, however, in some measure by the opinion of Minister Christiancy, at whose request I attended a meeting of the diplomatic corps to-day, and who I find, not only understands the situation thoroughly, but also has considerable influence in the deliberations of the body.

I am, &c.,

CHARLES ADAMS.

No. 68. Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts. No. 68.
Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States to Bolivia,
Lima, Peru, June 22, 1880. (Received July 29.) No. 4.]

Sir: Since my last dispatch of the 14th instant, in which I had the honor to advise you of the existing uncertainty as to political affairs in Bolivia, advices have reached this city from La Paz to the effect that on the 1st instant General Narciso Campero was elected constitutional President by the Congress, which had met on the 25th ultimo, after his report of the defeat at Tacna had been received, and after it had become known that the remains of his army were scattered and dissolved and that he himself was returning to La Paz with but a few followers.

Taking into consideration the reverses sustained by President Campero in the field, this action of Congress foreshadows a strong government for Bolivia, one that is well supported and therefore likely to endure.

I have the honor also to report that the proceedings of the Bolivian Congress, in its different acts and decrees passed, seem to indicate a further prosecution of the war with Chili, as new levies of men are projected; war material is to be gathered; the revenues of the republic pledged for war purposes, and any correspondence looking towards peace is to be considered treason and to be punished with death.

At the same time that the above news reaches us from La Paz, and without previous intimation whatever, a message of the Dictator of Peru addressed to the council of state is published, submitting a protocol entered into by the representatives of both Peru and Bolivia on the 11th instant, looking towards the unification of the two republics into one, with a full constitution for the new republic, subject, however, to a plébiscite; all of which Mr. Piérola highly indorses, and advises its ratification.

Minister Christiancy will forward copies of the documents relating thereto, and will no doubt also report upon its merits and the probability of its adoption as far as Peru is concerned. Inasmuch as Bolivian advices are entirely silent upon the subject, it is impossible to say whether the people of that country, or even its present government, will agree to this confederation, and I cannot intelligently report thereon until I shall have reached La Paz and examined into the matter thoroughly.

I am notified that the steamer Alaska has finished coaling and will leave for Mollendo to-morrow, so I shall be enabled to reach La Paz by the 1st proximo, where I expect President Campero to be at the same time, and so be able to deliver my credentials to him in person, instead of to the president of the council of ministers, the secretary general of state, or lately the first vice-president, under which different titles different persons have been in power in Bolivia since the flight of President Daza, and the absence from the seat of government of the Provisional President General Campero.

I have, &c.,

CHARLES ADAMS.

No. 69. Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts. No. 69.
Mr. Adams to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
La Paz, August 5, 1880. (Received October 5.) No. 22.]

Sir: Since my last dispatch (No. 13) concerning the political situation of Bolivia, nothing of importance has occurred. Congress is still in session, doing nothing apparently, but said to be engaged in secret sessions to deliberate upon the question of peace or further prosecution of the war.

Two weeks ago the question of peace was not even discussed openly; now two of our journals here propose the necessary preliminaries looking towards an armistice, and within a few days the two most prominent members of the cabinet, Mr. Carillo, of state and foreign affairs, and Mr. Salinas, of war, have been mentioned as favoring such a policy.

Arica, the Peruvian port lately captured by the Chilians, has been opened to Bolivian commerce, but such commerce has been interdicted by the government at the demand of Peru, and in consequence it is now rumored that Chilian troops will shortly move towards this city or Puno, Peru, the latter the only place by which communication is kept open between the allies.

Should this prove true, and it is likely, as the sentiment of Chili demands some action, either place could “be occupied by a small force, and then indeed all intercourse between Peru and Bolivia would necessarily cease.

It is already said that the government here will abandon La Paz and retire to Oruro, and private advices have been received from Tacna that such movement may take place very shortly.

The war party here consoles itself with late news from Lima, stating that several ironclads with war material of all kinds, purchased in the United States, have arrived or will shortly arrive, and will change the aspect of the war materially, and this slim hope keeps off utter despondency.

I rather look forward to an early invasion of Bolivia, and as La Paz will naturally be the object of the enemy’s attack, I shall probably have my hands full in protecting property and persons in that event.

Everything, however, is uncertain, and a day may change the whole aspect of affairs.

I have, &c.,

CHARLES ADAMS.

BrazilBrazil

[70] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, June 16, 1879. (Received July 28, 1879.)

[71] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, August 2, 1879. (Received Aug. 27, 1879.)

[72] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, September 4, 1879. (Received September 29.)

[73] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, November 3, 1879. (Received November 28.)

[74] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, November 3, 1879. (Received November 28.)

[75] . Mr. Billiard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, November 15, 1879. (Received December 27.)

[76] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hilliard.

Department of State, Washington, December 1, 1879.

[77] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rio de Janeiro, January 23, 1880. (Received February 28.)

[78] . Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, April 3, 1880. (Received May 1.)

[79] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio de Janeiro, June 5, 1880. (Received July 51.)

[80] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Rio Janeiro, July 24, 1880. (Received August 28.)

[81] . Mr. Devens to Mr. Hilliard.

Department of State, Washington, August 21, 1880.

[82] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rio de Janeiro, August 21, 1880. (Received October 2.)

[83] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rio de Janeiro, August 26, 1880. (Received October 2.)

Contents

Correspondence with the Brazilian Legation in Washington. (Documents 84-95)

No. 70. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. No. 70.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, June 16, 1879. (Received July 28, 1879.) No. 107.]

Sir: I have in previous dispatches given an account of the discussion of the electoral reform bill in the Chamber of Deputies, and stated that the bill had been ordered to a second reading. All amendments offered by those who, while friendly to the government, opposed some features of that important measure, were voted down.

The bill, with the provisions originally contained in it as described in my previous dispatches, has passed the Chamber of Deputies by a large majority. It is now before the Senate, and it will undergo thorough discussion in that body. The conservative majority is so large in the Senate that the fate of the bill is regarded as doubtful. Still, as the measure is really conservative in its structure, and must be so in its influence, it may pass that body, notwithstanding the fact that it is brought forward by a liberal ministry. Baron de Cotegipe, a member of the late ministry, a man of great ability and a statesman of courage, is the leader “of the conservative party in the Senate. It is understood that the conservative senators recently met at the residence of Baron de Cotegipe to confer as to the proper course to be pursued in regard to the electoral reform bill.

I do not know that the report as to the result of the “caucus” is authentic, but it is stated that it is proposed by some of the leading conservative senators to meet the measure submitted to them by the liberal ministry in the boldest way; that is, to incorporate in it the amendment offered in the Chamber of Deputies by Mr. Saldanho Maromho making non-Catholics and naturalized Brazilians eligible to office. This would place the conservative leaders far in advance of the liberal ministry upon the most important political question in this empire. Compared with all other issues of the day, the question of the eligibilidade of non-Catholics and naturalized Brazilians to office is transcendently the greatest. It is impossible to ignore the elements of power that are inherent in the proposition that to-day, in the pressure of the great reforms effected by the civilization of the nineteenth century, all the barriers that exclude certain classes of the people from participation in the government of the empire because of their religious opinions, or the place of their nativity, should be removed in such a country as Brazil.

If, therefore, the leaders of the conservative party possess the requisite foresight and courage to adopt this great principle of modern free government, they will achieve a splendid triumph, and open their way to the seats of influence and power. Such an amendment adopted by the Senate would vindicate that body from the reproach that it blocks the way of progress in the empire of Brazil.

Nor would this course on the part of the conservatives be without a precedent to guide and to sanction it. But a few years since, the late Mr. Zacarias de Goes Vasconcellos, a great liberal leader, retired from the ministry upon some question affecting his dignity and touching his sensibilities, when Visconde do Bio Branco came into power and brought forward a bill for the gradual abolition of slavery, which became a law in September, 1871. This great measure, so beneficent, and so much in harmony with the advancing civilization of the world, was really a liberal idea, and ought to have been adopted by the statesmen who represented that party, but it was strenuously opposed by Mr. Zacarias de Goes Vasconcellos as inopportune, and the wise and statesmanlike policy of the premier, Yisconde do Rio Branco, prevailed.

Some years previous to this, the Emperor, a statesman of noble impulses and large views, had led the way to this important measure by emancipating his own slaves.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

No. 71. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. No. 71.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, August 2, 1879. (Received Aug. 27, 1879.) No. 113.]

Sir: The present liberal minister came into power on the 5th of January, 1878, and found the government in a state of serious financial embarrassment, the treasury exhausted, and the estimated revenue for the ensuing six months of the fiscal year already disposed of.

Funds for immediate and pressing demands were required, and it was not desirable to attempt to negotiate a foreign loan which must be effected, if at all, under great disadvantages.

The government, as a last resource, decided to make an issue of $30,000,000 of paper currency. Of this amount $20,000,000 were put in circulation, but the minister of finance, observing the disastrous effects of this scheme, felt that it must seriously impair the public credit. He therefore took occasion to announce that he would not use the remaining $10,000,000.

Another measure was adopted by the new ministry authorizing the issue of $20,000,000 of government bonds bearing an interest of six per centum, which was put on this market by a syndicate in the latter part of the year 1878. The measure was successful, and it was a temporary relief to the government.

Meanwhile the budget came up for discussion before the new Chamber of Deputies, and after some delay it passed that body and is now before the Senate.

The new minister of finance found that the budget could not be matured in time to enable him to meet the actual demands upon the treasury. He therefore applied to the Chambers to authorize the law of October 20, 1877 (budget law of 1876–’77) to continue in operation until December 31, 1879.

The Chamber of Deputies passed the resolution, thus continuing in force the existing law, which was about to expire. Supplementary credits were also voted for the several departments. The resolution then came up in the Senate, where it encountered opposition. Baron de Cotegipe, the leader of the conservative’s in that body, proposed to limit the authority of the existing law to two months after the expiration of the fiscal year, but Mr. Affonso Celso, minister of finance, made such a statement of the actual demands upon the government that the Senate passed the measure as it came from the Chamber of Deputies, and concurred in the vote of supplementary credits for the use of the departments. The minister of finance was also authorized, by a vote taken the same day, June 20, 1879, to contract a loan of 50 contos of reis (about $25,000,000) for the following purposes: 1st. To consolidate the floating debt, consisting in great part of treasury bills, to the amount of $11,000,000.

2d. To liquidate the budget of 1878–’79, in which are included the deficits of previous years.

This new loan is of 50 contos of reis ($25,000,000), bearing 4½ per cent, interest per annum, payable in gold, or in currency at the rate of exchange on the day of payment.

The decree of July 19, authorizing the minister of finance to effect this operation, establishes that the minimum shall be 96 per cent. The bonds have coupons attached for the payment of the interest. Interest is to be counted from the 1st of October next, and payable every three months upon presentation of the coupons. Redemption shall be made semi-annually, at par, by lot or purchase, according to the condition of the market. The payments shall be made, at the will of the holder of the bonds, in Rio de Janeiro, Para, Rio Grande do Sul, or San Paulo, or in London, Paris, or Lisbon. The bonds are to enjoy all the rights and privileges belonging to other bonds in circulation. In the subscription for these bonds a payment must be made of 10 per cent, of their nominal value, and any sum besides which the subscriber may choose. The other payments are to be made as follows: September 22, 16 per cent.; October 20, 20 per cent.; November 20, 15 per cent.; December 22, 20 per cent.; January 21, 1880, 15 per cent.

The loan has met great success; it is understood that the amount has already been more than subscribed for. A syndicate of three native banks and one Brazilian capitalist guaranteed the taking of 35 contos ($17,500,000) at a fraction below the minimum price marked by the government circular, announcing the loan before the circular was published; so that really the public had only some 15 contos ($7,500,000) to take.

The success of the loan was thus assured from the first, and reflects great credit on the present minister of finance, Mr. Affonso Celso. Subscriptions were undoubtedly checked at first by doubts as to the interpretation of certain parts of the circular; but these have been cleared away by explicit declarations of the minister of finance. At present rate of exchange a gold loan at 96 per cent, is about equal to a 6 per cent, bond of the old type, and much superior as a security, being payable to bearer with coupons attached, and redeemable after a fixed term, like our five-twenties. The result of the subscription for the loan has not yet been officially announced.

Another important financial operation has just been effected by the government and presents some remarkable features. A Senhor Pecego, having received a railroad concession from the imperial government, has been for a long time endeavoring to raise money in England to construct his road. He could do nothing in London. * * * He transferred his operations to, a new field; he went over to Paris, and a combination of banking associations decided to look into the scheme. To that end they sent out here a representative, Monsieur de La Hande, with an engineer, to examine the projected line of railway, and empowered their agent to treat with the imperial government.

After surveying the situation, the representative of the French capitalists said to the government, “You want money at once.” This arrested attention, and after a free conference it was understood that instead of advancing money to the scheme, as the construction proceeded, the capitalists would hand over to the government the entire amount estimated for the work (upon which the government had guaranteed 7 per cent.) in one lump.

The government accepted this advance in the way of a deposit as a bank sometimes does, paying 7 per cent, interest on the fund intrusted to their keeping.

The railroad is estimated to cost somewhere about 11,000 contos ($5,500,000), and a great consideration with the French capitalists in making the arrangement is that this is regarded as the initial of several similar financial arrangements in which they are to be interested. The prospective advantages are, therefore, very great. The French negotiators are understood to represent a large amount of capital. Of course this arrangement indicates great confidence in the ability of the imperial government to pay in future, and it is at the same time a splendid proof of perfect trust in its good faith. It is well entitled to this confidence, for the whole spirit of the government, of which the Emperor is a noble illustration, is earnest in its purpose to meet all its obligations.

As to Brazilian finances, I propose to conclude this dispatch with an authentic statement giving a condensed summary of the debt of the government, taken from a recent report made to the Chamber of Deputies bv the minister of finance. The public debt is stated as follows: Class: Milreis.

Foreign dept (par of 27d.) 158,283,555

Internal dept 363,569,700

Internal dept anterior to 1827 336,734

Emancipation fund 5,136,217

Loan from orphans, fund 16,478,705

Private loans 700,000

Estates of deceased and absentes 2,632,487

Savings deposits 12,924,942

Monte do Soccorro deposits 740,447

Miscellaneous deposits 8,799,796

Treasury bills 20,255,900

Paper currency 189,258,354

Total milreis 779,116,837

Or at par exchange £88,327,733

This discloses an increase over the official report of December last of £3,756,000. The total amount of paper currency issued within the last year is £4,900,000, and government 6 per cent, bonds £4,500,000.

The total public debt of Brazil in 1870 was £39,600,000 and in 1876 £78,880,000. Such is the financial condition of Brazil to-day.

* * * * * * *

The measures just adopted here are based upon ideas already exhibited in the operations of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States.

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

No. 72. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. No. 72.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, September 4, 1879. (Received September 29.) No. 123.]

Sir: The discussion of the scheme for an interoceanic canal has not only awakened interest in Europe, but I observe that it has attracted the attention of our own government. The scheme of M. de Lesseps for the construction of what is known as the Panama Canal, is presented by that gentleman in a way to make it seem both practicable and important.

It is remarkable that he has given to the scheme not only the sanction of his name, but he takes the responsibility of stating that the difficulties to be overcome are not so formidable as those encountered in making the Suez Canal.

* * * * * * *

There is another statement understood to have been made that is not so well founded: that M. de Lesseps has applied to the Emperor of Brazil to supply him with laborers for service in the accomplishment of his great task. It is said that 15,000 negroes will be furnished to M. de Lesseps under this arrangement. The application may have been made, but it will lead to nothing.

* * * * * * *

Independent of other considerations, the demand for labor in Brazil at this time is so great that one of the chief questions that now engross the attention of the imperial government is to determine upon some feasible plan for introducing foreign laborers into this country. At this very time the Brazilian Government proposes to induce laborers from China to emigrate to this country. The question is actually under discussion; it was the subject of debate in the Chamber of Deputies yesterday. One of the leading liberal members applied to me during the past week for information in regard to the policy of encouraging emigration from China, and, at his request, I was able to put into his hand some publications, made in the United States, bearing upon that question.

Some time last year Mr. de Sinimbu, the president of the council, called on me and discussed that subject with me. I gave him my views as to this question—an important one, not only in political economy, but in political science, as it seems to me—and I could not speak encouragingly of the scheme. I said, among other things, “If these people come into your country you will never get clear of them.” But such is the scarcity of labor in Brazil, compared with the vast extent of its territory, a scarcity heightened by the working out of the measure of the gradual abolition of slavery, wise and beneficent as that measure is, that the government will take some steps at an early day to induce emigration from China. It would be remarkable, then, if, in the presence of such a great problem as this, the imperial government should consent to send laborers out of the country. Of course there are other considerations which would make it simply impossible for M. de Lesseps to obtain laborers from Brazil.

* * * * * * *

I thought it proper to make you acquainted with the information that has been conveyed to me in an authentic way, as to the proposed scheme of M. de Lesseps. He will draw no laborers from Brazil to aid him in the accomplishment of his great task, to construct an inter-oceanic canal.

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

No. 73. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. No. 73.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, November 3, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 133.]

Sir: Two eminent Brazilian statesmen have recently died. General Osorio, Marquez do Herval, marshal of the army, senator, and minister of war, died on the 4th of October last, in the seventy-second year of his age. Of humble origin, he rose to a position of great dignity, power, and influence. He entered the imperial army in Rio Grande do Sul, the province of his birth, before he had completed his fifteenth year, as a private soldier, soon after the declaration of Brazilian independence. He was repeatedly promoted for his gallantry on the field of battle. In the war against Rosas he greatly distinguished himself, and won a national reputation while in command of Rio Grande lancers by a brilliant charge upon a battery of thirty-six pieces, achieving a signal victory.

After the termination of that war he took part in the political contests of Rio Grande do Sul, and became a recognized leader of the liberal party. In the war against Paraguay, General Osorio displayed the highest courage and rendered signal service to his country. At the great battle of Avahy, December 11, 1869, he was shot through the mouth while leading a charge in person on the enemy’s lines. He soon recovered, returned to the field, and commanded the First Army Corps during the closing scenes of the war. He was made a field marshal in 1865; lieutenant-general in 1867, and field-marshal of the army in 1877. He was also successively honored with the titles of barāo, visconde, and marquez do Herval, the name of a parish in his native province. In January, 1877, he was chosen senator from his province. On the 5th of January, 1878, he became a member of the new liberal cabinet, taking the portfolio of war.

His personal character was high, brave, frank, manly, sincere; he was honored and loved by the people throughout the empire. He always reminded me of General Taylor, our great soldier.

Consilheiro Domingos de Souza Leão, Barão de Villa Bella, late minister and secretary of state for foreign affairs, died in this city on the 18th of October last. He was born in the province of Pernambuco in 1818, educated for the bar, and graduated at the law school of Olinda, Portugal, in 1839. He belonged to one of the wealthiest and most in fluential families in Ms province, and soon took an active part in politics. He was a liberal leader, and was elected deputy to the General Assembly in 1851. He continued to serve for several years. He subsequently became President of his province. On the formation of the present cabinet, January 5, 1878, he became minister and secretary of state for foreign affairs.

He retired from the cabinet some months since, at the same time with Mr. Silveira Martins, late minister of finance, because the ministry refused to carry out certain liberal measures; the most important, the granting full political rights to non-Catholics.

It will be remembered that I negotiated with Baron de Villa Bella, the treaty for the protection of trade-marks. He was a man of exalted character, of cultivated tastes, and of large views. He was a member of the Chamber of Deputies from Pernambuco at the time of his death.

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

No. 74. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. No. 74.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, November 3, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 135.]

Sir: On the 30th of last month His Majesty the Emperor proceeded in his usual style on such occasions to close the second session of the seventeenth legislature, and to open the extraordinary session which had been convened by imperial decree. The ceremony took place in the Senate chamber, and the state observed on the occasion was such as I have heretofore described.

Most of the important measures had been matured and adopted before the close of the late session of the General Assembly. The budget had been carried successfully through both houses, to the great satisfaction of the ministry. But one great measure, the electoral reform bill, which had been carried through the Chamber of Deputies, had not been acted upon by the Senate. It is to secure the adoption of this important reform that the extraordinary session has been called. But its fate is doubtful. I had a conversation with a leading member of the Chamber a day or two since, and I learn from him that the success of the measure is doubtful. It is his opinion that the Senate will not adopt it. If the Senate should reject the measure without making any amendment to the bill as it came from the Chamber, the result would be a dissolution of the legislature.

But still the measure may not be accomplished by an appeal to the the people. It is probable that the liberals will still control the new Chamber of Deputies by a large majority. The measure will again be brought forward by the ministry and it will be adopted. But in the Senate it may encounter the same opposition. It is impossible to foresee what will then occur. The ministry will be brought into direct conflict with the Senate. One or the other must recede. The Senate is a permanent body; its members hold their places for life. In the course of a few weeks we shall probably see the measure disposed of by the Senate for the present.

There is not much of importance in the speech from the throne. The Emperor speaks with satisfaction of the peaceful and friendly relations which Brazil enjoys with other nations. He speaks of war between the republics on the Pacific coasts, and states that the Empire of Brazil is strictly neutral. He expresses an earnest wish to see peace restored.

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIABD.

No. 75. Mr. Billiard to Mr. Evarts. No. 75.
Mr. Billiard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, November 15, 1879. (Received December 27.) No. 136.]

Sir: In my last dispatch, dated November 3, I stated that His Majesty the Emperor had opened an extraordinary session of the General Assembly, and that it had been called to secure the adoption of the electoral reform bill, a measure that had passed the Chamber of Deputies, but which the Senate had not acted on. The measure was urged by the ministry with much force and earnestness, but without success. The Senate took up the measure, and after a vigorous discussion the bill was rejected by a large majority. The ministry could not command the support of their own party.

In the Senate but ten votes could be brought to the support of a measure regarded as so important. Liberal and conservative statesmen combined in opposition to the electoral reform bill, and it was hopelessly defeated.

It was supposed that the rejection of the bill would be immediately followed by an imperial decree dissolving the General Assembly. But it seems that, at a meeting of the ministry held the same day at the palace, it was decided not to adopt that extreme measure at this time, but merely to adjourn the session. The Emperor, therefore, signed a decree, on the 12th instant, adjourning the Legislature to the 15th of April next. Nothing more serious has yet followed the rejection of an important measure recommended by the Emperor and urged by the ministry.

* * * * * * *

Mr. de Sinimbu is an able man, has large experience, an acquaintance with foreign countries, of fine temper, and of thorough integrity, an important quality in all statesmen and certainly not to be undervalued here. His administration has involved him in great labors, and exposed him to severe criticism. He has encountered opposition not only in the body of conservative statesmen whom he must confront, but some of the ablest men of his own party have refused to be led by him. His measures have met with resistance at every step, still he has borne himself well) he has never descended to a quarrel with his friends, he has treated his opponents with respect, he has defended the measures of the ministry with ability, and has at all times imparted a fine moral tone to his treatment of public questions. He entertains a profound respect for the institutions of our country and for our people, and he has expressed to me his sincere regard for the President as a statesman and his approval of the measures of the administration.

* * * * * * *

The senators hold their places for life, and would not be affected by a decree of dissolution. In that permanent body the great measure of the ministry was defeated.

The Chamber of Deputies, an elective body, is thoroughly liberal. It passed the electoral reform bill by an overwhelming majority; why, then, should the Chamber be dissolved, and the seats of the liberal members be imperiled? Would this punish a refractory conservative Senate? Would it strengten the position of the ministry’? Still, it is said in political circles that upon the reassembling of the Legislature, in April, an imperial decree of dissolution will be read.

It is supposed that an appeal to the country would result in such a decided liberal triumph that the ministry would be able to press the electoral reform bill upon the Chambers with increased advantages. They might claim to have not only the sanction of the Emperor, but a popular indorsement of the measure. It seems to me, however, more probable that when the session of the General Assembly is opened, in April, another effort will be made to pass an electoral reform bill in some shape. The bill which was rejected in the Senate may be so modified as to make it acceptable to the majority of that body.

In the event of failure, then a decree of dissolution would certainly follow. The ministry could then go before the country and gain time to strengthen their position. I still think that the liberal party will continue to hold power for some time to come. It must be borne in mind that the electoral reform bill owes its defeat not to conservatives alone; it was vigorously opposed by several leading liberal senators. There are other important measures of the ministry which I propose to examine in a future dispatch. The affairs of Brazil are unsettled and the condition of the country requires wise and comprehensive statesmanship. Its financial condition is improved. Its industrial state is far from satisfactory; the labor question is a difficult problem, and is at this time attracting the anxious attention of the Government.

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

No. 76. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hilliard. No. 76.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hilliard.

Department of State,
Washington, December 1, 1879. No. 89.]

Sir: With reference to possible inquiry being made of you concerning the effects of the recent decision of the Supreme Court declaring the unconstitutionality of the trade-mark act of July 8, 1870, I transmit herewith for your personal perusal and information a copy of that decision.* As you will perceive, the treaty-making aspect of the question is left untouched, but it may become a subject for future examination how far the declaratory clause of the recent trade-mark agreement between the United States and Brazil, which gives to the citizens of Brazil in the United States the same rights and privileges as American citizens, may in the absence of the “most favored nation” clause, confer upon them the special privileges of registry and civil suit guaranteed to foreigners, as such, by the operation of certain existing trade-mark conventions. You will be cautious not to commit this Government to the expression of any opinion on this point, should your views thereon be solicited.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

* See instruction No. 142, of Dec. 19, 1879, to Mr. Kasson, ante, page 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30].

No. 77. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. No. 77.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rio de Janeiro, January 23, 1880. (Received February 28.) No. 147.]

Sir: Before the recent close of the session of the General Assembly of Brazil, the budget presented by the minister of finance, Mr. Alfonso Celso, was discussed, and some new subjects of taxation were introduced. The wants of the treasury led to an increase of taxes, and it was thought proper to adopt some method for collecting a revenue from the prosperous companies engaged in transporting passengers over the lines of travel throughout the empire. The original plan was to tax the companies directly by requiring them to pay a small sum to the Government for each person transported over the lines. This plan, however, was not acceptable to some of the companies, as it would require them not only to increase their rates of travel, but would at the same time make them responsible for the collection of the tax, whether collected from the passengers or not.

When the bill was matured it provided that such passengers should pay a certain sum to the Government, and that the minister of finance, charged with the execution of the law, should come to an understanding with the managers of the several companies as to the method of collecting the tax.

The sum to be collected was what is known as a “vintem,” 20 reis—a small amount. But when notice was given that the law would go into effect on the 1st day of January, 1880, it produced a popular excitement in this city, which deepened every day. The law was so odious that it was denounced in some of the leading papers published here, and it was asserted that it would be impracticable to enforce it. It is estimated that within the limits of the capital 75,000 persons are transported daily over the several routes of travel by public conveyances, and the return travel being equal, made it clear that the new tax must be collected from 150,000 passengers daily.

The minister of finance called the managers of the several lines of conveyance within the city to meet in conference previous to January 1 and agree upon the best method of collecting the tax. Several meetings were held, and several plans were discussed. The manager of the Botanical Garden Railroad Company, an American enterprise, whose board of directors reside in New York, promptly proposed to pay the amount of the tax estimated to be due for the travel over its line, a sum not less than 120,000 milreis per annum (about $60,000 of our money), in monthly installments, in accordance with the terms of the law. But this offer was not acceptable to the minister of finance, as it would be impossible to induce the other companies to take the same step. The minister insisted that there must be uniformity in the method of collecting the tax, and he declined the offer of the manager of the Botanical Garden Railroad Company, which would have relieved its passengers from the payment of the tax, and at the same time insured to the government the payment of the amount due under the law. The minister issued his regulations, intended to be binding upon all the companies engaged in the transportation of passengers, and instructed the managers to demand and enforce the payment of the tax in every instance.

Not only was the law an injudicious one, imposing a tax upon every person who for business or pleasure took a place in the lines of travel, but the method of collecting the tax was irritating. Instead of taxing the companies upon their receipts, the law imposed a tax upon each passenger who paid his fare in a public conveyance, thus levying a tax not upon income but on expenditure.

Public meetings were held, addresses were delivered by popular citizens, remonstrances were made against the measure; so that, when the 1st of January came, the public feeling was strongly excited against the tax and the proposed method for its collection. To increase the difficulty, the 1st of January is recognized here as a holiday, and the streets were filled with people. As it had been anticipated that resistance would be made to the enforcement of the law, a body of troops was called out by the government to preserve order. The city police, aided by a small body of cavalry and One or two companies of infantry, took position at certain points where the tramways of the city had their stations, and where crowds of people were gathered.

The people were inflamed by speeches delivered in some of the neighboring squares, and some acts of violence occurred. The lines of several of the tramway companies were obstructed; the animals were detached and the cars were broken. A scene of great confusion followed, and the troops present to preserve order found themselves engaged in a conflict with the people. An order was given to disperse the crowds in the streets, and the troops fired upon the people. Some three or four persons were killed and a number were wounded. The excitement increased; attempts were made by the people to break open shops where arms were kept for sale, and the military attacked them and finally dispersed them.

The next day the scenes of violence were renewed, but the people, unable to obtain arms, were controlled by the military. Meanwhile the greatest indignation prevailed among the people. Some of the political leaders, men of both parties, met and discussed affairs. The public journals presented daily communications upon the subject. Appeals were made to the Emperor, and a large body of the people, estimated at some 4,000, proceeded to the imperial palace at San Christovão to represent their grievances to His Majesty. They were repelled at the gates of the palace by the guard on duty, and returned peaceably to the city. The manager of the Botanical Garden Railroad instructed the conductors on his line to ask for the vintem required by law, but in no case to use force to collect it. The minister of finance wrote to the manager repeatedly upon the subject, insisting that the collection of the tax must be enforced. The manager replied that he was endeavoring to collect the tax, and that if any persons failed to pay it he would make up the sum to the government; that nothing should be lost by his method, and that the books of the company would show daily an accurate statement of the number of passengers transported over the Botanical Garden Railroad line. The result was that no obstruction was offered to the service on that line’; and it was understood that the tax was generally paid by its passengers, though some declined to do so. The president of one of the important tramway lines fled from the city to escape the popular feeling against him. There was a rumor that the enforcement of the law would be suspended, but no decree to that effect has been issued.

Public feeling has become calm and tranquillity is restored. It is understood that the Emperor was much disturbed by the scenes of violence in the capital. But he bore himself well, and displayed the wisdom which has heretofore characterized him. He drove through the streets of the city as usual, and made no public demonstration of his feeling in regard to the disturbances.

It is supposed by some who profess to be acquainted with political affairs here that there will be a change in the ministry at an early day. To make an immediate change would be construed into a concession to the demands of the people expressed in acts of violence. Of course this is not to be expected from a sovereign so wise and self possessed as the Emperor of Brazil. It is probable that there will be a recasting of the ministry, but to what extent it is not easy to conjecture.

This is the second time during my residence here that I have seen the military called out to preserve order in the streets of the capital. There is a large population, the freedom of speech and of the press is rarely interfered with, and there is a growing influence of the people over the government. I think the people are well disposed and easily governed.

The Emperor is a man of large views and of line temper. Among the rulers of the world to-day, I do not know one who combines more of the qualities which constitute a good sovereign. He is a statesman, he has visited other countries, he is a man of generous nature, he desires to promote the happiness of his people, and he comprehends the embarrassments that surround his government. He said to me in conversation some time since that the trouble with Brazil was a want of productive industry on the part of the people; they expected too much from the government, and looked to it for succor instead of sustaining it by their energy. He said, too, that, the financial condition of the country was unsatisfactory. He spoke without reserve, and I was impressed with his statesmanlike views.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

No. 78. Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts. No. 78.
Mr. Hilliard to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, April 3, 1880. (Received May 1.) No. 156.]

Sir: The ministry of January 5, as it is styled here, of which Consilheiro de Sinimbu was chief, resigned the seals of office on the 6th of March last. The event was unexpected. Several causes contributed to produce the important result. As I have heretofore informed you, the failure of the electoral reform bill in the Senate was regarded by Mr. de Sinimbu, president of the council and chief of the ministry, as a disaster. It was the great measure of the administration. The Emperor, acting upon the advice of Mr. de Sinimbu, immediately adjourned the session of the General Assembly. It was believed there would be a dissolution of the chamber, but the Emperor took time to consider.

The electoral reform bill had passed the Chamber of Deputies by a large majority. It did not seem logical, therefore, that the chamber should be dissolved because of the failure of the Senate to concur in its action. The Senate is a permanent body, and the dissolution of the chamber could not effect any change in its composition. Still the measure was insisted upon by Mr. de Sinimbu, and it was understood that the Emperor had yielded to his counsel. The same question was subsequently considered in the council of state, and a majority of that body advised against dissolution.

The Emperor, in view of the situation, resolved to act upon his own judgment. At a meeting of the cabinet on the 6th of March, he announced his purpose to decline to issue a decree for the dissolution of the chamber. Thereupon the ministers tendered their resignation, and the Emperor consented promptly that they should surrender their portfolios. His Majesty then invited Consilheiro José Antonio Saraiva, a leader of the liberal party in Bahia, to organize a new ministry; who, after taking some time to consider the situation, consented to undertake the task.

It was announced on Sunday morning, March 28, that the new ministry had been formed.

Consilheiro José Antonio Saraiva, president of the council, takes the department of finance, for the reason that the question of finance is today of great and vital importance in Brazil. He is a senator from the province of Bahia, and is now minister for the third time. He is generally esteemed as an upright man, a politician of broad views, moderate, and patriotic. Married, but childless, he receives from his fazenda, a country estate, near the Bahia Railway, an ample income. His habits are moderate and simple. He is an enemy of ostentation, and even of ceremony, which has made him reluctant to leave his domestic life. He began his career while very young, having been brought forward by influential relatives of the conservative party. He was deputy and president of the province under conservative régime, but conducted himself with such circumspection that he won the esteem of the liberals. When he observed the condition of the country, and saw that the conservative party did not interpret the constitution in accordance with his views, seeking to retard progress, he frankly announced his purpose to act with the liberals, and has been ever since one of the most faithful, devoted, and patriotic chiefs of that party, which today holds him in high esteem.

He was formerly minister plenipotentiary to the Argentine Republic and to Uruguay, when the empire joined with the colorados under General Flores, for the purpose of putting an end to the tyrannies of the blancos in Montevideo. Together with Mr. Thornton he endeavored to prevent bloodshed, although unsuccessfully.

On his return from this mission he became minister of foreign affairs and approved the triple-alliance treaty against Paraguay, negotiating through his successor, Consilheiro Octaviano, his intimate friend and co-laborer, who, like Mr. Saraiva, has always refused to form a part of the council of state, for the reason that they both believed this institution to be unconstitutional.

Mr. Saraiva is an animated, but not always correct, speaker; he has great natural talent, and, above all, a frankness in giving expression to his views, which often carries him further than the policy of his party would require. But while he is faithful to his party and to its liberal ideas, he never forsakes his reason or his morality to treat of measures or expedients which lie considers unworthy. His electoral-reform plan is more in accord with the views of the liberal chiefs of the southern provinces than that of Mr. de Sinimbu. He does not ask for reform of the constitution, because he believes that direct election can be arrived at by ordinary law, since the actual right of Brazilians, who may be electors according to the constitution, is not restricted. Instead of making a list of eligible persons, from which the people may choose the electors, he declares all persons electors whom the people may elect.

This project puts an end to great abuses on the part of the preponderating classes and the official element. It is already undergoing consideration by the Emperor. It is understood that when the Emperor invited Consilheiro Saraiva to form the new cabinet he committed himself to the approval of any project submitted by him.

The minister of foreign affairs, Dr. Pedro Luiz Percina de Souza, is a deputy from Rio de Janeiro. A young man of great talent, of literary culture, a poet in sympathy with the country, possessing a good estate in a rural district, he entered public life as soon as he graduated at the Sao Paulo law school. His early success was due to the powerful protection given him by the liberal chief of Rio de Janeiro, Senator Octa-viano, whoni the new ministry thus far consider its principal friend and support. His appointment to the important post of foreign affairs is regarded as a courtesy shown by Mr. Saraiva to his friend Mr. Octa-viano.

The new minister has traveled, speaks French and Italian, and understands English, but is not accustomed to speak it.

The minister of justice, Consilheiro and Senator Dantas, is next after Mr. Saraiva the most important and popular chief of the liberal party of Bahia. He was once minister of public works in the ministry of the late Mr. Zacarias, an eminent leader of the liberal party during the Paraguayan war. He is a fluent orator, studious and upright in his life.

The minister of empire (interior), Baron Homun de Mello, is a deputy for São Paulo. He was a short while ago president of the province of Bahia. He is an intimate and devoted friend of Mr. Saraiva, who required in the ministry a man capable of resisting any extravagant ideas on the part of his colleagues.

The minister of agriculture, commerce, and public works, Deputy Buarque de Macedo, is an engineer, and was director of the section of public works in the department of which he is now chief. He is a prominent man in his branch, and was formerly fiscal of the Pernambuco Railway. He has had charge of other commissions of importance. During the last session of the Chamber of Deputies he became noted for the talent with which he defended the financial measures made necessary by the bad circumstances of the country.

* * * * * * *

For the present, the names of significance are those of Mr. Saraiva, on account of his reputation for sincerity and patriotism, and of the minister of foreign affairs, on account of his talents and of his important friends from the south who support him.

The southern parliamentarian, Martinho Campos, was invited by Mr. Saraiva to become a minister, but refused, promising, however, all his support. He is a friend of the minister of foreign affairs. It seems that in his place will be presented the name of the deputy for Minas, Lima Duarte, who is not a liberal leader, but he is an important planter, highly esteemed for his loyalty to the support of his party. Should he accept, he will be minister of marine.

The war department will probably be occupied by (General) the visconde de Pelotas, who enjoys great prestige for having been the one who fought the last battle of the Cordilheiras in Paraguay, or rather of having skillfully organized the pursuit of Lopez until he was killed. The visconde has been presented by his province in a triple list for senator. The Emperor will choose him first, that he may afterwards be called to the ministry, for it is understood that upon the death of the Marquez de Herval he declared he would not accept a place as minister, as it was dependent upon the popular vote, and on the imperial choice for senator.

In case the visconde refuses, it is probable that Senator Paranagua, an intimate friend of Mr. Saraiva, will resume the duties of the war department.

Such is the composition of the new ministry. It brings to the service of the empire much ability and influence, but it must at once undertake difficult tasks.

I have the honor to be, &c.,

HENRY W. HILLIARD.

No. 79. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 79.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio de Janeiro, June 5, 1880. (Received July 51.) No. 166.]

Sir: I see by the newspapers lately received from the United States that the withdrawal of the line of steamships now performing a regular service between New York and Brazil is contemplated; and, in view of the disastrous effect on our trade and commerce that such a step would have, it seems to me proper to invite special attention to the matter. Our foreign trade is neither a personal nor sectional question; it is a cardinal factor in the welfare and prosperity of our whole country, and it is for the government, in my humble judgment, to foster and protect it. If, in order to promote our export interest in South America, it be found necessary to give pecuniary aid to maintain regular direct steamship service, the aid should not be withheld. That a regular service between the United States and Brazil is essential in the interests of our export trade, no one can question. That a regular service cannot be self-supporting for some years is a fact known to all who are familiar with the sharp, keen opposition it must encounter from rival lines, whose sole aim is to force a regular service to retire in order that they may enjoy the benefits of high rates and an exclusive monopoly of the freights.

Our merchant marine should augment more rapidly, and our flag more frequently be seen in this quarter of the globe. Our shipping interest should be fostered, and everything possible done to promote its growth.

John Quincy Adams regarded commerce and navigation as the true “means of communication with the rest of the human family,” and the tremendous impetus given to our exports during the past three years, and the great part they have played in the accomplishment and maintenance of the resumption of specie payment, are practical evidences of the truth of the statement made over half a century ago.

The trade of Brazil is of much value to our country, and every effort should be made to obtain it; and it is greatly to be desired that a regular service between the two countries be maintained, that our exporters may not be at a disadvantage in competing for the trade. If rapid freight facilities be permanent, I venture to say that our export trade in this quarter will increase 100 per cent, in ten years.

I have, &c.,

JOHN C. WHITE.

No. 80. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 80.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Rio Janeiro, July 24, 1880. (Received August 28.) No. 168.]

Sir: The minister of agriculture has recommended to the chamber of deputies that the imperial government grant 100,000 milreis ($50,000) per annum to a line of steamships performing a regular service between Canada, the United States, and the ports of Pernambuco, Maranhão, Bahia, and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It appears that Canada has voted a subsidy of £10,000 in the interest of such a service.

You have already been informed of the action of the chambers in regard to the Roach line of steamships, so called. They insisted on the steamers calling at Maranhão, which steamships of the tonnage employed cannot do.

The minister of agriculture has refused to longer meet the requirements of the original contract, and refuses to pay the subsidy until the two chambers shall have again passed upon the contract as originally drawn, and have given a favorable decision. He makes no recommendation in favor of the original contract, but in the case of the projected Canadian line he not only recommends the subsidy but also includes the amount in his budget.

* * * * * * *

I am inclined to believe that, notwithstanding his silence, the original contract will now be approved by the two chambers.

* * * * * * *

I have the honor to be, &c.,

JOHN C. WHITE.

No. 81. Mr. Devens to Mr. Hilliard. No. 81.
Mr. Devens to Mr. Hilliard.

Department of State,
Washington, August 21, 1880. No. 114.]

Sir: Referring to instruction No. 111 of the 4th instant touching correspondence between the minister of France in Washington and this Department, relative to the application to the Emperor of Brazil to name a third commissioner under the American-French convention of January 15, 1880, I have to state that on the 9th instant a telegram was received from Mr. Outrey which reads as follows: My government adheres to the combination suggested in your letter of August 4. The telegram proposed by you will be forwarded next Thursday, the 12th of this month, to Mr. Noel at Rio. I will write to you to-morrow.

The minister’s note of the 10th instant was the same in substance as the telegram above quoted.

On the 11th instant you were telegraphed as follows: The claims convention of January last between the United States and France having been ratified by these governments, and the ratifications exchanged on June 23d last, you will confer with the French minister in Brazil as to identic notes to be simultaneously presented, requesting that his majesty will name third commissioner to be ready to act with the other commissioners as early as possible. Am assured Mr. Noel will be similarly instructed.

In view of the possibility that you might not have reached Rio at that date, Mr. White was instructed by a telegraphic message of the 16th instant to act at once, as chargé, in carrying out the instruction of the 11th instant.

I am, &c.,

CHAS. DEVENS,
Acting Secretary.

No. 82. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 82.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rio de Janeiro, August 21, 1880. (Received October 2.) No. 175.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I have complied with the telegraphic instructions (see inclosures Nos. 1, 2, 3) in reference to the submitting of a note identic in form with one to be submitted by Mr. Noel, the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of France, requesting His Majesty the Emperor of Brazil to nominate, at his earliest pleasure, the third member of the commission to sit at Washington in accordance with the terms of the treaty recently ratified by the Governments of the United States of America and France.

I inclose a copy of my note to his excellency the minister of foreign affairs, which in terms corresponds with Mr. Noel’s note, which he presented at the same time that I presented mine.

We received from Baron de Cabo Frio, under secretary of state for foreign affairs, who received us in the absence of the minister of foreign affairs, the assurance that the subject of our two notes would receive immedate attention. When notified of His Majesty’s selection I shall cable the name to you.

I am of opinion that Baron de Arinos, minister to Brussels will be appointed.

I have, &c.,

JOHN C. WHITE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 175.—Telegram.]

Washington. [undated].

Hilliard, Minister, Rio de Janeiro:

The claims convention of January last between the United States and France having been ratified by these governments, and the ratifications exchanged on June 23 last, you will confer with French minister in Brazil as to identic notes, to be simultaneously presented, requesting that His Majesty will name third commissioner to be ready to act with the other commissioners as early as possible. Am assured Mr. Noel will be similarly instructed.

EVARTS, Secretary.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 175.—Telegram.]

Evarts, Secretary, Washington:

Cable concerning convention with France received. Foreign office made inquiry relating thereto. Hilliard expected September 1. Shall matter attend his arrival?

WHITE, Chargé.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 175.—Telegram.]

White, Chargé, Rio, Brazil:

Act at once as chargé

HAY, Acting Secretary.

[Inclosure 4 hi No. 175.]

Mr. White to Senhor de Souza.

Legation of the United States,
Rio de Janeiro, August 18, 1880.

Mr. Minister: A telegram from my government announces the ratification on the 23d of June last of the convention signed on the 15th of January, between the United States of America and France, for a mixed commission to be held at Washington, to consider the demands for indemnity made by citizens of the two countries, respecting injurious actions claimed to be accomplished under certain circumstances specified in the convention ratified.

According to the terms of the convention, the Government of the United States of America names one of the commissioners; the Government of France names one member; and His Majesty Dom Pedro II the third member.

His Majesty having responded favorably to the request made—to name the third member of the commission—my government charges me to solicit His Majesty to deign to make the nomination, and hopes that it will be his pleasure to make it as early as possible, as the meeting of the mixed commission must be held within six months after the exchange of the ratifications.

I have the honor, Mr. Minister, to request you to transmit to His Majesty the Emperor the wish I make, and to inform me of His Majesty’s decision at His Majesty’s earliest pleasure.

Accept, &c.

JOHN C. WHITE,
Chargé d’Affairs ad interim.

His Excellency Mr. Pedro Luis E. de Souza,
Minister and Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs.

No. 83. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 83.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rio de Janeiro, August 26, 1880. (Received October 2.) No. 176.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of the note received from his excellency, Mr. Pedro Luis P. de Souza, minister and secretary of state for foreign affairs; also a translated copy of same, in reply to my note of the 18th instant, respecting the appointment by His Majesty the Emperor, of the third commissioner of the commission, to sit at Washington under the treaty between the United States of America and France, recently ratified, and ratifications exchanged by both countries. Believing it to be of importance that you should have early information of the decision of his majesty, who has selected his envoy at Brussels, Baron de Arinos, I this day sent you the following cablegram: Evarts, Secretary, Washington:

‘Baron Arinos, minister to Brussels, third commissioner, to arrive at Washington, October.

WHITE, Chargé.

I have, &.,

JOHN C. WHITE,

[Inclosure in No. 176.—Translation.]

Senhor de Souza to Mr. White.

Pceeicn Office, Rio de Janeiro,
August 26, 1880.

Mr. John C. White, chargé d’affaires ad interim of the United States of America, was pleased to communicate to me by his note of the 18th instant that on the 23d of June there were exchanged, the ratifications of the convention concluded on the 15th of January between France and those states for the judgment, by means of a mixed commission, according to the conditions established by the conventions, of the claims arising from losses suffered by citizens of the two countries.

The commission being composed of three members, and one of them having to be nominated by the Emperor, who has already accepted the charge, Mr. Chargé d’Affaires asks at the same time that this nomination be made with promptitude in order that the commission may be able to meet in Washington at the time stipulated.

In response it behooves me to communicate to Mr. Chargé d’Affaires that the choice of his majesty has fallen on Baron de Arinos, his envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary in Brussels, and that this gentleman will be at Washington in the month of October.

I avail myself, &c.,

PEDKO LUIS P. De SOUZA.

Correspondence with the Brazilian Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the Brazilian Legation in Washington.

[84] . Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States, New York, June 12, 1879.

[85] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros.

Department of State, Washington, June 20, 1879.

[86] . Mr. Torreão de Barros to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States, New York, December 12, 1879.

[87] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros.

Department of State, Washington, January 8, 1880.

[88] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros.

Department of State, Washington, January 30, 1880.

[89] . Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil, Washington, May 18, 1880.

[90] . Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil, Washington, May 20, 1880.

[91] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges.

Department of State, Washington, May 20, 1880.

[92] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges.

Department of State, Washington, June 15, 1880.

[93] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Borges.

Department of State, Washington, June 17, 1880.

[94] . Mr. Say to Mr. Borges.

Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1880.

[95] . Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil, Washington, August 2, 1880.

No. 84. Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts. No. 84.
Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States,
New York, June 12, 1879.

Mr. Secretary of State: I had the honor duly to receive the note which your excellency did me the honor to address to me on the 3rd of March last, inclosing a letter addressed to your excellency by the chairman of the Judiciary Committee of the Senate in reference to a law for the punishment of the crime of counterfeiting the paper currency of foreign governments in the United States.

Your excellency’s note having been laid before the imperial government, the latter was gratified to learn that the Department of State had thus complied with the request of this legation, and it hopes that the matter will again be brought before Congress at its next session, as is indicated in the aforesaid note of the chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee.

I avail myself of this occasion to reiterate to your excellency the assurance of my highest esteem and consideration.

A. P. de CAEVALHO BORGES.

His Excellency W. M. Evarts,
Secretary of State of the United States, &c., &c., &c.

No. 85. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros. No. 85.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros.

Department of State,
Washington, June 20, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Borges’ note of the 12th instant, expressing the hope that the subject of the provision by United States law for punishing the crime of counterfeiting the paper currency of foreign governments may be brought to the attention of Congress at its next sesssion, and to say, in reply, that I shall have the honor to again address the chairman of the Committee on the Judiciary with reference to the matter.

Accept sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 86. Mr. Torreão de Barros to Mr. Evarts. No. 86.
Mr. Torreão de Barros to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil in the United States,
New York, December 12, 1879.

Mr. Secretary of State: The Federal Congress being now in session, I have the honor to remind your excellency of the promise contained in your note of the 20th of June last, with regard to the punishment of the crime of counterfeiting the paper money of foreign governments.

This legation having brought the aforesaid note to the notice of the imperial government, the latter, although it considers the measure as proposed to Congress of great importance, thinks that it does not meet the requirements of the case, inasmuch as the counterfeiting of notes authorized by foreign governments should be provided for in the law.

The government of His Majesty the Emperor would be glad to see the repressive measures made more ample, and the law governing the matter made to extend to the protection of bonds issued by foreign governments. A law embracing, for instance, the counterfeiting of treasury notes, government securities, bank notes, and similar representatives of value, together with the coinage of money and other frauds against foreign governments, or banking or commercial associations authorized by such governments, would supply the deficiency in the laws relative to bonds and notes issued by foreign governments. Printers and engravers should not be able to allege their ignorance of the law, and should not be permitted to execute orders without the previous authorization of the foreign legation or consulates established in these states.

The detect now existing in the laws on this subject would thus be supplied.

I have the honor to renew, &c.,

B. F. TORREÃO de BARROS.

To His Excellency W. M. Evarts,
Secretary of State of the United States, &c., &c., &c.

No. 87. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros. No. 87.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros.

Department of State,
Washington, January 8, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 12th ultimo, in regard to the punishment of the crime of counterfeiting the paper money of foreign governments, &c.

In reply I beg to observe that according to the promise contained in my note of June 20 last, on the subject to which you refer, the chairman of the Senate Committee on the Judiciary was addressed in reference to the matter on the 1st ultimo, and has to-day been furnished with a copy of your above note.

Accept, &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

Mr. B. F. Torreão de Barros, &c., &c., &c.

No. 88. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros. No. 88.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Torreão de Barros.

Department of State,
Washington, January 30, 1880.

Sir: It is with much pleasure that I inform you hereby, with reference to your recent announcement of the intention of the Emperor to send an embassy to China to enter into certain treaties of amity and commerce with the government of that country, that the President sincerely sympathizes with the desire of the Emperor to extend and confirm his friendly relations with that government, and will give orders that the representative of the United States in China shall extend to the Brazilian representative in that country the friendly welcome and the moral support which is naturally to be expected from the intimate relations so happily existing between the United States and Brazil.

I profit by this occasion, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Mr. B. E. Torreão de Barros, &c., &c., &c.

No. 89. Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts. No. 89.
Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil,
Washington, May 18, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: I am informed that the Brazilian vessel Foster, having recently arrived at New York with a cargo of merchandise, the custom-house of that city required her to pay fifty cents per ton in addition to the amount called for by the general tariff, this being-due, according to the statement of the custom-house, owing to the expiration of the treaty between Brazil and the United States.

The consignees of the vessel paid this additional charge under protest, the fact being that, although the stipulations of the treaty of 1827 (1828?) relative to commerce long since ceased to have binding force, Brazilian vessels have always been considered in the United States as being exempt from that additional charge, and the same has been the case in Brazil with regard to vessels of the United States.

As this new measure is at variance with a time-honored custom, and is detrimental to the interests of Brazil, it is my duty to bring it to the knowledge of the imperial government; before doing so, however, I desire to call your excellency’s attention to it, because, if this regulation were also adopted in the empire, it would be still more prejudicial to the interests of the United States, inasmuch as the number of United States vessels entering Brazilian ports is very considerable, while but few Brazilian vessels enter the ports of the United States $ such a measure, moreover, cannot certainly be favorable to the development and extension of commercial relations between Brazil and the United States which are so much desired by the people of both countries as well as their respective governments.

I avail myself of this occasion to reiterate to your excellency the assurances of my highest consideration.

A. P. de CARVALHO BORGES.

No. 90. Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts. No. 90.
Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil,
Washington, May 20, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: The imperial government has instructed me to convey its thanks to your excellency for your kind compliance with its request relative to the moral support of the United States for the mission sent by His Majesty the Emperor to the Chinese Empire, and also for the promise made by your excellency in your note of the 30th of January last, that the representative of the United States in China should be instructed accordingly.

I take great pleasure in obeying the instructions of my government and in reiterating to your excellency the expressions of my highest consideration.

A. P. de CARVALHO BORGES.

To His Excellency William M. Evarts,
Secretary of State of the United States, &c., &c., &c.

No. 91. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges. No. 91.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges.

Department of State,
Washington, May 20, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 18thinstant, in relation to an extra charge of 50 cents per ton, recently exacted from the Brazilian vessel Foster at the New York custom-house.

In reply I have to observe that I share your view that it would be a subject of great regret were the commerce of the two countries to suffer in any wise from the absence of treaty provisions or legislation to prevent such charges. I have accordingly communicated with the Secretary of the Treasury, apprising him of the purport of your note and inquiring as to the circumstances referred to, and I shall avail myself of the earliest opportunity to inform you of the result of my inquiry.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Councillor A. P. de Carvalho Borges, &c., &c., &c.

No. 92. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges. No. 92.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Borges.

Department of State,
Washington, June 15, 1880.

Sir: Referring to your note of the 18th ultimo, in relation to the additional charge of 50 cents per ton required at New York of the Brazilian vessel Foster, I have the honor to state that, as I find by a reference of the matter to the Treasury Department, the Secretary of the Treasury inclines to the opinion that as regards the tax or duty referred to the vessels of Brazil are entitled to exemption therefrom under the proclamation of the President of November 4, 1847 (9 Statutes at Large, p. 1001). I have examined this proclamation, and, so far as I now perceive, its terms have the effect to make Brazilian vessels exempt from the additional duties levied on the Foster as referred to in your note, and I have so informed the Secretary of the Treasury. It is of course understood that a similar exemption is still extended to vessels of the United States in the ports of Brazil. Under the circumstances it is presumed that, on the presentation of a proper claim to the Treasury Department, setting forth the grounds upon which the exemption is claimed, the additional duties paid by the Foster will be remitted.

Accept, &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

Councillor A. P. de Carvalho Borges, &c., &c., &c.

No. 93. Mr. Hay to Mr. Borges. No. 93.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Borges.

Department of State,
Washington, June 17, 1880.

Sir: With regard to your personal request of yesterday, I have the honor to inclose herein a copy of the proclamation of President Polk, referred to in the note addressed to you on the 15th instant.

Accept, sir, &c.

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

Councillor A. P. de Carvalho Borges, &c., &c., &c.

By the President of the United States of America.

a proclamation.

Whereas, by an act of the Congress of the United States of the twenty-fourth of May, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-eight, entitled “An act in addition to an act entitled ‘An act concerning discriminating duties of tonnage and impost, and to equalize the duties on Prussian vessels and and their cargoes,’” it is provided, that upon satisfactory evidence being given to the President of the United States, by the government of any foreign nation, that no discriminating duties of tonnage or impost are imposed or levied in the ports of the said nation upon vessels wholly belonging to-citizens of the United States, or upon the produce, manufactures, or merchandise imported in the same from the United States, or from any foreign country, the President is thereby authorized to issue his proclamation, declaring that the foreign discriminating duties of tonnage and impost within the United States are, and shall be, suspended and discontinued, so far as respects the vessels of the said foreign nation, and the produce, manufactures, or merchandise imported into the United States in the same from the said foreign nation, or from any other foreign country, the said suspension to take effect from the time of such notification being given to the President of the United States, and to continue so long as the reciprocal exemption of vessels belonging to citizens of the United States, and their cargoes, as aforesaid, shall be continued and no longer:

And whereas satisfactory evidence has lately been received by me, from his Majesty the Emperor of Brazil, through an official communication of Mr. Felippe José Pereira Leal, his chargé d’affaires, in the United States, under date of the 25th of October, 1847, that no other or higher duties of tonnage and impost are imposed or levied in the ports of Brazil upon vessels wholly belonging to citizens of the United States, and upon the produce, manufactures, or merchandise imported in the same from the United States, and from any foreign country whatever, than are levied on Brazilian ships and their cargoes in the same ports under like circumstances:

Now, therefore, I, James K. Polk, President of the United States of America, do hereby declare and proclaim, that, so much of the several acts imposing discriminating duties of tonnage and impost within the United States are, and shall be, suspended and discontinued so far as respects the vessels of Brazil, and the produce, manufactures, and merchandise imported into the United States in the same, from Brazil and from any other foreign country whatever, the said suspension to take effect from the day above mentioned, and to continue thenceforward so long as the reciprocal exemption of the vessels of the United States, and the produce, manufactures, and merchandise imported into Brazil in the same as aforesaid, shall be continued on the part of the government of Brazil.

Given under my hand, at the city of Washington, this fourth day of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and forty-seven, and the seventy-second of the Independence of the United States.
JAMES K. POLK.

By the President.
James Buchanan,
Secretary of State.

No. 94. Mr. Say to Mr. Borges. No. 94.
Mr. Say to Mr. Borges.

Department of State,
Washington, June 18, 1880.

Sir: Referring to the previous correspondence in the case of the Foster, I have the honor to state that according to a letter of the 16th instant from the Treasury, that Department has taken the proper steps for the refunding of the excess of tonnage tax paid by the vessel referred to, and will issue instructions as regards the exaction of tonnage tax in the future on the vessels of Brazil. The Department will transmit to your address one or more copies of any circular on the subject which may be received from the Treasury.

Accept sir, &c.

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary..

Councillor A. P. de Carvalho Borges, &c., &c., &c.

No. 95. Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts. No. 95.
Mr. Borges to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Brazil,
Washington, August 2, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the notes which your excellency addressed to me On the 26th May, the 15th and 18th June, and the 24th July, all relating to mine of the 18th May, wherein I called your excellency’s attention to the additional duty of 50 cents laid by the custom-house at New York upon the Brazilian vessel Foster. By them I am informed that Brazilian vessels will continue to be exempt, as hitherto, from this additional duty in view of the proclamation of President Polk of the 4th November, 1847, the Empire proceeding in like manner with respect to the vessels of the United States.

I am also thereby made aware that the Department of the Treasury has ordered the restitution of the payment of the additional duty of the Foster, and I gratefully thank your excellency for the five copies of the decision, No. 4576, by which that department has instructed the customhouse at New York for the exemption of the additional duty for Brazilian vessels.

I have given information of all this to the imperial government, and I improve this occasion to reiterate to your excellency the assurances of my highest esteem and consideration.

A. P. DE CARYALHO BOEGES.

Central AmericaCentral America

[96] . Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America, Guatemala City, August 28, 1879. (Received September 17.)

[97] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan.

Department of State, Washington, September 19, 1879.

[98] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Logan.

Department of State, Washington, October 7, 1879.

[99] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan.

Department of State, Washington, November 3, 1879.

[100] . Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America, Guatemala City, December 6, 1879. (Received January 7, 1880.)

[101] . Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America, Guatemala, December 20, 1879. (Received January 22, 1880.)

[102] . Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States In Central America, San Salvador, March 5, 1880. (Received April 10.)

[103] . Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America, Guatemala City, May 7, 1880. (Received June 7.)

[104] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan.

Department of State, Washington, June 8, 1880.

[105] . Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America, Guatemala City, June 30, 1880. (Received July 29.)

[106] . Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America, Guatemala City, July 17, 1880. (Received August 21.)

No. 96. Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts. No. 96.
Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America,
Guatemala City, August 28, 1879. (Received September 17.) No. 24.]

Sir: Before the closing of the mail, I have time only to invite your attention to the inclosed note, just received, from the Government of Honduras. No. 1 is a copy of the original note, and No. 2 a translation thereof.

The note explains itself, and furnishes, perhaps, additional suggestiveness to the remarks upon the subject of expatriation in my despatch No. 22. Two chief inquiries present themselves to me in connection with it: first, whether our government should permit the recognition of Mr. Burchard to rest upon the basis given it by the minister—that of an exceptional courtesy, necessitating a return of the courtesy when it might not be convenient or proper to extend it; and second, what the consequences of a disputed nationality might be to Mr. Burchard personally, or to his heirs at a future period?

I shall be glad to receive an expression of opinion from you upon the subject.

I have, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 24.—Translation.]

Mr. Rosa to Mr. Logan.

Office of the Minister of Foreign Relations,
Republic of Honduras,
Tegucigalpa, July 28, 1879.

Sir: I have had the honor to receive the esteemed note of your excellency dated the 2d of June last, conveying information of the nomination which your excellency’s government has made in favor of William C. Burchard, accrediting him with the character of consul of the United States of America at the ports of Truxillo and Omoa in this republic.

Although my government has adopted the principle of not recognizing in the diplomatic or consular service of a foreign nation any citizen of Honduras, and Mr. Burchard must be so considered, since he has resided many years in the country and has discharged important functions requiring as a positive condition, the quality of citizenship, yet in view of the friendly relations which hind this government with that of the United States, and the good qualities which distinguish Mr. Burchard, he will be recognized in the consular capacity with which he has been invested, although against the rule which my government has adopted.

As soon as Mr. Burchard presents to the office under my charge the commission which accredits him as consul, the exequatur will be granted enabling him to enter upon the discharge of his duties.

With assurances of especial appreciation, I subscribe myself your excellency’s obedient servant,

RAMON ROSA.

Hon. Cornelius A. Logan, &c., &c., &c.

No. 97. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan. No. 97.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan.

Department of State,
Washington, September 19, 1879. No. 22.]

Sir: You dispatch No. 24 of the 28th ultimo has been received. It is accompanied by a copy of a note of the 28th of July, addressed to you by the minister for foreign affairs of Honduras, in answer to yours requesting the recognition of Mr. William C. Burchard as consul of the United States at Truxillo and Omoa. Although the request was complied with, this was with hesitation, because Mr. Burchard was regarded as a citizen of Honduras, and it is contrary to the policy of that government to recognize any of its citizens as consul of a foreign government. Mr. Bam on Bosa claims that Mr. Burchard may be regarded as a citizen of that republic from his long residence there, and from his having discharged functions with which no one but a citizen of Honduras could be intrusted.

If Mr. Burchard was regularly naturalized, pursuant to the laws of Honduras, the hesitation of the minister may have been well founded. If, however, the change of his nationality is supposed to have been occasioned by the length of his abode there, or even by his having held offices for which citizenship was required, the objection to his recognition could not be considered as tenable. Mr. Burchard continued to be a citizen of the United States, whose rights as such could not be denied upon his return hither, at least, no matter how long he might have staid abroad, provided he should not have formally relinquished his allegiance to the United States. If it was contrary to the law of Honduras to confer a public office on him, he being a foreigner, the authorities there would have been justified in refusing him any such honor, and his commission might have been canceled in the way which, it is presumed, the law provides. The mere acceptance of an office, however, can scarcely be said to have denationalized him.

This government objects to receiving a citizen of the United States as a diplomatic representative of a foreign power. Such citizens, however, are frequently recognized as consular officers of other nations, and this policy is not known to have hitherto occasioned any inconvenience.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS

No. 98. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Logan. No. 98.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Logan.

Department of State,
Washington, October 7, 1879. No. 24.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 22, of the 20th of August last,* in relation to the abuse of the claim to American protection abroad, and especially in the States of Central America, has been received and read with interest.

The evils to which you draw attention are only too familiar to this Department, through the almost unvarying experience of many years. The remedies, however, are not so easy to seek, and to make them effective a careful scheme of Congressional legislation would be needed. This is especially true of your suggestions with regard to expatriation. Congress, by resolution, has declared its understanding that the right of voluntary expatriation exists, but does not define it.

On general principles, a person expatriates himself by legally assuming the responsibilities of citizenship in a foreign land, and, per contra, the act of expatriation might be held not to be performed in the absence of an alien naturalization. Such is, in fact, the fundamental law concerning expatriation as established in certain foreign countries. Under these circumstances, a sweeping declaration of the penalty of expatriation because of continued residence of native Americans abroad would be, in the absence of competent legislation, impracticable.

The case of aliens naturalized here and returning to the land of their original allegiance is different, inasmuch as the laws of their native country may not expatriate them in the event of naturalization elsewhere, and therefore, by returning to their native land and assuming’ duties or performing acts there compatible with their original allegiance and as such incompatible with their American naturalization, they may be held to have absolved this government from the necessity to protect them.

Your announced intention to exercise the most careful scrutiny in such cases as come under your notice is approved.

The case of Maassen, which you cite, is a peculiar one. In virtue of the existing naturalization treaty with Germany, his appeal for German protection after naturalization in the United States was a manifest fraud, his American citizenship being guaranteed by that convention. He is presumably an American citizen. * * * If called upon to protect him in the exercise of his legal rights as an American citizen, you should satisfy yourself of his identity with the Anton Joseph Maassen naturalized in California in March, 1874. The certificate of naturalization you transmit is a certified copy of the original record, filled up and signed in the usual way by the clerk of the county court, and, as such, is sufficient evidence of the fact of naturalization, but not of identity.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

* Printed in Foreign Relations, 1879, page 143.

No. 99. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan. No. 99.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan.

Department of State,
Washington, November 3, 1879. No. 32.]

Sir: Information has been received from Mr. Burchard, the consul of the United States at Truxillo and Ruatan, that the American schooner Santos Oteri, Capt. Henry Pizzati, arrived at Utilla on the 3d ultimo, from New Orleans, with a cargo of merchandise; that the vessel was boarded by some of the local officers, who ordered the captain to leave the island immediately, as the port was closed by order of the governor; that the captain refused to obey the order on the ground that he had been regularly cleared for the port of Utilla, and that his papers were duly authenticated under the seal of the consul of Honduras in New Orleans; whereupon the officers threatened him with a fine, imprisonment, seizure of the vessel, &c., but finally allowed him to go to Ruatan in company with the commandante of the island; that upon the arrival of the captain he called on the governor and exhibited to him the manifest and other papers, and asked his permission to have the schooner discharged at Utilla, which, after some discussion upon the subject, was granted by the governor, with permission also for the vessel to receive a return cargo and clearance from the island.

Information has also since been received from Mr. Burchard that the American schooner Susan Scranton, which arrived at Bonaca about the same time, was not permitted to enter, but was ordered to leave the island immediately, notwithstanding her manifest and other papers were made out for that port and duly authenticated by the consul of Honduras in New Orleans; that the schooner did not go to Truxillo as was reported, but that her cargo was sold in Bonaca, and that her master, offered to pay the duties and port charges according to the new tariff, but there was no one authorized to receive the money, and consequently loaded his vessel with fruit and cocoanuts and sailed for New Orleans without a clearance; that the governor on showing him a communication from the commandante of Bonaca, giving a history of the case, and a list of the merchandise sold and landed from the vessel, intimated that on the return of the schooner he should demand not only the full amount of duties, but also the payment of a fine for violation of the revenue laws; that the commandante was told by him that the duties would probable be paid, but nothing more would be paid; and that in order to avoid a repetition of such irregular proceedings the Government of Honduras must reopen the ports of Bonaca and Utilla, or instruct the, consul of that government in New Orleans not to dispatch vessels foil those islands.

You will communicate the foregoing facts to the Government of Honduras, and ask an explanation concerning the action of the consul of Honduras at New Orleans in clearing vessels for ports reported to be closed. This government cannot admit that the closing of such ports by local authority should operate to involve shipmasters in fine or penalty for violation of the revenue laws of Honduras, unless due public notice were given through the consuls of that country in the United States as well , as through the usual diplomatic channel, and clearances for those ports duly, with held. Information is desired as to whether the ports adverted to are closed now or open.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 100. Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts. No. 100.
Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America,
Guatemala City, December 6, 1879. (Received January 7, 1880.) No. 44.]

Sir: As you are aware, President Barrios, of Guatemala, after his accession to power, and the failure to agree upon a constitution in place of the one which had been annulled, was regularly invested with the title and faculties of dictator. The time having arrived when the latter has concluded to give the people a constitutional government, an assembly created for the purpose has prepared and is now considering the draft of a constitution.

* * * * * * *

When finished and officially proclaimed, I shall take pleasure in sending you a copy. At present, I desire to offer for your consideration three articles which have especially claimed my own attention. I append these articles under the head of No. 1, and their translation under that of No. 2. For the purpose of convenient consideration, however, I shall include them also in the body of this dispatch.

Article 5 of the proposed constitution is as follows: Are native citizens— 1. All persons born or that may be born in the limits of the republic, whatever may be the nationality of the father, with the exception of the children of diplomatic agents.

2. The children of Guatemalteco father, or illegitimate children of Guatemalteca mother, born in foreign countries, from the moment that they reside in the republic; and even without this condition when, in conformity to the laws of the country where born, they have the right to elect their nationality.

The first of these paragraphs conflicts directly with the laws of the United States, which declare the children of American citizens to be Americans wherever born; and indirectly with the laws of other countries. Hoping to accomplish a modification of this, and subsequent articles, I convened a meeting of the representatives in Central America of France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, and Spain to consider a common ground upon which we could all stand in recommending a change. Your own representative presented the following amendment, which, being considered to cover the requirements of all the above-named countries, was unanimously adopted.

Amend article 5 by adding, at the end of the sentence, the following words: “And except the children of foreign parents, the laws of whose country declare the children to be citizens thereof; and except the children of parents, the laws of whose country peimit an option of nationality upon obtaining their majority; in which latter case the said children born in Guatemala shall be considered Guatemalans until they elect, at the age of 18 years, a different nationality.”

At the age of eighteen years enforced military service by every Guatemalteco is provided by law, and hence my desire to harmonize the laws of Guatemala in the interest of peace.

Article 14 of the constitution reads as follows: Neither Guatemaltecos nor foreigners shall be able in any case to make a claim for indemnity against the government by reason of damages and losses to their persons or goods through the acts of factions (facciones).

The word “faction,” in the Castilian, means an armed rebellion against the authority of a government; but it also has a lesser scope of signification, and fairly embraces any turbulent and riotous body, however small the number. Some of my colleagues could not indorse the principle adopted by our own government, which disavows liability for losses sustained in a rebellion of such magnitude as to be beyond the ready power of the government to suppress; but they all stood with me on the following form of amendment: Amend article 14 so it will read as follows: “No Guatemalteco shall he entitled to make a claim against the government for any indemnity whatever for damages and injuries which he may sustain in his property and person caused by “facciones,” nor shall any foreigner he considered entitled to make any such claim, except under the general laws of nations.”

Article 23 reads as follows: The inhabitants of the republic shall have alike the same free access to the tribunals of the country, in order to bring their suits in the forms prescribed by law.

Foreigners shall not have the right to resort to diplomatic assistance, except in cases of denial of justice, and a sentence which may not be favorable to the claimant shall not be considered a denial of justice.

I objected to the latter clause of this article for three reasons: 1, because there are many cases of dispute which do not involve a resort to the tribunals of justice, such as personal outrages by a government itself upon a foreigner, as well as questions of contract with a government, which latter cannot be taken into court, &c.; 2, because there is no end to the possibilities of construction which might be given the article, in cases involving a foreigner and his legal rights; 3, because the whole of the last portion of the provision is in conflict with the privileges guaranteed under the laws of nations. My colleagues all agreed in the recommendation to strike out the last clause relating to the restrictions upon foreigners.

Thus agreeing, I was requested to see President Barrios, who is all-directing in the matter, upon behalf of the diplomatic corps. After disclaiming, in the most distinct and courteous terms, any disposition to interfere with or dictate in the local affairs of Guatemala, I told the President that our action was directed toward avoiding possible complications in the future. I then proceeded to explain the changes in the articles above quoted which we believed it expedient to make. As to the fifth article, I gave the President a copy of our own law upon the subject, and proceeded to illustrate the possible complications which might arise, by instancing the case of a boy, born of American parents in Guatemala, who next year will reach the age of eighteen. “Under your laws,” I said, “that boy will be impressed into your army for service; he will appeal to his country for protection; what then must happen? Why, that one or the other government must, sooner or later, recede from its own laws. If ours were an isolated case, and your own provisions usual and recognized, it would be different; but here come many of the principal powers of the world, through their representatives, to bear testimony to the inexpediency of the proposed law.” The President told me that the law was so framed in order to prevent their own citizens from adopting a different nationality, as foreigners enjoy so many immunities in a country of forced loans, compulsory military service, &c., which the natives do not.

As to the other articles, I told the President frankly that it would be impossible to induce immigration and capital to seek a country whose laws were so doubtful in construction as to afford a foreigner few or no fixed rights.

The President was much impressed with what I said, and asked me to reduce the amendments or changes to writing, in order that he might send them to the assembly and recommend their passage. This I did. But, much to the surprise of myself and colleagues, the original articles were severally adopted by the assembly, without debate or a dissenting voice.

* * * * * * *

When the constitution has been adopted as a whole, and officially promulgated, if these obnoxious articles remain as they now are I shall officially notify the government that the United States, without regard to the laws of Guatemala, will in every case claim the rights for its citizens guaranteed by the laws of nations. In this notification I shall be joined by all the foreign representatives above named.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

addendum. * * * * * * *

It is a singular thing that the fifth article relating to natural citizenship, should have been copied from the Spanish constitution of 1812, by nearly all of the Spanish-American republics, without the subsequent modification which Spain was compelled to adopt. While the writer was representing our government in Chili, this same article was incorporated into the new constitution of that country, though he used his strongest efforts to prevent it. The history of the article is so well given in a French work issued during the present year, that I must ask your permission to make a few extracts therefrom; and in order that there may be no loss through translation, I give them in the original text. The work is upon the “Droit des Gens,” and is entitled “La Nationalité, au point de vue des rapports internationaux, par George Cogordan, docteur en droit attaché au ministère des affaires Mrangères, Paris, 1879.”

(Page 50.) La constitution du 30 Juin, 1876, qui régit aujourd’hui l’Espagne, porte dans son article ler la disposition suivante: Sont Espaguols: 1° ceux qui sont nés sur le territoire espagnol.

(Page 51.) L’article ler 1° de la constitution de 1876 a êté reproduit de toutes les constitutions qui se sont succédées en Espagne depuis celle de 1812, où il-figure pour la première fois. Insérée dans le projet de constitution sounds aux cortés de 1837, par le gouvernement de la Reine Régente, cette disposition attira l’attention du gouvernement Français qui avait eu l’occasion d’en reconnâitre plusieurs fois les inconvénients. Sur les représentations de l’ambassadeur du roi français, le ministère Calatrava se détermina, tout en gardant l’article, à faire aux córtès une déclaration de nature à en limiter la portée. Dans la séance du 11 Mai, 1837, M. Olózaga président de la commission chargée d’élaborer le projet, exposa solennellement l’interprétation à donner au texte constitutional:

“Quelques députés ont cru,” a-t-il dit, “et il paraît qu’on a cru aussi en dehors de cette enceinte, que concéder la qualité d’ espagnol aux étrangers nés fortuitement en Espagne était la même chose que leur imposer l’obligation d’être espagnols. Ceux qui parlent ainsi n’ont pas compris le laconisme et la précision avec lesquels il convient de rédiger des lois fondamentales comme celle-ci. On a pensé qu’il fallait ne placer dans la constitution que les principes essentiels du droit public, et laisser aux lois particulières le soin de les expliquer.” Et M. Olózaga continuait en déclarant que l’in-dividu né en Espagne de parents étrangers pourrait seulement choisir entre la nationalité de sa famille et celle que lui confére la constitution espagnole, qu’en tout cas, jamais cette dernière nationalité ne lui serait imposée.

(Page 52.) C’est done à vrai dire, dans cette singulière interprétation de la constitution, une simple oifre de nationalité espagnole qui est fait aux fils d’étranger. * * * Deux lois postérieures, venant à l’appui de la déclaration de 1837, ont établi dans la péninsule un régime à peu pres identique à celui de l’article 9 du code civil. Le texte constitutional n’a done plus qu’une signification tout à fait vague, et veut dire seulement que le droit d’être espagnol appartient rirtuellement à tout natif du territoire péninsulaire. Ces deux lois sont: 1° le decret du 17 Novembre, 1852, sur les étrangers, dont l’article ler 3° déclare étrangers les individus nés en Espagne de parents étrangers on meme de père étranger et de mère espagnole, s’ils n’ont pas reclamé la qual té de sujet espagcol, &c.

From these extracts it appears: First. That the law declaring all children born within the limits of a state to be subjects or citizens thereof first appeared in the constitution of Spain in 1812, and that it has been reproduced in all the constitutions of that country in succeeding years.

Second. That being reproduced in the draft of a constitution submitted to the Cortes in 1837, the provision attracted the attention of the French Government, which had felt its inconvenience upon several occasions. That upon the representations of the French ambassador, the Spanish Calatrava ministry determined to make a declaration to the Córtes limiting its scope, and that M. Olózaga, president of the commission charged with the draft, made an interpretation of the article at the session on the 11th of May, 1837.

Third. That the interpretation denies the position taken by many deputies, as well as outside persons, that to concede the quality of a Spanish subject to strangers born by accident in Spain, was the same thing as to impose upon them the obligation of being Spaniards; that it was only necessary to state essential principles in the constitution, leaving to particular laws the methods of construing them; that the individual born in Spain of foreign parents was free to choose between the nationality of his family and that which the Spanish Constitution conferred upon him, and that in no case would the last nationality be imposed upon him.

Fourth. That-this singular interpretation of the constitution is a simple offer of the Spanish nationality to the children of foreigners.

Fifth. That two later laws support the declaration of 1837, and have established in the Peninsula a usage nearly identical with that of the 9th article of the civil code. The constitutional text has a signification entirely vague, and simply gives the apparent right to be a Spaniard virtually to every native of the Peninsula. These two laws are: First, the decree of November 17th, 1852, concerning foreigners, of which the first article, third section, declares to be foreigners individuals born in Spain of foreign parents, or even of foreign father and Spanish mother, if they have not claimed the quality of Spanish subject, etc., etc.

Thus we see that while Spain, as the originator of the article, has receded from it, before a more intelligent public sentiment, her American offshoots still hover around the defunct body of a code which, even half a century since, was tottering with age and imbecility.

I have, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

[Inclosure in No. 44.]

Copy and translation of Articles 5, 14, and 23 of the proposed constitution for Guatemala.

Art. 5. Art. 5.

Son naturales: 1°. Todas las personas nacidas ó que nazcan en territorio de la República, cualquiera que sea la nacionalidad del padre, con escepcion de los hijos de los ajentes diplomáticos.

2°. Los hijos de padre guatemalteeo, ó hijos ilejítimos de madre guatemalteca nacidos en el extranjero, desde el momento en que residan en la República, y aun sin esta condicion, cuando conforme á las leyes del país del nacimiento tuvieren derecho á elejir nacionalidad y optaren por la guatamalteca.

Are native citizens: 1st. All persons horn, or that may be born in the limits of the Republic, whatever may be the nationality of the father, with the exception of the children of diplomatic agents.

2nd. The children of Guatemalteca father, or illegitimate children of Guatemalteca mother, born in foreign countries, from the moment that they reside in the republic; and even without this condition when, in conformity to the laws of the country where born, they have the right to elect their nationality and choose that of Guatemala.

Art. 14. Art. 14.

Ni los guatemaltecos ni los estranjeros podran en ningun caso, reclamar al Gobierno indemnizacion alguna por danos y perjnicios que á sus personas ó á sus bienes causaren las facciones. Neither Guatemaltecos nor foreigners shall be able in any case to make a claim for indemnity against the government by reason of damages and losses to their persons or goods through the acts of factions (facciones).

Art. 23. Art. 23.

Los babitantes de la República tienen asi mismo libre acceso ante los tribunales del país, para ejereitar sus acciones en la forma que prescriben las leyes.

Los estranjeros no podran oeurir á la via diplomatica, sino en los casos de denegacion de jnsticia. Para este efecto, no se entiende por denegacion de justicia, el que un fallo ejecutoriado no sea favorable al reclamante.

The inhabitants of the Republic shall, alike, have the same free access to the tribunals of the country, in order to bring their suits in the forms prescribed by law.

Foreigners shall not have the right to resort to diplomatic assistance (or methods) except in cases of denial of justice, and a sentence which may not be favorable to the claimant shall not be considered a denial of justice.

No. 101. Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts. No. 101.
Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America,
Guatemala, December 20, 1879. (Received January 22, 1880.) No. 45.]

Sir: Under cover of this dispatch I inclose a printed copy of the new constitution of Guatemala referred to in my dispatch No. 44. The articles discussed in that dispatch, numbered 5, 14, and 23, stand as previously reported. I also inclose a copy of the note addressed by myself to the minister of foreign relations in connection therewith.

A note, in similar terms, was also addressed to the minister by the representatives of Germany, France, Italy, Great Britain, and Spain. I also add a translated copy of the minister’s reply. I shall be glad to receive any instructions you may desire to give me.

I have, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 45.]

Mr. Logan to Señor Heirrera.

Legation or the United States in Central America,
Guatemala, December 19, 1879.

Sir: The undersigned has to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency’s note of the 17th instant, inclosing six copies of the constitution recently adopted by the National Constituent Assembly of Guatemala, and now officially promulgated as operative from the first day of March next.

Having carefully perused the printed copy, he has noticed certain articles of the constitution which seriously affect the plainest rights of his countrymen as well as his own faculties and prerogatives as a foreign representative. In view of the instructions of his government, he has therefore to declare that he will continue in the future as in the past to protect the person and interests of his countrymen, to cause their just rights to be respected, to sustain their proper claims, and to demand redress in all cases in which diplomatic intervention may be justified by the law of nations. With sentiments of respect, I have the honor to subscribe myself,

Yours, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

Hon. Manuel Herrera,
Minister in charge of the Department of Foreign Relations of Guatemala.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 45.—Translation.]

Señor Herrera to Mr. Logan.

Office of the Minister of Foreign Relations of Guatemala,
Guatemala, December 24, 1879.

Sir: I have had the honor to receive the polite communication which your excellency has been pleased to address me under date of the 19th instant, informing me that, having read attentively the constitution promulgated the 12th of the present month, you have found several of its articles affecting the faculties and prerogatives of yourself, as well as the rights of your countrymen, in consideration of which you think it proper to declare that in the future as in the past you will continue to defend the persons and interests of your countrymen, causing their rights to be respected, sustaining their just claims, and asking (pidiendo) justice in all cases in which diplomatic intervention may be justified by the law of nations.

In reply to your excellency as to the reservations which you have thought necessary to make respecting certain articles of the constitution, which your excellency has not specified in the note to which I have the honor to refer, I have to say that my Government has the intention to proceed, as always, to guard (guardar) the constitutional prescriptions in the cases which occur, in conformity with the general principles recognized by international law.

I am, &c.,

MANUEL HERRERA.

Hon. C. A. Logan, &c., &c., &c.

No. 102. Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts. No. 102.
Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States In Central America,
San Salvador, March 5, 1880. (Received April 10.) No. 63.]

Sir: Expecting by each mail to receive instructions relating to the proposed canal in Nicaragua, I have delayed a visit to the capitals of Central America, lest at a moment when I might be required I should be absent from the seat of my legation. Learning, however, of the impossibility of the arrrival of another mail for a whole month, owing to the irregularity of the Pacific Mail steamers, caused by a strike among the laborers at Panama, I thought the time an opportune one for a visit to Salvador.

I left Guatemala, therefore, on the 18th of last month and arrived safely, after a hard and tedious journey, at this capital. Sending the usual announcement of my arrival to the government, and soliciting a personal audience with the President, I received a notification that he would be pleased to receive me upon the 4th instant.

The ceremony of reception took place, accordingly, yesterday at 2 p.m. with much state and circumstance, all of the troops, bands, and civil officials taking part. The document marked No. 1 accompanying this dispatch is a copy of the remarks made by myself upon the occasion, and that marked No. 2, the response of President Zaldivar.

* * * * * * *

The expressions were of the most cordial character upon both sides, and I leave Salvador with the assurance that there is a better feeling toward us now than formerly; an assurance finding vent in the most unreserved declarations by the President and the various State officials.

I have, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 63.]

Copy of Mr. Logan’s remarks upon the occasion of his official reception by the President of Salvador.

Mr. President: Having had the honor to forward you by mail upon a prior date the autographic letter which accredits me as minister resident of the United States near your excellency’s government, I now embrace the earliest opportunity of presenting myself in person at your excellency’s capital. The cordial relations of amity and good will which so fortunately exist between our governments render it quite unnecessary that I should reiterate the well-understood desires of my own government to perpetuate and strengthen them, or that I should assure you that my mission will best be fulfilled by endeavoring to reflect those desires in the very highest degree.

The government of which I am the representative in Central America, while possessing the enlarged desire of enjoying the friendship of and witnessing universal peace and prosperity among all the nations, has a particular interest in those whose forms of government tend to a similarity with that of the United States; and this-interest is felt in a very special degree in the republics of Spanish-speaking America.

The reason for this should be plain enough, as it seems the most natural of all things, that those who move in the same directions and whose thoughts run in the same channels should possess ties in common, which such circumstances alone can create. But, further than this, there is an additional reason in the fact that the republics of Central America, are our near neighbors by geographical location, and it is our avowed policy to build up with them the strongest ties of mutual friendship and mutual interest. Our government will take every proper measure to secure this result, and will endeavor to make the interest an eminently reciprocal one. If we send flour and hardware and agricultural implements, railroad and other machinery, to Central America, we shall hope to become large purchasers of the coffee, sugar, indigo, and tropical productions of our commercial and friendly allies. Exchange of products is the great secret of trade, and the intercommunication among nations produced by remunerative trade is the most certain means of promoting peace and establishing national and individual prosperity among all peoples.

Upon behalf of my government, then, I tender to your excellency’s government, as well as to all your sister republics in Central America, the right hand of a good will which I trust may be as lasting as I know it to be sincere.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 63.]

Translation of the reply of President Zaldivar upon Mr. Logan’s reception.

Mr. Minister: Since the Government of Salvador recognized you in the character of minister resident of the United States of America, I have much desired the opportunity of your official presentation, which to-day I have the pleasure of seeing realized. It is some years since we began the cultivation, with the greatest care, of the relations of friendship between the great republic which you represent and that of Salvador, the satisfactory result which has ensued being influenced largely by a strict compliance with the treaties between both governments; and there is no doubt that the maintenance of those relations becomes more important each day in view of the notable extension which the commercial movement between the countries is acquiring, creating new interests which it is fitting for us to reciprocate.

The government of this republic, Mr. Minister, congratulates itself upon being placed in such fortunate circumstances respecting your powerful nation, which is not only to be admired for its gigantic progress and its tendencies toward peace and universal fraternity, but because it has known how to win the respect and consideration of other peoples by its spirit of Americanism (Americanismo) and by the care with which it has endeavored to strengthen the ties of friendship with the neighboring republics upon the same continent.

It is highly satisfactory to me to be able to manifest upon this solemn occasion my appreciation at their full value of the demonstrations which you have made in the name of your government; and I hope, Mr. Minister, that you will transmit my acknowledgments with the assurance that the sympathies of the people and Government of Salvador are firm and true to the government and people of North America.

I conclude, then, Mr. Minister, by felicitating myself upon your happy designation for the diplomatic charge which you exercise with such dignity, and I express the sincerest desires that the great North American Republic may continue in its career of progress, claiming the admiration of the other civilized nations.

No. 103. Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts. No. 103.
Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America,
Guatemala City, May 7, 1880. (Received June 7.) No. 83.]

Sir: In order that I may have an official expression upon record in this legation, I respectfully ask: 1st. Has a public minister or consul of the United States the legal faculty of celebrating a marriage in the District of Columbia?

2d. Has a public minister or consul of the United States the legal faculty of celebrating a marriage in the foreign country wherein he resides, even if there be nothing in the lex loci to prohibit it?

The act of June 22, 1860, does not authorize the consul to perform the marriage ceremony, though paragraph 278 of the Consular Regulations of 1870 does so authorize him in certain cases. The British consular acts of 1840 and 1868 are specific upon the subject.

Much misunderstanding exists upon the right and duty of United States ministers and consuls to perform the marriage ceremony in foreign countries. As the subject presents itself frequently to me, I ask for an expression upon the above questions.

I have, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

No. 104. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan. No. 104.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Logan.

Department of State,
Washington, June 8, 1880. No. 69.]

Sir: I have received and considered your dispatch No. 83, in which you inquire concerning the faculties of ministers and consuls to perform the marriage ceremony. You therein ask specifically— “1st. Has a public minister or consul of the United States the legal faculty of celebrating a marriage in the District of Columbia?”

“2d. Has a public minister or consul of the United States the legal faculty of celebrating a marriage in a foreign country wherein he resides, even if there be nothing in the lex loci to prohibit it?”

The first of these queries must be answered in the negative. The marriage ceremony in the District of Columbia, to be legal, requires to be performed under license by a minister of the Gospel, or, as a civil contract, it can be authenticated by the competent judicial officers of the District.

The second query is best answered by the following citation from the Consular Regulations of 1874, which have superseded those to which you refer of 1870.

“278. The statute does not authorize the consul to perform the ceremony. It is not to be supposed that Congress intended to authorize a consul to perform the ceremony of marriage or to countenance the doing of any act which would be, or even seem to be, a violation of the laws of the country in which he resides. Marriage is a contract which each State regulates for itself by its own laws. Inasmuch as rights of inheritance may depend upon the validity of marriages, consuls cannot be too cautious in satisfying themselves, when their presence is asked at a proposed marriage, not only that the parties may lawfully intermarry according to the laws of the country in which the ceremony is to take place, but also that all requirements of law necessary to give validity to the marriage have been had. In no case should the consul himself assume to perform the ceremony unless authorized by the laws of the country to do so. The statute contemplates that the ceremony is to be performed in his presence, but it should be done according to local laws,” &c.

The act of June 22, 1860, now incorporated in the Revised Statutes (section 4082), neither expresses nor, implies that a minister shall have like powers with a consul as regards the authentication of a marriage and the performance of a marriage ceremony within the precincts of a legation would require the presence of the consul to fulfill the law. (Personal Instructions, XLVIII.)

Unless, therefore, a minister of the United States be required or authorized by the lex loci where he officially resides to perform the marriage ceremony, he cannot lawfully do so.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 105. Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts. No. 105.
Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America,
Guatemala City, June 30, 1880. (Received July 29.) No. 95.]

Sir: A concession was granted by the Government of Guatemala, in April, 1877, to William Nanne and his representatives for the construction of a railroad from the port of San Jose on the Pacific, to the village of Escuintla, about half way from the port to Guatemala City, the capital.

The first arrangement of Nanne for the necessary funds wherewith to construct the road was with English capitalists. The arrangement failing, a company was organized in California called the Guatemala Central Railroad Company/’ into which Col. Luis Schlesinger, an American citizen resident in Central America, was subsequently admitted. Being a gentleman of large pecuniary resources, and of extensive business credit in Europe, as well as one of great energy and character, he and Mr. Nanne have become the leading spirits of the enterprise.

Had it not been for the unfortunate accident to the Panama railroad in November last, whereby the business of the North and South Pacific coasts has been so greatly deranged, the Guatemala railroad would have been completed three months since.

In face of this accident, however, whereby the rails and entire stock of the road were detained upon the Isthmus for so long a period, the road has been completed just as the rainy season is beginning in this part of the country.

The “official opening” was celebrated upon the 18th instant, with great state and enthusiasm. President Barrios with his Cabinet, the members of the Supreme Court, officers of the Assembly, military officials, and the diplomatic corps were present upon the occasion, and took part in the ceremonies. To lend additional interest to the event President Barrios had arranged a visit from President Zaldivar, of Salvador, and President Soto, of Honduras, at the same time, and the unusual occurrence of three of the five Central American Presidents meeting in the same country and sleeping under the same roof was witnessed.

The occasion was a very gay one. The little city of Escuintla was full to overflowing with visitors. The streets were draped with flags and streamers; arches were erected at every corner and appropriate mottoes greeted the spectators upon every side; beautiful flowers were clustered in bunches, twined in wreaths, and filled the air with perfume. As the first train of cars, bearing the noted company of officials, moved out of the station at Escuintla, the scene was most animated. The engines were beautifully decorated with flowers, and what to an American was the most inspiring of all, they were covered all over with, the flags of the United States, whose sons have again led the way in the march of civilization, fairly waking to life again the “pale sleepers” of the ancient Quiché Kingdom by the shrill whistle of the modern locomotive. As the train moved off cannons boomed, rockets sped into the air; bands of music played; the crowd surged; huzzahs went up; handkerchiefs waved.

At San José magnificent breakfasts were prepared; wine flowed and eloquence followed the current. The new era was hailed, and the first railroad of Guatemala was baptized with unrestrained enthusiasm, myself a quiet observer of the scene. I could not but feel the compliment, to my country as speaker after speaker dwelt upon the greatness and the energy of its citizens; and one speaker declared that he desired the union of Central America under the protection of their great sister republic of the Forth, and the sentiment was vociferously cheered.

* * * * * * *

The party returned to Escuintla on the 20th instant, and from there to Guatemala, the visiting Presidents intending to remain as guests of President Barrios for three or four weeks. One of them, however, President Zaldivar, has since been called suddenly home by the sickness of his wife.

I was quite surprised to find the road-bed so good. Indeed, as a new road, I have never seen a better in our own country. It runs as smoothly as a road with two years’ work of ballasting and leveling upon it. The gauge is 39 inches, the rails of steel, the sleepers of the California redwood, and the rolling stock entirely adapted to the requirements. As a business enterprise it must be a great success. It will form the sole artery by which all of the exports and imports of Guatemala must leave and reach the country. Economical in construction, it runs through a district of level land which must render it capable of being kept up at a very little expense.

To add to the certainty of its financial success, however, the Government guarantees 12 per cent, interest upon a nominal capital of $1,000,000, greatly more than its real cost.

Since the opening of the railroad, the desire has been widespread to extend it at once to Guatemala, a distance of about 40 miles, when there would be direct communication by rail between this capital and the sea-board—a thing most devoutly to be wished by any one having to travel the present road. I am of the belief that the American company, under Schlesinger & Nanne, will obtain a concession for the extension to Guatemala, equally as liberal as, if not more so than, their concession for the road they have just completed. Another company, composed of native capitalists, is bidding for the concession; but the prestige of successfully completing the first section is with the American company, and it seems altogether probable that it will be awarded the concession.

I have, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

No. 106. Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts. No. 106.
Mr. Logan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States in Central America,
Guatemala City, July 17, 1880. (Received August 21.) No. 99.]

Sir: My previous dispatches have informed you of the visit of the Honorable Marco Aurelio Soto, President of Honduras, to Guatemala, as the guest of President Barrios. Desirous of showing him such attention as was in my power, a banquet was given in his honor, at the United States Legation, in this city, upon the evening of July 15.

There were present upon the occasion: President Soto, of Honduras; Mrs. President Barrios of Guatemala, the President being absent through sickness; Mr. Pedro Melendez, Minister of War and Finance of Salvador; Mr. Barrundia, Minister of War of Guatemala; Mr. Montúfar, Minister of Foreign Relations; Mr. Cruz, Minister of the Interior; Mr. Sanchez, Minister of Fomento; Mr. and Mrs. Dabry de Thiersant, of the French Legation; Mr. Graham, of the English Legation; Mr. Suarez, of the Spanish; Mr. Lama, of the Peruvian Legation; Mr. Medina, the American Consul, and several other notables.

The occasion drew forth many handsome tributes to our Government from the Central Americans, and strong expressions of the desire for a closer union with us. While no sentiment whatever of an offensive nature to European Governments was offered, President Soto, of Honduras, Mr. Melendez, of Salvador, and others, of Guatemala, openly said that the United States was the natural friend and protector of the Central American States, and that to the former nation the latter must look for their future. The whole affair was one of great harmony and good feeling.

I have, &c.,

C. A. LOGAN.

ChiliChili

[107] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, August 8, 1879.

[108] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, August 16, 1879. (Received September 17.)

[109] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, October 28, 1879. (Received December 18.)

[110] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, December 26, 1879.

[111] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, February 19, 1880.

[112] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, February 25, 1880. (Received April 10.)

[113] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, February 27, 1880. (Received April 10.)

[114] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, March 5, 1880. (Received April 10.)

[115] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, April 13, 1880.

[116] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, April 14, 1880.

[117] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State, Washington, April 23, 1880.

[118] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, April 30, 1880. (Received June 5.)

[119] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, June 10, 1880. (Received July 29.)

[120] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, August 4, 1880. (Received September 17.)

[121] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, September 9, 1880. (Received October 22.)

[122] . Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Santiago, Chili, September 13, 1880. (Received November 4.)

Contents

Correspondence with the Chilian Legation in Washington. (Documents 123-126)

No. 107. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn. No. 107.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, August 8, 1879. No. 70.]

Sir: I transmit herewith for your information copy of a dispatch from Mr. Ernest Dichman,* United States Minister Resident at Bogotá, reciting the causes which have prompted Colombia to proffer mediation for the settlement of the war between Chili and Peru and Bolivia, and announcing the appointment of Dr. Arosemena, the former secretary of foreign relations of Colombia, to visit Santiago, Lima, and La Paz on a special mission for the purpose of tendering such mediation.

Although abstaining from any direct indorsement of, or co-operation in, this apparently laudable effort of Colombia in the interest of peace and reconciliation, this government, which feels lively solicitude for the prosperity and tranquillity of the South American States, cannot but watch Dr. Arosemena’s mission with especial attention.

In personal intercourse with the Doctor, when he visits Santiago, you will probably find a fitting occasion to express to him the warm interest taken by the United States in this tentative step, and the friendly solicitude of this government as to the result.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

WM. M. EVARTS.

* Printed under Colombia, vide infra.

No. 108. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 108.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, August 16, 1879. (Received September 17.) No. 112.]

Sir: * * * The war spirit is in the ascendency and it is likely so to remain until a trial of strength has been had.

President-making is now the order of the day, and I very much fear that this spirit will soon develop into one of President-breaking. The Cabinet is being repeatedly called before Congress for explanations concerning the conduct of the war, and it is now understood that there is soon to be another change in the ministry. The mass of the people, urged on by the politicians, clamor for more activity, while the administration hesitates. The government doubtless fears that a serious reverse would, in the present condition, produce a revolution. I seriously fear that Chili is being threatened by an enemy far more dangerous than the armies of Peru and Bolivia. Her internal political condition is that of confusion, and as each day succeeds the other it becomes more so.

A rumor obtained currency a few days since that the United States Government had determined upon intervention in the controversy, and the newspapers of the clerical party, accepting the rumor as well-founded, proceeded to inform the President as to his duties in the premises.

* * * * * * *

Of course the rumor was of short duration, but the discussion which it produced developed the existence of a strong public sentiment in opposition to dictation from without.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBOEK

No. 109. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 109.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, October 28, 1879. (Received December 18.) No. 120.]

Sir: Referring to your instruction, No. 70, regarding the mission of Dr. Arosemena, special ambassador of the United States of Colombia to the belligerents in the existing war in this section, I have the honor to inform you that I have discharged, to the best of my ability, the duty therein imposed upon me. Soon after the arrival of Dr. A. at this capital we were made acquainted with each other, and circumstances have since brought us together quite frequently. On more than one occasion before the arrival of your instruction he had mentioned to me the purposes of his mission, and had intimated a hope that possibly the United States Government might join the United States of Colombia in its efforts for peace. I said to him in substance that I was without instructions touching the matter suggested by him, but that, while I knew that the United States Government felt a deep concern for the welfare of all the American republics, and that it regretted very much the present conflict and would rejoice at its termination, still I did not believe that it would, in the absence of knowledge that its good offices were desired by all the belligerents, or until it should have some good reason for believing that an effort by it in behalf of peace would be crowned with success, propose to meddle in the controversy in any manner.

Subsequently, when your instruction came to hand, I was more than gratified to observe that my expressions were in harmony with the views of the State Department in so far as the Department had seen fit to make them known. Dr. Arosemena is not hopeful of accomplishing anything now, and will leave here in a few days for Lima without formally tendering the good offices of his government. He has private assurances that the services of his government are not desired by Chili at present.

* * * * * * *

This country was never more confident of success in the war, apparently, than it is now. The government, as now organized, with Señor Santa Maria at the head of the cabinet, represents fully the aggressive war spirit of the country. The government has the confidence of the people in so far as the conduct of the war is concerned, and all are sanguine regarding the result. And yet I judge from the tone of the Peruvian press that the allies are quite as confident that they will ultimately triumph. While matters continue in this condition I am at a loss to understand how our government can possibly make itself useful in the direction of peace. I am sure that no proposition which would admit of the reoccupation by Bolivia of the territory between the 23d and 24th parallels, or any considerable part thereof, would be accepted by Chili, no matter where the proposition should come from.

* * * * * * *

The principal cause for the declaration of war against Peru was the secret treaty between Peru and Bolivia. Chili understands this compact to have originated in Peru’s hostility to her, and I am led to infer that the “security for the future” mentioned contemplated an abrogation of the treaty and an assurance that a like one would not be entered into hereafter. If Chili should, however, get possession of the Tarapacá district, I apprehend that it would be interpreted to mean much more.

There can be no peace until at least one of the parties to the conflict shall show a disposition to abate some of its pretensions. I am confident that Chili is not so disposed now. If the allies are, I do not know it. The fact is, the belligerents have not sufficiently felt the horrors of war to incline them in the direction of peace. Up to this time the conflict has been confined to the sea. There has been no engagement worthy the name of battle by the army, and there must be, in my judgment, at least one serious, bloody engagement by the land force ere they will be found ready to listen to friendly suggestions from outsiders.

The Chilian land forces now number about twenty-five thousand men. They have been supplied with new arms of the most approved patterns, purchased in Europe. The men are regarded as good soldiers, and there will be much disappointment here if they fail to render a good account of themselves in the engagements which must, sooner or later, take place.

The capture of the famous turreted monitor Huascar by the Chilian navy has produced here the most unbounded enthusiasm. This vessel is now in the Valparaiso harbor undergoing repairs. This naval victory leaves Chili undisputed mistress of the sea. It remains to be seen whether she is to be as fortunate on land. Her position is undoubtedly muck stronger than it was prior to this naval engagement.

The government is anxiously watching the course of events in the Argentine Republic. There is much hostility there to Chili, and it is feared that that country may yet drift into an alliance with Peru and Bolivia.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBOBISL

No. 110. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn. No. 110.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, December 26, 1879. No. 78.]

Sir: In my No. 67 of June 24 last, I sent to you a copy of my No. 23 to the minister of the United States at Lima, in relation to the status of foreign-built ships owned by Americans, and questions pertaining thereto. Having had occasion to address that minister farther on this subject, I deem it well to communicate to you the substance of my instruction to Mr. Christiancy, in the form of a further instruction to your legation, to the end that no occasion may exist for any failure of accordance in the premises between the diplomatic representatives of the United States at Lima and Santiago.

This department in its instructions (Nos. 65 and 67) to your legation, and in Nos. 7, 11, and 23 to the legation at Lima, has already defined the principles which should guide them in the determination of these questions, and can now do little more than reiterate and reaffirm the leading principles hitherto laid down, relying upon your judgment and discretion for their proper application in matters of detail, as it is manifestly impracticable to frame an instruction which shall meet every possible incident as it may arise.

The right of Americans to buy foreign-built vessels and to carry on commerce with them is clear and undoubted. A reference to paragraphs 220 and 221 of the consular regulations will show how perfectly this right is recognized, and how clearly the exercise of it is defined. It has existed ever since the origin of the Government. The fact that it is possible for collusion to take place between consuls and American merchants in foreign countries, in connection with these transactions, is not a sufficient reason to invalidate a right which exists independently of statute law, and which is advantageous to the interests of American commerce and enterprise. As a consequence and adjunct of this right, the flying of the American flag cannot be absolutely prohibited. As before stated in the instructions, if circumstances justify on the part of the consular officer an opinion that the sale was honest, and that the vessel has really become the property of a citizen, she may properly fly the flag of the owner’s country, as an indication of such ownership and an emblem of the owner’s nationality.

The duty of the consul in reference to these transactions is clearly enough indicated in Article XVII of the consular regulations. He is forbidden by law to grant any marine document or certificate of ownership, but he may properly make record of the bill of sale in his office, authenticate its execution, and deliver to the purchaser a certificate to that effect and also certify that the owner is a citizen of the United States. A considerable discretion and responsibility rest upon consuls in regard to determining the good faith of such transactions. They are not to conclude, as a matter of course, that all such transactions are genuine and honest. They are to take notice of any circumstances which would indicate that the transfer is fraudulent, and in all such cases it is their duty to refuse the certificates referred to. But, on the other hand, they are certainly not required to consider the mere fact of the transfer of a foreign-built vessel to an American citizen as an evidence of bad faith. The presumption is rather on the other side, as in all transactions in civilized countries, and in the absence of any indication of fraud a sale in a regular way, with the usual business formalities, is to be regarded by the consul as made in good faith.

When such transactions have been perfected, and when a consul, thoroughly satisfied of the good faith of the parties, has given his certificate of the transfer of a foreign-built vessel to an American citizen, and a vessel furnished with such consular certificate has been regularly cleared from the port where the consul referred to is stationed, and has come within the jurisdiction of another consular officer or diplomatic representative of the United States, it should require very strong evidence of fraud to induce the second consular officer to deny the American character of the vessel, to refuse the regular and necessary clearance to enable the vessel to pursue its voyage, and still more to insist upon such a vessel hauling down its flag. In cases where a consular officer or diplomatic representative is thoroughly convinced that a vessel has no right to an American certificate of sale, and consequently no right to the use of the American colors, he will be justified in going to the extent indicated; but this discretionary power should be used with the utmost caution and reserve.

Vessels in these circumstances, of course, cannot claim the privileges and immunities and the thorough protection which are accorded to regularly registered American vessels plying between ports of the United States and those of foreign countries. The American owners domiciled abroad, engaging in business of this sort, take upon themselves all the risks incident to such traffic. If they are seized by the war vessels of one or the other belligerent, and carried into courts of admiralty as prizes, they have no right to demand from the diplomatic officers of the United States that they shall be accorded anything more than fair treatment in such courts; that is to say, the fact that they are provided with consular certificates of American ownership secures for them only presumption that such is the fact, and they are not necessarily for that reason entitled to demand from the legations of the United States anything more than that protection afforded to every other species of property belonging to American citizens domiciled in foreign countries.

In the absence of any statutory provisions in regard to these important and delicate matters, it seems to be the duty of the Executive branch of the Government to prevent as far as possible any damage or danger to American interests, and, in addition, to guard and cherish to the extent of its power the right of neutrals to carry on honest commerce between nations engaged in hostilities, reducing to the least possible degree the hinderances to neutral trade, which inevitably arise from a state of war.

You will therefore, in all cases that may arise, keep these considerations constantly in sight, and apply them with that judgment and discretion which have hitherto won the approval of the President. The action of the legation at Lima in the matter of the “Itata” was commended, because there seemed sufficient reason to doubt the regularity of the transfer in virtue of which she was displaying the American flag. If, as has been intimated, that vessel and her consorts, are now about to resume our flag, and other merchant vessels are preparing to pursue the same course, it will be the duty of the consul, under the direction of the legation, in that country where these ships first display American colors, to inquire strictly into the circumstances of the alleged transfers, and refuse or grant clearances according to the merits of each particular case. This being done, it is obvious that the act of one American consul or minister should not be challenged or reversed by another, except upon the strongest proof of mistake or collusion.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 111. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn. No. 111.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, February 19, 1880. No. 83.]

Sir: I have received a dispatch from the minister of the United States at Lima, with a copy of a letter from the consul at Lambayeque, Mr. Montjoy, from which it appears that certain property of the American Oil Company, at Talara, which is described as “exclusively American property,” and other like effects at the Lobos Islands, have been destroyed by the fleet of Chili; also that a launch belonging to an American steam tug-boat was captured and taken away by the Chilian vessels, although made fast to the steamer and flying the American ensign.”

It is understood that these facts are already within your cognizance You will bring these acts to the early attention of the Chilian Government, and so represent the matter as may distinctly show, without however any appearance of captious opposition to the legitimate processes and needs of war, that the United States expect the equitable rights of their citizens under treaty and the law of nations to be respected to the full, as befits the relations between two such friendly powers.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 112. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 112.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, February 25, 1880. (Received April 10.) No. 131.]

Sir: Under date of the 3d instant the minister of war and marine issued an order to the chief officer of the Chili squadron regarding the course to be pursued in the further prosecution of the war, an extract from which, with a translation in English, I herewith inclose.

* * * * * * *

It will be seen that this government proposes to adopt more vigorous measures than it has heretofore had recourse to in the prosecution of the war, and that to that end it directs the bombardment and destruction of all towns on the Peruvian coast which have prepared cannons for defense, and the destruction of all moles and other property in the various ports of the enemy used in the loading and discharging of cargo.

To say nothing of the misery and suffering which would necessarily ensue from a rigid execution of this instruction, it occurred to me that neutral rights and interests were liable to become very seriously jeopardized by it, and I therefore suggested to my colleagues of the diplomatic corps that it might be well to consider the propriety of addressing the Chilian Government on the subject. The result was a meeting of the corps, and, after a full discussion, an understanding that each representative should address the Chilian Government concerning the interpretation to be placed on the order in question. A copy of my note is herewith inclosed.

You will observe that I have urged that bombardment should only be resorted to as against towns which possess some importance in a military sense, and that even then sufficient notice should be given to enable non-combatants and neutrals to remove themselves and their property from danger. You will also have observed that I have protested against the right of Chili to destroy the moles and other means of loading and discharging cargo on the enemy’s coast, except where Such destruction appears to be necessary in view of the military situation.

An important fact in connection with this subject is that a very large proportion of the population, and even a larger proportion of the property, in the various towns on this coast, whether in Chili or Peru, is foreign; and it is upon these people and upon these interests that the severity of this measure must, in a great degree, fall, if its execution is insisted upon. Many of these people are Americans. If the government should listen to my suggestions, much ruin would be avoided, and I am not without hope of such a result.

My note is now under consideration at the foreign office, as are also those of the other ministers, and I anticipate a reply soon.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 131.—Translation.]

Extract from order of minister of war and marine, February 3, 1880.

So, then, now that it is manifest that the enemy did not duly appreciate the humanity of our conduct, I believe that our hostilities must he conducted with greater severity. In virtue of this, all towns on the coast that are protected by cannons should he bomharded and destroyed; all railroads that are serving the enemy in the transportation of troops and elements of war should he fired upon; and all moles and “boats employed in the ports of the enemy in loading or discharging cargo should he destroyed. In a word, our standard of conduct hereafter must he to do the enemy all possible injury, without neglecting anything that is authorized by the law of nations, until it is made to feel the necessity of obtaining peace. Any other course will result in prolonging the war without limit, and will greatly increase the sacrifices which the country is making to sustain it.

If heretofore it was believed that great severity in conducting our hostilities was, until a certain point, unnecessary; now we have sufficient data to believe that we shall not oblige Peru to lay down her arms except by reducing her to absolute want, and making her feel, in the property and interests of her inhabitants, all the burden of the war.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 131.]

Mr. Osborn to Señor Amuñátegui.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, February 21, 1880.

Sir: I find published in the Diario Official an order from the minister of war and marine of your excellency’s government issued on the 3d instant to the commander in-chief of the Chili squadron, regarding the course to be pursued in the prosecution of the present war, touching the purport of which I deem it my duty to address your excellency.

The very cordial relations which exist between our respective governments encourage me to believe that the motives which impel me cannot be misconstrued, and that my suggestions will be received by your excellency as they are offered, in a spirit of the utmost sincerity and friendship.

I understand the order mentioned to direct the bombardment and destruction of all Peruvian towns which have made preparations for defense, and the destruction of all launches, and other property whether public or private, used for loading and discharging cargo in the various ports of the enemy. The instruction to bombard is, I understand, unrestricted, except as stated above. The importance of the place in a military point of view is not to be taken into consideration. It is enough to know that it has in place some cannons for defense. Nor is there any requirement for the notice now so generally recognized as necessary by the civilized governments in such cases.

The right of bombardment is a cruel one in any aspect, and the public opinion of the world very justly demands that it should be sparingly exercised, and when exercised that the horrors attending it should be mitigated in the greatest degree possible. It is a relic of the barbarism of the dark ages, against which civilization has for several centuries steadily and unceasingly directed its fire, and while the progress which has been made may not be as great as good men everywhere could wish for, still much has been accomplished for humanity. The limits which circumscribed its exercise in the ages which are past have been through the expansion of an enlightened public sentiment gradually reduced, until, I respectfully submit to your excellency, the law of nations recognizes it only as pertaining to ports which possess some inportance, strategic or otherwise, in a military sense, and that even then sufficient notice of the proposed bombardment should be given to enable non-combatants and neutrals to remove themselves and their property from danger. And so, too, regarding the destruction of the launches and moles. It will hardly be seriously contended that such destruction could be justified except when the necessities of the military situation might seem to require it.

These observations are of a general character, but it is in its bearing upon the interests and rights of neutrals that I desire more especially to direct your excellency’s attention to the order in question. These rights are liable to be seriously compromised by a rigid execution of the order, if I correctly understand its purport. The destruction of all the moles and launches on the Peruvian coast, for instance, involves the destruction of all neutral commerce with that country without the necessity of a blockade. I trust to be informed that my interpretation of the order in this respect is a mistaken one.

Without, however, particularizing further, I feel that my duty has been performed in bringing the matter to the consideration of your excellency, and I shall rest in the hope that whatever may appear to be wrong in the order referred to, in so far at least as it affects the right of neutrals, will be duly righted.

With sentiments of the highest consideration, I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

Hon. Miguel Luis Amuñátegui,
Minister of Foreign Relations.

No. 113. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 113.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, February 27, 1880. (Received April 10.) No. 132.]

Sir: The Minister of Foreign Relations has addressed me a note soliciting the friendly aid of our legations at Santiago and La Paz in securing an exchange with Bolivia of prisoners of war, in answer to which I have assured him that I would very cheerfully render his government all the aid in my power and that I would communicate at as early a day as possible with my colleague in La Paz on the subject. I further informed the minister that Judge Pettis had been absent from his post, and that I was uninformed touching the time fixed for his return, but that I judged that the legation had been left in the hands of some person who would give due consideration to my communication if Judge P. should not be there to receive it.

I have this day written to the legation in La Paz, as promised in my note.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBOEN.

No. 114. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 114.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, March 5, 1880. (Received April 10.) No. 133.]

Sir: In several of my dispatches upon the subject of the existing war in this section I have expressed the conviction that if Chili should succeed in placing her army in possession of the rich nitre and guano deposits of the Tarapaca district she would insist upon holding them, regardless of any intimation which she may have made touching the purposes of the war. Prior to her occupation of this district her authorized officials here strenuously insisted that great injustice was done her if it was believed that her purpose was one of conquest.

* * * * * * *

The drift of public opinion has constantly been in the direction indicated, and now I doubt if any responsible citizen would have the temerity to suggest a contrary course. There has been, and is now, doubtless, a difference of opinion as to the manner in which the annexation should take place, but that Tarapacá is to be annexed, now that it is in the possession of the Chilian army, is an acknowledged fact which no one presumes to question. A proposition for peace which should exclude the possibility of such a consummation would not, in my opinion, be seriously considered by this government. Just prior to the adjournment of the late session of Congress a resolution proposing an immediate annexation was offered by a very prominent and influential member, but the minister of the Interior urged that its adoption then would be inopportune, and at his request it was laid aside. I judge that the government would prefer to accept Tarapacá as a reimbursement for expenses in the war to any other form of annexation.

The management of the nitre and guano interests in the conquered territory is presenting some difficult questions to the Chilian Government. By military order an export duty upon nitre of one dollar and fifty cents per hundred pounds was established some three months since, but from various causes comparatively little has been shipped, and the revenue derived therefrom is very small. Of the principal causes for the meagre shipment may be mentioned, the excessive duty and the fear upon the part of the individual owners of a confiscation of their interests if Peru should recover her lost possessions. The government is sadly in need of money, and is making every effort to bring about a shipment of the nitre, but I incline to the belief that before much is accomplished in that direction a reduction of the duty will be found’ necessary.

The average value of nitre in the European markets during the year 1878 was thirteen shillings per hundred pounds. At this figure it would hardly pay to engage in its production, with the export duty as fixed. In 1878 the amount exported from the Pacific coast was 313,000 tons. Assuming this to be an average year, it will be seen that upwards of seven millions of dollars per annum could be realized from this source with the duty at one dollar per hundred pounds.

I inclose a military order recently issued regarding the exportation of guano from the district mentioned. These guano deposits are, it is understood, all mortgaged to secure the payment of the Peruvian foreign debt. An agent of a part of the Peruvian bondholders has been here for about five months endeavoring to secure an arrangement with the government by which the guano in question should be appropriated to the payment of the debt for which it was mortgaged, and the inclosed order is the result. In diplomatic circles here this action of the Chilian Government in permitting the foreign bondholders of Peru to pay themselves from the conquered territory is very highly spoken of.

It occurs to me that there may be some question touching the ownership of guano shipped under this order in the absence of further action by the Chilian Government.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN

[Inclosure with No. 133.]

Military order touching exports of guano from the occupied district of Peru.

José A. Villagran, General-in-Chief of the Army of Reserve, &c.

The province of Tarapacá being occupied by the Chilian army, and in virtue of the powers conferred upon me by the Supreme Government, I proclaim:

That as the foreign holders of Peruvian Bonds have solicited due permission from the Supreme Government to ship guano from the Peruvian deposits, occupied by the arms of the republic, and there being no impediment to granting this permission, I decree: Article 1. The foreign holders of Peruvian Bonds are hereby allowed to extract guano from the Peruvian deposits occupied by the arms of the republic, under the following conditions: 1st. The bondholders shall name a committee or a responsible business house to direct the operations.

2d. The Chilian Government reserves the power of intervention and of naming one or more functionaries to inspect, and if it be thought opportune, to direct the operations of extraction and shipment.

3d. The functionaries referred to in the foregoing paragraph shall dispatch the loaded ships to Valparaiso, whence they cannot sail to a foreign port until the sum of 30s. per ton of guano on board has been paid into the custom-house.

4th. This payment shall be made in bills of exchange upon London, in favor of the Chilian Government and to its satisfaction; this payment shall be lowered to 20s. per ton, in case that the price of guano falls below £6 per ton.

Art. 2. The papers of the ships sent off shall be made out to the order of the firm of Messrs. Baring Bros. & Co., or to some other equally respectable firm, in case consignation is not arranged with them.

Until a contract of consignation be signed, the ships’ papers shall be made out in favor of the Chilian Minister and Plenipotentiary in Europe, and of James Croyle, esq., and Sir Charles Russell.

Art. 3. The consignee or consignees of the guano shall proceed to sell the cargoes, and, after deducting the sums expended, be it in the obtaining of this permission, be it in payment of the debts referred to in Article 1, or be it to repay the shipping expenses, or in other similar objects, the remainder shall be divided between the foreign holders of Peruvian Bonds, in whose favor the guano deposits have been mortgaged.

Provisional article. Until the committee, mentioned in Article 1, be named, Mr. John Proctor is authorized to arrange provisionally the mode of shipment, he being empowered to use for that purpose the material in possession of the Government.

Let this be published, noted, and communicated.

J. A. VILLAGRAN.

No. 115. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn. No. 115.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, April 13, 1880. No. 87.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 132, in which you inclose a copy of a note from the Chilian Minister of Foreign Affairs, soliciting the friendly offices of the legations of the United States at La Paz and Santiago, in securing an exchange of prisoners of war between Chili and Bolivia, and to say in reply that Mr. Adams, who succeeds Mr. Pettis in the mission to Bolivia, presently departs for his post at La Paz and will be instructed in the direction desired. The person in charge of the archives of the legation at La Paz is not authorized to act in a diplomatic sense.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 116. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn. No. 116.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, April 14, 1880. No. 88.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 131, communicating information of the order made by the Chilian minister of war and marine to the chief officer of the navy to bombard all cities and towns and destroy all moles and launches of the enemy, where practicable, and in reply to approve the spirit and purpose of your note (a copy of which you inclose) to the minister of foreign relations of Chili on the subject of that order.

Commending the method you employed of expressing your views in the premises by a separate note rather than in connection with your colleagues, I conclude by observing that this government desires you to make every proper effort to restrict to collisions of a military character the cruelties and destruction of life and property involved in the prosecution of this deplorable war.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 117. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn. No. 117.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Osborn.

Department of State,
Washington, April 23, 1880. No. 89.]

Sir: I transmit herein for your information a copy of a late instruction* sent to Mr. Adams, the newly appointed minister of the United States to Bolivia, respecting a proposition of Chili, touching an exchange between those countries of prisoners of war.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

* See Mr. Evarts’s instruction to Mr. Adams, ante, page 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66].

No. 118. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 118.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, April 30, 1880. (Received June 5.) No. 143.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch, No. 83, concerning the destruction by the Chilian fleet of certain property of the American Oil Company at Talara, Peru, and the seizure at the Lobos Islands of a launch attached to an American tug-boat, I have to inform you that the instructions therein contained have been duly observed.

The information which I have been enabled to obtain bearing upon this subject is exceedingly meagre, yet I judge that I am sufficiently acquainted with the facts to warrant the conclusion that the destruction of the property at Talara, at least, was without justification. Talara is far removed from the field of actual military and naval operations, and if the property destroyed had been used, or if it was in condition to be used, to further the prospects of Peru in the war, I am not advised thereof.

My information in regard to these matters is limited to a copy of the letter of Consul Monuoy, written to Mr. Christian cy under date of January 3. By referring to your copy of this letter you will see that the information furnished, touching the affair at Lobos Islands, is based entirely upon a conversation with a Peruvian official at that point, and while it may be correct in every particular, I am as yet without testimony confirming it. It is true, however, that this government has asserted from the beginning of the war that Peru should not be permitted to export guano or nitre, and to that end has insisted upon the right to destroy, in the various ports used for these purposes, the means by which these articles have been loaded. Early in the war her navy destroyed the moles and launches at the guano deposits of Pabellon de Pica and Huanillos. The loss was very great, and the owners, who were British Subjects residing in Great Britain, had the earnest support of their government in an effort to obtain assurances from Chili that they should not be again molested if they should repair their moles and launches. The note of Lord Salisbury was, I am credibly informed, somewhat dictatorial in its tone, but it accomplished nothing. The guano deposits are, it will be borne in mind, the property of the Peruvian Government, and it was contended here that Peru relied upon the exportations from them for means with which to carry on the war. That Peru has been very materially crippled in her finances by Chili’s course in this matter will not admit of a doubt.

The Lobos Islands contain large beds of guano, and I infer that the launch referred to was seized to prevent its being used in loading that article.

I may add that the naval officer under whose immediate direction the acts complained of were committed was a rash man, and that he has since paid with his life for his excessive temerity.

I have reason to believe that the government has cautioned its naval officers against a repetition of such scenes as that at Talara. But while the war lasts, I feel confident that Chili will endeavor to maintain her position regarding the exportation of guano.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

No. 119. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 119.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, June 10, 1880. (Received July 29.) No. 151.]

Sir: Herewith, find inclosed a copy of the message of the President? delivered to the Chilian congress at its opening on the 1st instant. The events of the war, with which you are already familiar, have claimed the attention of the executive to the almost total exclusion of other topics. An English translation of so much of the message as treats of the commerce of the country and its financial status is also inclosed, and a reference thereto will show you that, notwithstanding the war, the past year has been a prosperous one for Chili.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 151.]

Translation of parts of the President’s message referring to commerce and finance.

* * * * * * *

The ordinary consequences of war have been hut little felt in Chili. During its progress there has been a notable improvement in trade, partly owing to the favorable crops of the last two years and to the rise in the price of copper and nitrate, and partly to the effects of the economies introduced into the country during the commercial crisis of the former years.

Money is now more abundant than it was before the war; discount has fallen; there is a greater ease in business transactions, and property has risen in value.

During the past year the imports amounted to the value of $22,740,000 and the exports to $36,620,226, giving a balance of $13,880,226 in favor of the latter.

Compared with the preceding year we see an increase of $6,892,401 in favor of exportation, while the importation diminished by $2,582,011.

The value of agricultural produce exported last year amounted to $12,811,570; exceeding the previous year $4,138,009. Minerals were exported to the value of $20,280,258, which sum exceeds by $2,754,392 the exportation during 1878. The minerals exported from the port of Antofagasta are not included in this, as the statements have not yet come in.

The ordinary and extraordinary receipt during the year 1879 amounted to $27,693,087.74, and the expenditure to $24,777,360.12. But in the latter amount many sums spent by our legation in Europe are not included.

Large sums have been received from the sale of nitrate or from duties levied upon that article.

The guano deposits are now being worked and will ere long, be developed.

The expenses of the war have hitherto been paid by the sums voted on several occasions, by the increase of the ordinary sources of income, caused by the increasing riches of the country, and by the income now derived from the territory occupied by our troops.

No. 120. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 120.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, August 4, 1880. (Received September 17.) No. 155.]

Sir: Some movements have been made here by a number of the European legations with a view to removing the obstacles to peace. The legations which took part in this movement were those of France, Italy, and Great Britian, but the minister of the latter took but little interest in it and seemed to regard it as futile. There was nothing which indicated even in the remotest degree a disposition on the part of the European powers to dictate terms to Chili, nor was there the slightest evidence of an intention to urge a peace except with the full and free consent of the belligerents. In answer to a suggestion from me the Italian minister said quite emphatically that European intervention with force was not to be thought of.

I am not aware that the German minister, Baron von Gülich, was consulted in this matter. He is about to depart for his home in Europe on leave of absence, and I therefore conclude that the German Government has in contemplation no movement of an extraordinary character in this part of the world. I see no reason to hope for an early conclusion of the war. Public opinion here emphatically demands Tarapacá, and I fear that Peru is determined to continue the desperate and apparently hopeless struggle rather than cede it. * * *

The army has been remitted to its strength prior to the late battles in Southern Peru, and I judge that it now contains about 25,000 effective men. Much discontent pervades it at the delay of the government in giving the order to march on Lima. The government is, for obvious reasons, exceedingly desirous of avoiding a campaign against Lima, and will, I judge, for the present occupy the army with expeditions to Northern Peru.

I have, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

No. 121. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 121.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, September 9, 1880. (Received October 22.) No. 164.]

Sir: Responding to your instruction No. 98, I have the honor to inclose an English translation of a note received by me from the minister of foreign relations on the day of its date. You will observe that it is simply an acknowledgment of the receipt of my note to which your instruction refers concerning the course to be observed by Chili in the prosecution of the war in this section, and an assurance that it should be laid before the President. A similar note was received at the European legations, but no further response has been deemed necessary by this government. I am assured, however, that our respective notes have received that consideration which the gravity of the subject of which they teach demanded, and I am led to believe that they have exercised no small influence in the subsequent conduct of the war. In so far as the naval operations are concerned, I have heard of no cause of complaint since about the first of last January. Unfortunately their land forces are not so easily controlled. I judge that the reports which have gone to the world from Peruvian sources regarding the behavior of the Chilian soldiery at Pisagua, Mollendo, Tacna, and Arica are more or less exaggerated; still it is undoubtedly true that they are not wholly without foundation. The common Chilian soldier is a strong and reckless man, paying but little regard to discipline, and, in battle, stranger, alike, to fear and to instincts of mercy. He is impatient cinder restraint, and is too apt to turn a deaf ear to commands which do not conform to his liking. This is the one great fault with the Chilian army—its want of respect for the commands of its officers in battle. The authorities here understand that perfectly, and to this knowledge, in a great degree, is due the hesitation of the government in entering upon the Lima campaign. There is not the slightest doubt entertained here as to the ability of the Chilian army to enter Lima, but it is feared by the more considerate ones, that once there, the soldiers might be guilty of excesses which would not redound to the credit of their country. The Chilian peon hates the Peruvian as if by instinct, and his hatred is as bitter as it is natural. To this common feeling add the flame which stories of torpedoes and of hidden mines laid for his destruction necessarily produce, and you will be able to comprehend, perhaps in a modified degree, the spirit which animates the common Chilian soldier in this war.

Preparations for an extensive campaign continue, and unless peace shall come soon, the government will undoubtedly be driven into the movement against Lima.

* * * * * * *

I think I see some slight evidences here of apprehension upon the part of the government of armed intervention by the European powers, to the extent of preventing the Chilian army from entering Lima, if that campaign should be undertaken, but my inquiries * * * have failed to develop anything in justification of this fear further than can be implied from the uncommon interest in behalf of peace now being manifested by the representatives of Great Britain, France, and Italy. I have the honor, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

[Inclosure in Mr. Osborn’s No. 164.—Translation.]

Republic of Chili, Department of Foreign Relations,
Valparaiso, February 26, 1880.

Sir: I have had the honor to receive the note which yon directed to me, dated the 21st instant, calling the attention of my government to the contents of the communications which the minister of war, in the field, sent on the 28th of January and the 3d of February to the chiefs of the army and of the Chilian squadron with regard to the course to be, by them, pursued in their belligerent operations.

To-day I will lay before His Excellency, the President of the Republic, the observations that you were pleased to make concerning said communications.

Limiting myself for the present to an acknowledgment of the receipt of your estimable note I improve with pleasure the occasion to reiterate to you the sentiments of high consideration with which I am,

Your obedient servant,

MIGUEL LUIS AMUÑÁTEGUL

No. 122. Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts. No. 122.
Mr. Osborn to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, September 13, 1880. (Received November 4.) No. 165.]

Sir: Responding to your instruction No. 100, I have the honor herewith to inclose an English translation of the note received by me in February last from the minister of foreign relations regarding an exchange of prisoners with Bolivia, as also a copy of my reply thereto.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

THOMAS A. OSBOBN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 165.—Translation.]

Mr. Amuñátegui to Mr. Osborn.

Republic of Chili, Department of Foreign Relations,
Valparaiso, February 20, 1880.

Sir: The government of Chili is desirous of ransoming some soldiers which Bolivia has made prisoners in unimportant encounters that have taken place between the scouts of our respective armies.

At present we have many Bolivian prisoners from which we would give the number necessary to ransom those which they have belonging to us.

Convinced of the benevolent sentiments that animate you, my government has believed that perhaps it could count upon your friendly assistance in bringing about an exchange of all the Chilian prisoners which are in Bolivia for a corresponding number of those which we have in Chili.

In case there should be no objection on your part to assist in carrying into effect this proposition, I would venture to request that you should be pleased to solicit in our name the co-operation of your worthy colleague in La Paz.

As soon as a favorable response shall be received from you, I will be careful to send to you the list of Bolivian prisoners that we now have, so that the exchange can be perfected in La Paz.

I improve the occasion, &c.

MIGUEL LUIS AMUÑATEGUI.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 165.]

Mr. Osborn to Mr. Amuñátegui.

Legation of the United States,
Santiago, Chili, February 23, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your estemed note of the 20th instant, wherein your excellency is pleased to solicit the aid of this legation, as also that of my colleague in La Paz, in securing an exchange of prisoners of war with Bolivia.

Your excellency can rest assured that such aid as it may be in my power to render to your excellency’s government in this connection will be most cheerfully given, and I shall avail myself of the first mail which leaves for the north to communicate with the United States legation in La Paz on the subject, pursuant to the suggestion contained in your note.

It is possible, and I fear even probable, that my colleague in La Paz, Judge Pettis, has not yet returned from his home in the United States, whence he went in November last. He expected to return about this time, but I am as yet unadvised of his having reached his post. Nor have I, since his departure, had any correspondence with his legation, and I am quite ignorant regarding the person in whose hands it has been left. I judge, however, that the legation was placed in charge of some competent person, and that even though my colleague shall not have returned, my communication, upon its arrival in La Paz, will receive proper attention.

With sentiments of the highest consideration, &c.

THOMAS A. OSBORN.

Correspondence with the Chilian Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the Chilian Legation in Washington.

[123] . Mr. Asta-Buruaga to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Chili. Washington, December 15, 1879.

[124] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Asta-Buruaga.

Department of State, Washington, February 10, 1880.

[125] . Mr. Asta-Buruaga to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Chili in the United States, Washington, April 24, 1880.

[126] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Asta-Buruaga.

Department of State, Washington, June 18, 1880.

No. 123. Mr. Asta-Buruaga to Mr. Evarts. No. 123.
Mr. Asta-Buruaga to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of Chili.
Washington, December 15, 1879.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to address your excellency for the purpose of calling: your attention to the case of a torpedo-boat, which it is proposed to ship from Bristol, R. I., so that it may be used against Chili in its present war with Bolivia and Peru.

This legation has received reliable private information confirming the intelligence published on the 12th instant in the Evening Telegram (a slip containing the intelligence in question will be found on the margin of my letter), to the effect that this terrible agent of destruction has been in process of construction for some time, in pursuance of an order given by Peruvian commissioners or agents with the object above stated.

Without considering the question whether in legitimate warfare the use of an instrument of hostility would be admissible which uselessly endangers and sacrifices many lives, it may be asserted that a torpedo-boat comes under the head of armed vessels, as does any other of larger dimensions belonging to a navy, the fitting out of which violates the neutrality of the country in which it takes place. These boats are managed and operated by their own independent force, or as auxiliaries of other vessels forming part of a squadron. In such capacity they go to form, in my judgment, armed expeditions, whose preparation is in evident violation of the laws of the country in which it occurs, and from which they are conveyed for the purpose of carrying on hostilities against another with which that one is at perfect peace. I do not consider that this torpedo-boat is’ included in the right which is allowed to belligerents to purchase arms or other articles contraband of war in a neutral country.

Consequently, and in virtue of the stipulations of the treaty of 1832 between this country and Chili, which is still in full force as regards peace and sincere friendship, and of the neutrality law, I would request your excellency to adopt suitable measures to prevent the said torpedo-boat from leaving any port of these United States, it being evidently intended for hostile use against Chili.

I avail myself of this occasion to repeat to your excellency the assurances of the very high consideration with which I am

Your excellence’s, &c.,

F. S. ASTA-BUBUAGA.

No. 124. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Asta-Buruaga. No. 124.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Asta-Buruaga.

Department of State,
Washington, February 10, 1880.

Sir: Your note of the 15th of December last, in relation to a rumor that a torpedo boat was about to be shipped from Bristol, R. L, for the use of the Allies in the present war with Chili, was duly received. In reply I have the honor to observe that the facts, as now within the knowledge of this Department, do not constitute any sufficient ground of criminal action against the builders of the craft, such as would necessarily follow the preliminary measures prescribed in our neutrality statutes.

I have the honor, however, to add that I have requested my colleague of the Treasury to cause a watch to be kept on the movements of the suspicious craft to which your note refers, in order that any evident intent to violate the neutrality laws may be at once reported and acted upon.

Accept, &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 125. Mr. Asta-Buruaga to Mr. Evarts. No. 125.
Mr. Asta-Buruaga to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of Chili in the United States,
Washington, April 24, 1880.

Sir: In the conference which I yesterday had the honor to have with your excellency, in relation to the war in which my country is involved with Peru and Bolivia, you informed me that you had received official advices from the former of those republics, to which, in view of their gravity, you deemed it indispensable to call my attention.

By those advices your excellency was informed that the corvette Chacabuco and the transport Loa had appeared, on the 10th of March last, off the island of Lobos de Afuera, and that after notifying the governor of the island of the object of their visit, they had proceeded to burn and destroy the wharf, platforms, cars, boats, and other appurtenances of the port, and to take on board everything movable that they could find on the island, including mules, horses, cattle and provisions, belonging both to the company which is engaged in taking guano there, and to the store of the parties who supply it with provisions (over which the flag of the English consul was floating), without leaving anything on the island for the inhabitants to eat, save a quantity of rice and jerked beef sufficient to last them for eight days; that the commander of the Chilian vessels had declared, on performing these acts, that he had positive orders to take whatever he could find, to await re-enforcements, and then to destroy all the ports of Peru between Paita and Callao. Finally, that without any provocation on the part of the inhabitants, and without any warning to them, shots had been fired at their dwellings.

Yonr excellency further informed me that you had also received official advices that instructions had recently been issued by the ministry of war and marine to the Chilian squadron in the sense stated by the aforesaid commander, and that you were likewise informed that, as regarded those orders, representations had been addressed to the Government of Chili by the diplomatic ministers accredited to it, in behalf of neutral interests in Peru and Bolivia; your excellency observing that, in view of this intelligence, and since it was proposed to destroy property in those ports, ninety per cent, of which was understood to belong to foreigners, a large proportion belonging to North American citizens was thereby endangered, for which reason you requested me to give you some satisfactory explanation concerning the nature of these proceedings, and the reasons which had led to the adoption of such extreme war measures, since such acts of hostility affected not only the combatants and other inhabitants, but also neutrals, whose property and commerce thereby received injuries for which it was the duty of their respective governments to demand reparation, in the interest of their citizens. Your excellency remarked that you referred to this state of things in order that I might call the attention of my government to it, as likewise to the view which was taken of its action, reminding me that, during the course of this war, the government of this country had uniformly maintained strict neutrality, notwithstanding the fact that it had been urged, in various quarters, to assume a different attitude.

To all the above statements made by your excellency in the aforesaid conference, I had the honor to rely that I had no knowledge of the facts alleged, but that I would refer them to my government, together with your excellency’s observations, feeling confident that it would hasten to rectify the inaccuracy with which I thought that those facts had reached your excellency, and to manifest the legitimacy with which hostilities are adopted, even to a rigorous degree, under the present circumstances of the war, for the purpose of completely subduing the enemy.

I nevertheless think it proper for me, in the mean time, to give you an idea of the line of conduct that has been followed in this war, in which Chili was forced to engage in defense of her rights.

In the early part of the war, Chili carried on hostilities against the two allied republics with extreme mildness, respecting the property of her enemies even to excess. She made war, arms against arms, without the rigor which is authorized by a state of war, or by the necessity of putting a speedy end to a deplorable and ruinous struggle, in order to re-establish peace on a solid and permanent basis. The prevalence of a state of war allowed her, however, within the sphere recognized by civilized nations, to disable and destroy her armed enemies, and whomsoever in any way, even incidentally, took part in warlike operations against her; to render useless or destroy any property belonging to her enemies, and any means of communication and traffic; to deprive the enemy of all resources, provisions, and means of subsistence, and if military necessity required it, to extend her action with the same legitimacy to all inhabitants and property in the hostile country, so as to render it unable to continue hostilities.

A precedent for this course is found in the war in this country in 1861–’65, and in the recent European wars.

Chili did not do so. She now, however, finds herself obliged to comply with the demands of a military necessity, although she is careful not to disregard the dictates of humanity and the precepts of international law; she is obliged to do so by the conduct of her enemies, who, as is shown by Peruvian official documents, conduct hostilities on land by illicit means, and carry on an irregular warfare with armed prowlers. Nothing, therefore, remains for my government but to adopt severe repressive measures against hostilities of that character, in order not to prolong the contest indefinitely, at an immense sacrifice of blood and treasure and to the great detriment of even foreign commerce. Under these circumstances, it is not strange if Chili has ordered the bombardment of armed ports whence resources are procured for the enemy, or that she should cripple the activity of railways and other means of communication which enable him to transport troops and munitions of war; nor is it strange that she should order the destruction of wharves, apparatus, and material intended to facilitate the loading and unloading of vessels, and to serve to maintain establishments like that of the island of Lobos, from the working of which the Government of Peru derives means to continue the war. Those establishments, moreover, in several of the ports, even if controlled by neutrals residing there or associated with enemies, partake of the same hostile character.

If, through hostilities which are performed through military necessity, the property or interests of foreigners residing in the enemy’s country are injured, it is an evil similar to many others which emanate from the exceptional condition of a state of war. My government, however, has endeavored to avoid, as far as possible, doing injury to neutrals residing in the territory of the enemy, and I make bold to assert that it cannot be justly charged with doing anything detrimental to those interests without imperious necessity. Nevertheless, it is a recognized rule of international law that, if a neutral suffers injury through the unavoidable hostile acts of a belligerent, he does not thereby acquire a claim to indemnity; because, if he has preferred to continue or comes to reside in a belligerent country after the commencement of hostilities, it “has been his intention to submit to all the contingencies consequent upon a state of war.

There is still another circumstance to which I will take the liberty of calling your excellency’s attention, and it is that the bulk of the property in the ports of Peru has been transferred, perhaps surreptitiously, to foreign hands, since the beginning of the war, with a view to investing it with a neutral character, which explains why so large a proportion of that property has been represented to you as belonging to foreigners.

Yet, in spite of all, I can likewise assure your excellency that the Government of Chili, with the fairness and justice that characterize it in its dealings with friendly nations, will not refuse to make such reparation as may be called for by sound reason and the recognized principles of international law, and it hopes that the claims which it may prefer on account of the acts of foreign citizens during the war will be considered in the same spirit of reciprocity.

Hoping, sir, that the contents of this note will be satisfactory upon some of the points which formed the subject of our yesterday’s conversation, until I shall have reported them to my government, so that it may explain them more fully, I have the honor to avail myself of this occasion to reiterate to your excellency the assurances of my most distinguished consideration.

F. S. ASTA-BURUAGA.

Hon. Wm. M. Evarts,
Secretary of State, &c., &c., &c.

No. 126. Mr. Hay to Mr. Asta-Buruaga. No. 126.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Asta-Buruaga.

Department of State,
Washington, June 18, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to state that the Secretary of the Treasury has informed the Department of his decision, recently given, that under the proclamation of the President of the United States of November 1, 1850 (9 Stat, at L., p. 1004), Chilian vessels will be held exempt from paying any higher tax on their tonnage than 30 cents per ton.

It is understood that few cases, if any, have occurred where a tonnage duty in excess of that amount has been exacted from such vessels. I inclose a copy of the proclamation referred to. The Department will transmit, under cover to your address, one or more copies of any Treasury circular on the subject which may be received.

Accept, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

[Inclosure.]

By the President of the United States of America.

a proclamation.

Whereas by an act of the Congress of the United States of the twenty-fourth of May, one thousand eight hundred and twenty-eight, entitled “An act in addition to an act, entitled ‘An act concerning discriminating duties of tonnage and impost, and to equalize the duties on Prussian vessels and their cargoes,” it is provided that upon satisfactory evidence being given to the President of the United States by the government of any foreign nation that no discriminating duties of tonnage or impost are imposed or levied in the ports of the said nation upon vessels wholly belonging to citizens of the United States, or upon the produce, manufactures, or merchandise imported in the same, from the United States, or from any foreign country, the President Is thereby authorized to issue his proclamation declaring that the foreign discriminating duties of tonnage and impost within the United States are, and shall be, suspended and discontinued, so far as respects the vessels of the said foreign nation, and the produce, manufactures, or merchandise imported into the United States in the same from the said foreign nation, or from any other foreign country; the said suspension to take effect from the time of such notification being given to the President or the United States, and to continue so long as the reciprocal exemption of vessels belonging to citizens of the United States and their cargoes as aforesaid shall be continued, and no longer;

And whereas satisfactory evidence has lately been received by me from the Government of the Republic of Chili, through an official communication of Señor Don Manuel Carvallo, accredited to this government as envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of that republic, under date of the thirty-first of October, 1850, that no other or higher duties of tonnage and impost are imposed or levied in the ports of Chili upon vessels wholly belonging to citizens of the United States, and upon the produce, manufactures, or merchandise imported in the same from the United States, and from any foreign country whatever, than are levied on Chilian ships and their cargoes in the same ports and under like circumstances:

Now, therefore, I, Millard Fillmore, President of the United States of America, do hereby declare and proclaim that so much of the several acts imposing discriminating duties of tonnage and impost within the United States are, and shall be, suspended and discontinued so far as respects the vessels of Chili, and the produce, manufactures, and merchandise imported into the United States in the same from Chili, and from any other foreign country whatever; the said suspension to take effect from the day above mentioned, and to continue henceforward so long as the reciprocal exemption of the vessels of the United States, and the produce, manufactures, and merchandise imported into Chili in the same as aforesaid, shall lap continued on the part of the Government of Chili.

Given under my hand, at the city of Washington, this first day of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and fifty, and the seventy-fifth of the Independence of the United States.
MILLARD FILLMORE.

By the President:
W. S. Derrick,
Acting Secretary of State.

ChinaChina

[127] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Pelting, July 12, 1879. (Received September 4.)

[128] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, September 24, 1879. (Received November 4.)

[129] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, October 29, 1879. (Received January 7.)

[130] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, November 1, 1879. (Received January 7, 1880.)

[131] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, November 3, 1879. (Received January 7.)

[132] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Seward.

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1879.

[133] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, November 18, 1879. (Received January 7.)

[134] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, November 21, 1879. (Received January 7.)

[135] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Pelting, November 25, 1879. (Received January 7, 1880.)

[136] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Pelting, December 4, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880)

[137] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, December 8, 1879. (Received January 27.)

[138] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, December 10, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880.)

[139] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, December 11, 1879. (Received February 19, 1880.)

[140] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, December 27, 1879. (Received February 19, 1880.)

[141] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, December 27, 1879. (Received March 15, 1880.)

[142] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, January 12, 1880. (Received March 15.)

[143] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, January 15, 1880. (Received March 15.)

[144] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, January 16, 1880. (Received March 15.)

[145] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, January 20, 1880. (Received April 2.)

[146] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Seward.

Department of State, Washington, January 22, 1880.

[147] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, January 23, 1880. (Received April 2.)

[148] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, January 29, 1880. (Received April 2.)

[149] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, January 30, 1880. (Received April 2.)

[150] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Seward.

Department of State, Washington, January 31, 1880.

[151] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, February 6, 1880. (Received April 26.)

[152] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, February 10, 1880. (Received April 26.)

[153] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, February 16, 1880. (Received April 26.)

[154] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, February 23, 1880. (Received April 26.)

[155] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, February 23, 1880. (Received April 26.)

[156] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, March 1, 1880. (Received April 26.)

[157] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, March 8, 1880. (Received April 26.)

[158] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, March 16, 1880. (Received May 11.)

[159] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, March 27, 1880. (Received June 8.)

[160] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, April 1, 1880. (Received June 8.)

[161] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, April 7, 1880. (Received June 8.)

[162] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, April 19, 1880. (Received June 8.)

[163] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, April 23, 1880. (Received June 14.)

[164] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, April 24, 1880. (Received June 14.)

[165] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Seward.

Department of State, Washington, May 1, 1880.

[166] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, May 1, 1880. (Received June 14.)

[167] Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, May 6, 1880. (Received June 30.)

[168] . Mr. Denny to Mr. Payson.

United States Consulate-General, Shanghai, May 15, 1880. (Received June 14.)

[169] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, May 27, 1880. (Received July 13.)

[170] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, May 31, 1880. (Received July 13.)

[171] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, June 10, 1880. (Received August 2.)

[172] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, June 11, 1880. (Received August 2.)

[173] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, July 5, 1880. (Received August 27.)

[174] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Pelting, July 6, 1880. (Received August 27.)

[175] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, July 10, 1880. (Received August 27.)

[176] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, July 28, 1880. (Received September 15.)

[177] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, August 13, 1880. (Received September 28.)

[178] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Angell.

Department of State, Washington, August 16, 1880.

[179] . Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, August 20, 1880. (Received October 12.)

[180] . Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, August 20, 1880. (Received October 12.)

[181] . Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, August 20, 1880. (Received October 12.)

[182] . Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Peking, August 28, 1880. (Received October 12.)

[183] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Angell.

Department of State, Washington, October 11, 1880.

Contents

Correspondence with the Chinese Legation in Washington. (Documents 184-193)

No. 127. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 127.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Pelting, July 12, 1879. (Received September 4.) No. 451.]

Sir: A conference of foreign ministers was held on the 10th instant at the house of Sir Thomas Wade, doyen of the diplomatic body, at which it was agreed that the following questions, to wit, taxation of foreign manufactures and foreign owned domestic produce, official intercourse, and judicial proceedings, require attention and shall be brought under discussion with a view to reach conclusions to be put before the Chinese Government. Sir Thomas Wade was requested to communicate with absent ministers in this sense, and to say that it is proposed to meet for the study of these questions early in September.

The matters indicated have formed the subject of a number of dispatches heretofore addressed by me to the State Department, both from Shanghai and since I have been in charge here. They have come up for remark more particularly in connection with the German treaty revision scheme, and the English convention of Chefoo. They were severally dealt with in the protocol of November 25, 1876, transmitted with my dispatch No. 177.

* * * * * * *

I think that no special instructions in regard to the subjects which it is proposed to consider in September are needed. It is by no means certain that the foreign representatives here will be able to reach harmonious conclusions, and not likely that any one will desire to propose changes of treaty stipulations without first submitting the concrete propositions to his government. A bare approval, therefore, of the proposal to confer together, and a general authority to carry co-operation as to theresults, so far as may be appropriate, looking to the important character of the matters under discussion, is all that I would ask for.

My correspondence will have shown you that there has been some improvement in official intercourse and in the judicial situation since my arrival in Peking. The Chinese appear to admit now, in theory, that civil cases can only be dealt with in the courts of the defendants, and in accordance with the laws of the country of the defendant, and they have yielded somewhat in ceremony both here and at the ports.

The practical extinction of the Foochow Trade Committee has also been of decided advantage to us. There is no new light, however, in regard to the internal taxation question, unless I may consider that the evident disposition of the ministers resident here to look for a practical solution of the difficulties surrounding the subject to new stipulations which can be cordially accepted by all, including the Chinese, rather than to attempt to define and to sustain existing stipulations, which are obscure in terms and halve evidently failed to meet the purposes in view, is an advance of a substantial sort.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 128. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 128.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, September 24, 1879. (Received November 4.) No. 482.]

Sir: Recurring to my dispatch No. 451, I have now the honor to inform you that the representatives of all the treaty powers who are at present in China have assembled in this city. They comprise the ministers of Great Britain, Germany, the United States, Holland, Peru, Italy, and Japan, and the chargés d’affaires of Russia, Belgium, Spain, and France.

A meeting was held yesterday, at which it was decided, in the first instance, to discuss among ourselves the questions of Lekin taxes and the transit pass system, the judicial system, and official intercourse.

Committees were formed upon these subjects, under the vice-chairmanships, respectively, of Sir Thomas Wade, myself, and Mr. von Brandt—Sir Thomas Wade, as doyen, being the titular chairman of each committee.

My earlier dispatches will have indicated, I trust, with sufficient clearness my views upon the judicial system, and I purpose at an early moment to place before you a statement of my opinions upon the other topics mentioned.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 129. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 129.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, October 29, 1879. (Received January 7.) No. 495.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith a copy of a letter which I am addressing to the consul-general at Shanghai, in regard to the harbor rules for that port, which were adopted in the early part of last year, and which have not been put into force in consequence of a misunderstanding between the local authorities and the consular body. I think that there is a prospect that the present dead-lock will be broken soon and the rules enforced.

I have, &c., &c., &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 495.]

Mr. Seward to Mr. Bailey.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, October 29, 1879. No. 192.]

Sir: The fact that the harbor rules which were communicated to this legation by the Tsung-li Yamên in the early part of last year, and from which I was so sanguine as to hope that much good would result, have not come into effect, having been brought to my notice, I have inquired of the Yamên as to the reason, stating to them at the same time certain considerations which would be likely to encourage them to take the business in hand again. The representations which I made are shown in the memorandum inclosed, and the result in the report by Mr. Holcombe, also inclosed.

It is my intention to recall the attention of my colleagues to this subject at an early moment, if it shall not otherwise he brought forward, and I now communicate with you on the subject in order to indicate the situation of the business and the carefulness which should be exercised at Shanghai in order to avoid any further complications.

You are at liberty to hand a copy of this note to the chamber of commerce, but not for publication, and to read it to your colleagues and the customs authorities at any time when it may seem to you interesting or useful to do so.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c., &c., &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

memorandum for mr. holcombe regarding the shanghai harbor rules.

In speaking with the ministers of the foreign office on this subject, please say that their object in preparing the rules, no doubt, was to conserve the harbor, and that, in my opinion, they were well adapted to this purpose. Say further, that I regard control over the district occupied at Shanghai by junks, and over the banks of that part of the river which is opposite the native city and suburbs, quite as necessary as control over the foreign anchorage and the banks of the river opposite to the foreign settlement. The junk people are more given td throwing overboard their ballast than foreigners are, and stone jetties, timber yards, &c., are found only, as a rule, on the banks in the native quarter.

It is very desirable, therefore, that these rules shall not be abandoned, and that the native anchorage, &c., shall not be exempted from their operation.

Please say further that I regard the promulgation of the rules as an act which the government is competent to perform, and that it is competent for the government to declare how they shall be carried out; that is to say, to instruct the harbor master and the local authorities and to provide for co-operation between them. In this part of the business the foreign authorities have no concern. It will be difficult, however, to give perfect effect to the rules without the active support of the foreign authorities. The government may rely upon such support if the rules are fairly and efficiently administered over foreigners and Chinese alike.

Please add that I feel more at liberty to speak upon the subject because of my long residence at Shanghai and consequent acquaintance with the dangers which are threatening the existence of the port.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

shanghai harbor rules.

Minute of a conversation with His Excellency Shen, at the foreign office, September 16, 1879.

Mr. Holcombe repeated the memorandum furnished to him by Mr. Seward.

His excellency then remarked that he saw no reason why he should not speak with the utmost frankness in the business.

The rules, as Mr. Holcombe doubtless knew, did not originate in the foreign office, but had come from Mr. Hart, and the foreign office had approved them, asked the assent of the foreign representatives at Peking, and sent them to Shanghai to go into effect, because they believed that they were well calculated to conserve the interests of both Chinese and foreigners.

But at the very outset the consular body at Shanghai had not only put them to serious embarrassment, but also jeopardized the rules themselves by insisting at once upon greatly enlarging the range of their application beyond the area originally proposed by Mr. Hart. This had resulted in strong opposition to the rules on the part of the local Chinese authorities, and a protest by the high provincial officers against the action of the foreign office in approving the rules without having first consulted them.

His excellency added that at present the prospects for the successful application of the rules were much better, and that they could probably be enforced—the portion within the foreign concessions by the harbor master, and the portion of the area without those concessions by the local authorities acting in concert with the harbor master.

A suggestion of this sort had been recently received from the southern superintendent of trade.

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.
Peking, September 17, 1879.

No. 130. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 130.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, November 1, 1879. (Received January 7, 1880.) No. 499.]

Sir: Recurring to my dispatch No. 482, and to the statement made therein that my colleagues had committed to a committee, consisting of myself (as chairman) and the representatives of England, Germany, Peru, and Russia, the consideration of questions growing out of the extraterritorial system, I have now the honor to place before you a report which has been agreed upon by the committee, together with two memoranda, prepared by myself, and which form addenda to the report.*

It is hoped that the diplomatic body at large will be able to consider the subject at an early moment.

The committees appointed to consider the commercial and intercourse questions have not yet concluded their deliberations. The duty of the former committee has been found even more difficult than was anticipated. I think, however, that both committees will report soon.

I was added to the committee on commercial matters soon after its formation, and have attended all of its sittings excepting the first one.

I have, &c., &c. &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

* These reports and memoranda are printed as appendices to Mr. Seward’s No. 505, p. 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

No. 131. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 131.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, November 3, 1879. (Received January 7.) No. 502.]

Sir: I beg leave to recall your attention to the fact that the last Congress reduced the salaries of the two commissioned interpreters whom we employ in the consulates at Tientsin and Foo-Chow from $2,000 to $1,500 each, and to advise that a representation be made to the present Congress that it is desirable to review this action, and to increase their pay, with that of the interpreter at Shanghai, to $2,500 each.

It may be possible, I think, to secure the continuous services of competent men at the rate of pay mentioned$ it is a low compensation for qualified interpreters, but persons may be found occasionally who have scholarly learnings, and who would serve as interpreters, if so paid, in order to secure a certain stipend while making researches in the literature of China, or prosecuting other literary work. It is far less, however, than interpreters are paid in any other service, and less indeed, than ordinary book and corresponding clerks in mercantile houses receive.

At the present moment, the interpreter at Tientsin, very much to my regret, is serving as interpreter to the Chinese authorities at this port. As the pay he receives from us is inadequate, and as he would leave us rather than give up his Chinese employment, I have been obliged to acquiesce in the arrangement, although it is discreditable to us.

The officer at Shanghai ekes out his salary by translating deeds, contracts, &c. The work there is so great that he should give all his time to it, but no interpreter has done so for the last twenty years.

The officer at Foo-Chow has been able to continue in the service because he has been recently in charge of the consulate for a considerable period, and is now in charge at Canton.

In addition to paying the three interpreters named at the rate of $2,500 a year, we should add one more to the list at the same rate of pay, and assign him to duty at Canton. That office is an important one for many reasons, and is likely to become more so, if we are to take the steps necessary for an adequate examination of intending emigrants.

In this connection, I may suggest to you that we allow now $750 a year for cost of interpretation at the con sulfates at Amoy, Ningpo. Chinkiang and Hankow; Swatow may soon be added to the list of salaried consulates. At these five ports the cost of interpretation would come to $3,750. The work in each of these offices, however, both the consular work proper and the interpreter’s work, could easily be done by one officer. If, therefore, the interpreters employed in the more important consulates at Shanghai, Tientsin, Foo-Chow, and Canton should be promoted, as opportunities occur, to be consuls at the other ports, the amounts now allowed in the latter could be discontinued. The efficiency of the whole consular establishment would be greatly promoted is this way, and the expense of the establishment not sensibly increased.

Our consular establishment in China is gradually falling behind those of other leading powers, notably those of England, France, and Germany, for the reason that the governments indicated have educated at Peking, in the Chinese language, a large number of young men, distributed them for service in the various consulates, and gradually promoted them to full consulships. The result is that their consulates are efficient establishments, while ours are but little better than they were twenty years ago.

Something to remedy this condition of things could be done by adopting the proposals of this letter: 1st. By increasing the number of interpreters to four; and, 2d, by promoting the interpreters to the minor consulates. As it would cost the Executive only a slight degree of carefulness in the matter of appointments, and Congress no abandonment of economical considerations, not even in dollars and cents, for the one and the other to accept these suggestions, and as the results to be obtained are so manifestly desirable, I trust that my suggestions will not prove fruitless.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 132. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Seward. No. 132.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Seward.

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1879. No. 321.]

Sir: You will please report upon the judicial systems of the United States, Great Britain, and France in China, and will accompany such report with copies of the court rules and form of procedure in force under such systems.

It is desired that your report shall fully cover the grounds so as to give the Department a clear view of the various systems in force, and you may, if you think proper, present for the consideration of the Department in this connection any suggestions for the improvement of our system which may occur to you.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER.
Acting Secretary.

No. 133. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 133.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, November 18, 1879. (Received January 7.) No. 505.]

Sir: Recurring to my dispatches Nos. 482 and 499, I have the honor to inform you that the ministers present at the conferences have accepted the report of the committee upon the administration of justice, and have agreed upon a joint letter to be addressed to the Tsung-li Yamên, in accordance with its terms.

In order to make the series of papers relating to this subject complete, I beg leave to hand to you— 1st. A memorandum by myself on the general questions involved.

2d. A memorandum by myself on the so-called mixed “courts”.

3d. The report of the committee.

4th. The protocol of the conference in regard to the special matter.

5th. The joint note to the Tsmig-li Yamen.

As the questions involved have been dealt with in these papers as briefly as possible looking to their importance, I shall not attempt to renew them here.

In asking for your instructions, it is appropriate, however, that I should call your attention to the fact that the main proposition advanced in my memoranda, and accepted by the conference, is that mixed cases, civil and criminal, in which foreigners and Chinese are concerned, ought to be heard and determined in the proper court of the defendant, and in accordance with the laws of his country.

In taking up this position I have adhered to the views declared by our government with more or less precision in various legislative and executive acts.

I am clearly of opinion that those views are right, and that we should adhere to them for the future.

I am very anxious that the subject shall be carefully considered, and to receive instructions which will enable me to proceed as may be necessary to set the question at rest with the government here and in our own service.

Your approval of the main position, and your authority to proceed in concert with my colleagues as proposed in the report of the committee, will be sufficient for all immediate purposes.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 with No. 505.]

memorandum.

In considering what may he done to secure a more perfect administration of justice in cases in which Chinese are accused by our people of offenses and crimes against their persons or property, or in which reclamations are made of a civil nature, it is necessary to determine, first, the meaning of the treaties as to the manner in which such matters are to be heard and determined. The following statement is submitted by Mr. Seward to indicate the views to which he adheres and the position of his government in the matter.

criminal matters.

Article XXI of the American treaty of 1844 provides—

‘“Subjects of China who may be guilty of any criminal act towards citizens of the United States shall be arrested and punished by the Chinese authorities according to the laws of China. And citizens of the United States who may commit any crime in China shall be subject to be tried and punished only by the consul or other public functionary of the United States thereto authorized according to the laws of the United States. And in order to the prevention of all controversy and disaffection, justice shall be equitably and impartially administered on both sides.”

Another article—the XXIX—provides—

That mutineers and deserters from United States vessels shall be arrested by the Chinese authorities and “delivered up to the consuls or other officers for punishment.” It also provides that criminals being subjects of China shall not be harbored or concealed by citizens of the United States, but “shall be delivered up to justice on due requisition by the Chinese local officers addressed to those of the United States,” and “if individuals of either nation commit acts of violence and disorder, use arms to the injury of others, or create disturbances endangering life, the officers of the two governments will exert themselves to enforce order and to maintain the public peace by doing impartial justice in the premises.”

Article XI of the United States treaty of 1858 provides—

“Subjects of China guilty of any criminal act towards citizens of the United States shall be punished by the Chinese authorities according to the laws of China; and citizens of the United States, either on shore or in any merchant vessel, who may insult, trouble, or wound the persons or injure the property of Chinese, or commit any other improper act in China, shall be punished only by the consul or other public functionary thereto authorized, according to the laws of the United States.”

Article XVIII of the treaty of 1858 reproduces without change of language Article XXIX of the treaty of 1844.

Perusal of these several articles will indicate that citizens of the United States in China enjoy complete and absolute extraterritoriality in criminal matters, and that jurisdiction over Chinese who may be guilty of any criminal act towards citizens of the United States remains entirely with the Chinese Government.

In pursuance of these stipulations the United States have, by statutes which were passed, as their texts as well as their titles indicate, “to carry into full effect” the provisions of the treaties, provided for the exercise of jurisdiction in criminal matters over citizens of the United States in China, vesting all jurisdiction in this respect in the consular and diplomatic representatives of the United States in China, subject to appeal in certain cases to the circuit court in California.

The first of these statutes was enacted in 1848, the second in 1860, and the third in 1870. During this period our government has had occasion to deal with practical questions arising under the treaties in the progress of intercourse with China, and no case has occurred in which the extraterritorial privileges of Americans in relation to criminal matters have been called into question. The conditions created in this respect by the treaties stand unaffected by any divergence in practice or by any construction put upon them by either of the two governments.

It is true that of late the Chinese Government has advanced the proposition that the extraterritorial privileges of foreigners extend only so far as to give to them the right of being tried in their own courts, and of being condemned according to the remedies to be found in their own laws; but that $he laws of the Empire are, nevertheless, supreme, and that foreigners are as much bound to respect them as natives.

While it may be admitted at once that justice and fair dealing require that foreigners offending against laws rendered necessary in China as well as elsewhere by a right regard to the safety and convenience of the communities in which they reside and of the government upon whose soil they stand, should be punished for their offenses, it appears difficult to admit the broad proposition that they are amenable to Chinese law in the same sense as natives of China are, or, in point of fact, in any sense which would allow us to assent to the Chinese proposition.

The case indicated in the Chinese circular of March, 1878, will illustrate the point. It is urged that if a given street or passage is closed to the Chinese, and they may be punished for entering it, foreigners must be subject to the same restriction.

It will be admitted at once on the foreign side that it is not lawful for the foreigner to use the given street, and that he may be proceeded against in case he does so. But there is a great divergence between the treatment that he may expect and that which would be meted out against Chinese, for the prosecution in the one instance would take the form probably of a civil action for damages, while the Chinese offending would be dealt with criminally. Or, if it should happen that the laws of the country of the given foreigner would permit of a criminal prosecution, it is quite certain that the punishment inflicted would be wholly different in kind and in degree from that to which the native is subject.

There is, of course, very much in the Chinese code which is barbarous in the eyes of Western people. There is also very much that is singular and which is founded upon different conceptions of right or obligation from those prevailing in the West. Chinese law gives to parents, for instance, far broader authority over their children than is usual with us. The father may, it is said, take the life, even, of a worthless or depraved son. And having such authority a corresponding responsibility is sought to be imposed upon him. He may be punished, not only for the offenses of his child, but also because he has not so instructed him that he would not offend. So, a person who has lost property by theft may be punished for not having kept such watch over his property as to prevent its loss.

It would be idle to say that in such and similar cases foreigners offend against the native law, and that it is the duty of the foreign court to punish them. The simple truth is, that when foreigners are tried in their own courts and by their own laws no indictments against them can be sustained which do not describe offenses which would be punishable by law if committed at home, or which have been made punishable by some provision of the given treaty or enactment made in pursuance of the treaty.

It is not meant by this to assert that the only obligation of foreigners in China is to regard the laws of their own country. In actual practice it comes to this: that foreigners are bound to observe the laws of the Empire so far as they conform to the laws of their own country. It is an offense against China to commit a murder on Chinese soil. It would not be an offense against China if it was not an offense against law in China to do a murder. The person so offending may he arrested by the Chinese, and they have the right to demand that be shall be tried and punished; in the words of the treaty, “impartial justice shall be done in the premises.”

This principle may be carried further, and it may be said that we are bound to provide remedies in cases where the Chinese Government declares unlawful certain acts which are not in themselves criminal but which become so in consequence of enactments made for the public advantage. It cannot be said that throwing ballast overboard in a stream is in itself an offense against law, but the throwing overboard of ballast in a stream when it is prohibited by Chinese law, must be considered an improper act, an offense against the nation, and, as such, we are under obligation to provide a remedy, either by acknowledging the validity of the law, adopting it, so to speak, for ourselves, or by enacting a law of our own to meet the case.

The Government of the United States has not been disposed to split hairs with oriental governments in this matter, but its position may be misunderstood by other governments, and by the Chinese. It has seemed to me well, therefore, to speak with some particularity in order that no wrong ideas may be unnecessarily continued. It has seemed to me the more desirable, also, because the Chinese may be expected to advance this matter in any discussions which may take place with them having for its object the improvement of their own administration, in order that we may reach an understanding as to the language which will be held to them in response.

It does not seem necessary or possible to abandon the simple proposition that our people may be dealt with only in our own courts and according to our own laws. But so far as we can hold language to the Chinese which will indicate that we stand upon their soil in an attitude of respect and with a determination to sustain the government in the essential attributes of sovereignty, I think—and in so holding I maintain only the views of my government—that we ought not to withhold such language, nor fail to sustain it in practice by appropriate action whenever the occasion may arise.

Upon the basis herein laid down I believe that the Chinese Government will hold no dispute with us, and that we may safely approach any of the questions which require attention.

As the treaties generally are essentially the same it does not appear necessary to review their provisions, but I add for convenience the texts of several of them, and remark further only that so far as I am informed no foreign government has questioned the principle that the Chinese remain completely subject to their own authorities in criminal matters, and that all of them by legislation or otherwise have asserted the treaty exemption of their people from the local sovereignty.

The proposals which I have to submit for the improvement of the native courts will he submitted separately, and if my colleagues or any of them differ from the expressions of this part of my memorandum, it may be that they can, still support the proposals, it being distinctly understood that the object of this memorandum is to clear the way for a discussion of the proposals, and to guard against errors in any discussion which may take place with the foreign office.

civil matters.

The United States treaty of 1858 contains three articles which bear upon the subject of jurisdiction and procedure in civil cases.

The first is the XXIV, which reads—

“When there are debts due by subjects of China to citizens of the United States the latter may seek redress sin law, and, on suitable representation being made to the local authorities through the consul, they will cause due examination in the premises and take proper steps to compel satisfaction. And if citizens of the United States be indebted to subjects of China, the latter may seek redress by representation through the consul or by suit in the consular court.”

The next is the XXVII, which reads—

“All questions in regard to rights, whether of persons or property, arising between citizens of the United States in China, shall be subject to the jurisdiction and regulated by the authorities of their own government. And all controversies occurring in China between citizens of the United States and the subjects of any other government shall be regulated by the treaties existing between the United States and such governments respectively, without interference on the part of China.”

Article XXVIII determines the manner in which citizens of the United States may address the authorities of China, and Chinese our officers in China, and then provides:

“And if controversies arise between citizens of the United States and subjects of China which cannot be amicably settled otherwise, the same shall be examined and decided conformably to justice and equity by the public officers of the two nations acting in conjunction.”

These clauses were reproduced in the treaty of Tientsin from Mr. Cushing’s treaty (Wanghiya 1844) with no change in the wording which affects the intent of the stipulation.

Mr. Reed, who negotiated the treaty of 1858, does not appear to have commented at all, in his correspondence reporting the result of his negotiations, upon the hearing and effects of the stipulations which I have quoted, but Mr. Gushing did so in language of an unmistakable sort. His dispatch to the Secretary of State transmitting the treaty was dated July 5, 1844. It contains the following words:

“Americans in China, are to be deemed subject only to the jurisdiction of their government, both in criminal matters and in questions of civil right.”

This declaration is repeated by him in a dispatch dated September 29, 1844, as follows:

“In extending these principles to our intercourse with China, seeing that I have obtained the concession of absolute and unqualified exterritoriality, I considered it well to use in the treaty terms of such generality in describing the substitute jurisdiction, as, while they hold unimpaired the customary or law-of nations jurisdiction, do also leave to Congress the full and complete discretion to define, if it pleases to do so, what officers and what powers and in what form of law shall be the instruments for the protection and regulation of the citizens of the United States.”

The construction of our treaty thus given by Mr. Cushing is rigidly adhered to by him in his opinion as Attorney-General upon the act giving judicial authority to our officers in this empire, dated September 19, 1855. Mr. Gushing treats the question at much length, and with characteristic learning and acumen. His remarks upon the special topic begin with the words, “As among the nations of Chistendom,” and his conclusions are stated as follows: “First, as to a demand brought by a Chinese against an American. The controversy supposed is a civil case arising under the treaty. When it arises the proper officers of the two nations will agree that the Chinese shall go into the consular court as plaintiff, and that court will take jurisdiction of the defendant as an American. Or they may enter into a general agreement, and the commissioner may provide by a standing regulation under the statute that the consular court shall hear and decide all private claims which Chinese may prefer against Americans.

“Secondly, as to a demand by an American against a Chinese. The former must, of necessity, be content with such judicial or executive action of the Chinese Government in the premises as appertain to their institutions, and as, by special application in each case or by general application, may be required on the part of the public officers of the United States.”

For a further exposition of Mr. Cushing’s views I may refer also to an opinion given by him on the 4th of November, 1854, in regard to the authority of consuls to celebrate marriages, and in particular to the following language:

“This point (the exemption of our people from the local control) is determined very explicitly in our treaty with China, which, in the most unequivocal terms, places all the rights of Americans in China, whether as to persons or property, under the sole jurisdiction, civil and criminal, of the authorities of the United States.”

The views expressed by Mr. Gushing seem to have been those accepted by Congress in dealing with the subject-matter.

The statutes of 1848 and 1860, in pursuance of which our courts in this empire have been constituted, were enacted, as their texts and their titles declare, “to carry into full effect” the provisions of the treaties. In both may be found provisions under which the consular courts created by them “are vested with all the judicial authority necessary to execute the provisions of the treaties,” not only in regard to crimes and, misdemeanors, but also in regard to civil rights of Americans in China.

It is not to be forgotten or overlooked in this connection that, while the earlier act was passed in 1848 and the later act in 1860, the opinion of Mr. Gushing is dated in 1855. It was given then in full view of the earlier act, sustaining the proposition that the provisions of that act were in accordance with the stipulations of the treaty, and shows that the later act was not passed in ignorance, but that it confirms the earlier act and the interpretation given in it of the right meaning of the treaties.

The opinion of Mr. Cushing was transmitted to the consuls in China by the Department of State in a letter dated the 8th of October, 1855, “for their instruction.”

In view of the carefulness which the Government of the United States has shown in dealing with this matter, it would be very strange, indeed, if it had misconceived the bearing of the treaties, or had omitted to provide for mixed courts if such courts are necessary to carry into full effect the provisions of the treaties. When we find, therefore, that the measures taken by our government contain no provisions for mixed courts, and when, indeed, we can draw to the light no statement made upon authority and based upon the American treaties that such courts are needed to carry into effect the treaties, we must conclude that they are not called for by the treaties as construed by us.

In this connection I have to state farther that one of my predecessors transmitted to the Department of State the code of rules proposed by the Chinese Government for the control of the so-called mixed court at Shanghai, and that in view of certain ambiguous expressions occurring in the rules, in consequence of inadvertence in the translation, the Secretary, writing under date of February 18, 1889, instructed the minister “to inform the Chinese ministers of foreign affairs that this government cannot consent to the trial of a complaint [against an American], civil or criminal, otherwise than in the consular courts of the United States. In cases, however, when a Chinese subject may be plaintiff, we have no objection to the presence of an officer of that government as an assessor, but the decision must be made by the consul.”

In what has preceded, I have not attempted at all to reason upon the subject, but only to state the views of my government as expressed in the action of Congress and in the declarations of the Executive. It remains to speak, first, of the position assumed by the Chinese; second, that of other governments; and third, of certain general considerations which must affect our conclusions.

In dealing with the views of the Chinese Government, three very significant facts may be called to mind.

First, that while in theory and in practice, since the beginning of our intercourse under the treaties, the United States have adhered to the principle that civil matters as well as criminal are triable in the courts of the defendants, no instance is on record in which the Chinese Government has complained of our procedure.

Second, that the Chinese Government has established a mixed court, so called, at Shanghai, in which suits against Chinese defendants brought by foreigners may be tried, and that this court is so constituted that the native magistrate decides all matters coming before him, and that the foreign officer present acts only in the capacity of an assessor or assistant, for the purpose of securing a clear exposition of the facts and considerations upon which the foreign complainant relies.

Third, that the principle as applicable to mixed cases occurring between British subjects and subjects of China is recognized in the convention made between the plenipotentiaries of Great Britain and China in 1876.

The facts regarding the adherence of our government to the principle of the complete extraterritoriality of our people in civil and criminal matters have been set down already, and their effect as bearing upon the matter in hand is not shaken by the occasional departures from the rule which have happened at the ports. For it is true that the subject is one of some difficulty, and that in our own and in other consulates the rule has been departed from. Such departures, however, have not been so frequent as to constitute a rule, and, as this dispatch will indicate, they are discredited by the Chinese Government and by the governments of Great Britain and the United States, the three powers whose concern in the matter has been greatest.

The principle governing the mixed court at Shanghai was never doubted by those who promoted the establishment of the court. Of these I was one of the most prominent among the foreign agents acting in this behalf, with Sir H. Parkes as a committee of the consular body. That principle is set forth in the rules finally adopted by the Chinese Government and communicated to the legations in October, 1868. The rules, as so communicated and as accepted by England and the United States, are printed in Mr. Mayer’s book, “Treaties with China, &c.” (page 222). I quote from them as follows: 1. “An official having the rank of subprefect will be deputed to reside within the foreign settlement.* * * He will decide all civil and commercial suits between Chinese residents within the settlements, and also between Chinese and foreign residents, in cases where Chinese are defendants, by Chinese law. * * *

2. “Where a foreigner is concerned in a cause to be tried, a consul or his deputy shall sit at the trial with the subprefect.”

The meaning of the rules quoted from might have been made more clear, perhaps, by the addition to the second one, of words intended to explain that the function of the consul or his deputy is to assist the magistrate only. I am not aware, however, that any one has ever misconstrued the rules, or that any foreign consul or deputy has assumed to sit with the subprefect as judge, having equal and co-ordinate authority.

During my tenure of office at Shanghai, extending over fourteen years, I had, of course, occasion to ask the iutendant of circuit to deal with the graver cases brought to my notice by our people. A notable instance was the suit of Hill vs. Takee, in 1875, in which an account of about $200,000 was claimed. The minutes of the trial were published at the time, and show that I sat with the native officer in the trial, and took a large part in bringing the evidence before him and in discussing the case with him, but that I never questioned his right to decide the case, and that he did decide it.

The provisions of the Chefoo convention affecting this question will be found in Mr. Mayer’s book, page 46; they are as follows:

“It is understood that so long as the laws of the two countries differ from each other, there can be but one principle to guide judicial proceedings in mixed cases in China, namely, that the case is tried by the official of the defendant’s nationality; the official of the plaintiff’s nationality merely attending to watch the proceedings in the interests of justice. The law administered will he the law of the nationality of the officer trying the case. This is the meaning of hui-tung, indicating combined action in judicial proceedings, in Article XVI of the treaty of Tientsin; and this is the course to be respectively followed by the officers of either nationality.”

The question has been raised whether this stipulation refers to civil matters. Its language would seem to indicate that it does, but the reference to the article of the British treaty, which deals with criminal matters, looks in the other direction.

I believe that I may say, however, that both the English minister and the foreign office regard the language quoted as covering civil matters, and I have made reference to it in this sense in speaking with the ministers of the foreign office.

As to the views of other foreign governments, I may say that those of England would appear to coincide exactly with those held by the United States. The legislation of England has proceeded apparently upon the proposition that civil trials, as well as criminal, must be heard and determined in the courts of the defendant, and this position has been emphasized by the part taken by English officials in the creation of the mixed court at Shanghai and the stipulation already quoted from the Chefoo convention.

It is quite true that a degree of ambiguity marks the text of the English treaty. Article XXII of the treaty of 1858 reads—

“Should any Chinese subject fail to discharge debts incurred to a British subject, or should he fraudulently abscond, the Chinese authorities will do their utmost to effect his arrest and enforce recovery of the debt. The British authorities will likewise do their utmost to bring to justice any British subject fraudulently absconding or failing to discharge debts incurred by him to a Chinese subject.”

The language of this article is not quite so explicit and clear as the language of the XVI Article of the United States treaty of 1844, or that of the XXIV Article of the treaty of 1858, yet it is sufficiently clear, as I think, when read by the ordinary rules for the interpretation of public documents, to sustain the proposition that the ultimate recourse of the English claimant is to the native authorities and to the procedure which is sanctioned by their law.

The great stumbling-block in the interpretation of the English treaty has been found in the XVII Article of the treaty of 1858. That article is as follows:

“A British subject, having reason to complain of a Chinese, must proceed to the consulate and state his grievance. The consul will inquire into the merits of the case, and do his utmost to arrange it amicably. In like manner, if a Chinese have reason to complain of a British subject, the consul shall no less listen to his complaint, and endeavor to settle it in a friendly manner. If disputes take place of such a nature that the consul cannot arrange them amicably, then he shall request the assistance of the Chinese authorities that they may together examine into the merits of the case and decide it equitably.”

In the celebrated case of collision between the Chinese junk Kui-tsai-fah and the English steamer Kwangtung, a motion was made before the chief judge of the British supreme court at Shanghai (February 10, 1875, vide North China Herald of February 11), asking the court to declare null and void a judgment made by the English consul at Foo Chow, and theTaotai of that circuit acting conjointly, and the application was refused by the judge, who declared that the trial had been conducted in accordance with the XVII Article of the treaty.

It does not appear, however, that this reading of the treaty has been sustained by the English Government by legislation or otherwise; but, on the contrary, the stipulation regarding the trial of mixed cases to be found in the Chefoo convention was, made at a latter date, and is a more solemn and authoritative declaration as having been made by the chief representative of Her Majesty’s Government in China, and assented to by the Chinese Government.

The XVII Article of the British treaty has its parallel in the XXIV and XXVIII Articles of the American treaties of 1844 and 1858, respectively, which provide, as has already been shown, that “If controversies arise between citizens of the United States and subjects of China, which cannot be amicably settled otherwise, the same shall be examined and decided conformably to justice and equity by the public officers of the two nations acting in conjunction.”

The conclusions of the two governments have been taken, therefore, in view of stipulations of some ambiguity in each case, and the identity of the conclusions reached by each without concert with the other, and assented to directly of inferentially by China, must go far to strengthen the case for both.

The stipulations of other governments than those of the United States and Great Britain do not differ sensibly from those which have been quoted from the treaties of the latter. In general it may be said that they are neither less nor more explicit.

The Danish treaty, however, is an exception to this rule. Its XV Article is as follows:

“All questions in regard to rights, whether of property or person, arising between Danish subjects shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Danish authorities, and all controversies occurring in China between subjects of Denmark and the subjects of any other foreign power, shall he regulated by the treaties existing between Denmark and such powers, respectively, without interference on the part of China. But if, in such controversies, Chinese subjects be parties involved the Chinese authorities shall be assessor in all proceedings as in the cases provided for by Articles XVI and XVII of this treaty.”

The articles here referred to are, first, the article relating to criminal jurisdiction, and second, an article which is in the same terms as the XVII Article of the British treaty of 1858.

The Danish treaty was made in 1863, and the article quoted is construed by Her Majesty’s minister, who had a familiar knowledge of the negotiations, to mean that cases against Danes are to be heard by the officers of Denmark in the presence of Chinese officials and with their assistance, but that the judgments are to be those of the officer of the defendant’s nationality, and reciprocally that cases brought by Danes are to be heard and determined by Chinese officials assisted by officers of the plaintiff’s nationality.

The Russian treaty of 1860 contains in its VIII Article the following clause:

“Les contestations qui ne se rapportent point à des affaires de commerce entre marchands, telles que litiges, plaintes, &c., sont jugées de consentement mutuel par le Consul et le Chef local, et les delinquents sont punis d’apres les lois de leur pays.”

I am not in position to state whether the question of jurisdiction involved has been examined into by the several other governments having treaties with China. It would seem, however, that none of the governments have made provision by law for the execution of their treaties on the basis of joint jurisdiction in mixed cases, and that all the legislation which has been enacted has been directed to establish courts before which defendants of the several nationalities, respectively, may be pursued, whether in criminal or civil matters, and that, in practice, civil cases between persons of all nationalities and the Chinese have been tried as a rule in the courts of the defendants.

Having thus dealt with the question as affected by the construction put upon the treaties by the different governments, I pass now to state certain general considerations which must affect our conclusions.

Under this head I desire to point out that the situation created by the treaties as I read them, although abnormal, is not unusual or unprecedented.

Mr. Cushing in his opinion, to which I have already referred, quotes authorities to show that in the middle ages it was “common to give to distinct codes of law a personal application, according to nations instead of a merely territorial force,” and states that we have at the moment precisely the same fact before us in British India, where by statute “a case of controversy between Mohammedans is to be governed by their laws and usages, and a case of controversy between Gentoos is to be governed by theirs, and when it is a controversy between a Mohammedan and a Gen too the law of the defendant’s nation is to be applied to the case.” He carries the argument further, indeed, and points out that in substantial effect the law is administered in the United States by nationalities, that is to say, that in certain cases it is determined, not by the place of the individual, but by the State to which he belongs.

It is unnecessary, of course, to extend arguments in this direction. Reference, however, may be made to the treaties between Western powers and Japan in which there is no possible ambiguity of language. Article VI of the American treaty of 1858 is a sample of all in this respect. It reads:

“Americans committing offenses against Japanese shall be tried in, American consular courts, and when found guilty shall be punished according to American law. Japanese committing offenses against Americans shall be tried by the Japanese authorities, and punished according to Japanese law. The consular courts shall be open to Japanese creditors to enable them to recover their just claims against American citizens, and the Japanese courts shall in like manner be open to American citizens for the recovery of their just claims against Japanese.”

Articles VIII and IX of the treaty between China and Japan (1871), and IX and X of the treaty between Japan and Corea, contain provisions which practically sustain the extraterritorial system as stated in this memorandum. And within a short period a Corean who committed a murder on Chinese soil was sent to Corea for trial. The principle of extraterritoriality appears, indeed, to receive spontaneous acceptance among Asiatic peoples.

A further argument is the one drawn from the necessity of the case. This was clearly expressed in the protocol signed in this city in 1876 by the representatives of Russia, Germany, France, Spain, and the United States. I quote from that paper, as follows:

“It may be said that a foreign officer sitting as co-judge with a Chinese magistrate cannot exercise, in the absence of treaty stipulations of a more precise nature than those now existing, a greater authority than he would if his voice were consultative only. Each officer has independent functions and responsibilities by reason of his separate position and allegiance, and directs his conduct accordingly. Judgments can be enforced as matters stand, only under the forms of law to which the defendant and the judge of his nationality are subject. It may be said, indeed, that in effect no judgment can be given that does not conform to the laws of the defendant’s nation, and that Chinese and foreign laws do not always fall within the same line.”

Perhaps no stronger argument in favor of the proposition that civil matters between Chinese and foreigners must be tried in the court of the defendant could be stated than the one which is implied in the foregoing statement. It is one of the first principles of interpretation of public instruments that they shall be construed with regard to actual conditions. In this instance the conditions indicate that no other procedure can be successfully prosecuted, and it must be supposed that the framers of the treaties appreciated this fact and intended that their work should be interpreted accordingly.

The protocol of 1876 raises another point of great importance. If civil matters are to be heard in courts in which native and foreign officials having co-ordinate and equal authority sit as the judges, it is more than probable that such courts will lean to the application of native law as being that of the natural sovereignty. In such event the gravest dangers might be apprehended, as, for instance, in the definitions of rights and obligations, as of married persons, the succession to property real and personal, the construction of contracts, &c.

It may be answered that one of the treaties (the Russian already quoted) provides for a joint hearing and the application of the law of the defendant in determining the judgment. This proposition is much more satisfactory than one which appeals to no code or body of laws. But it does not alter the fact that the voice of the officer of the plaintiff will be as strong if he is held to act in a consultative capacity as in the absence of more clearly drawn stipulations it could be were he to assume equal authority with the judge of the defendant. And what do we come to upon this basis but this, that for no essential purpose we must undertake to provide with China regulations defining the way in which judges so acting shall exercise their authority, who is to preside, who is to decide disputed points in procedure, and what is to be done in regard to differences of opinion upon final judgment, or otherwise. In point of fact, a court composed of two judges belonging and owing allegiance to different nationalities, passing upon matters arising between persons of different nationalities, and in which, while each has equal powers, no referee is provided for, is, to say the least, inconvenient. In such a court there can be no award unless both judges agree. It is a court, indeed, the like of which probably has never been seen in any land or in any condition of society.

Nor does the matter become better when we remember that no appeals or ultimate recourse from such courts have been provided for, either in the treaties or in any other way.

It comes, then, to this, that while upon the theory that all civil matters are to be tried in the court of the defendant, there are open to complainants against Chinese the courts of the Empire and to complainants against foreigners the consular and other courts which have been established in China by the several foreign governments, upon the other theory we stand utterly unprovided with information as to the rights, powers, and responsibilities of the judges whether upon the trial or afterwards, and it becomes the duty of the several governments to take steps at once to remedy a condition of things which is unsatisfactory in the extreme.

The question arises here whether it may not be possible to establish a system of mixed courts resting upon the basis of the treaties as they are construed by some persons, and provided in pursuance of further-and more definite agreements with the Chinese Government, with a staff of judges with rules of procedure and appropriate codes of law.

This question was considered in 1876, and the conclusion of the foreign representatives then present was, that whether eventually efforts so directed may be desirable, the time has not yet arrived to undertake the work.

The establishment of mixed courts, that is to say, the inauguration of a complete system such as the term implies, would indeed be no slight undertaking.

It has been urged that the work has been done in Egypt and that it may be repeated here. But what has been done in Egypt, certainly with a very large measure of success, may not be possible in China. The rulers of Egypt were men some of whom at least were educated in the schools of Europe, and some of them, including the Khedive, were not only persons of enlightened understandings but earnestly bent upon working out the reform. In China, however, there are no indications that the government appreciates the insufficiency of its judicial system, and, so far as I know, not one person among the Chinese has moved for reform.

Who, then, is to undertake the great labor of preparing a code, of organizing a scheme for the establishment of mixed courts, of persuading the Chinese Government to accept them and of bringing about those negotiations with foreign States which must be carried to completion before the scheme can be put into operation? This government stands wrapped in the traditions of centuries, accustomed to look to the past for all the wisdom which is needed in conducting the affairs of State, as immovable as anything in the way of government can be conceived to be. What hope is there, then, of securing action upon the subject in the near future or finding the government earnest in standing by the new establishment when created?

The situation here is different from that in Egypt in another important particular, A foreign population of 100,000, or more persons, is resident in the narrow district which comprises the habitable section of that country. In China there are barely live or six thousand Europeans and Americans, and these are scattered along a sea coast of more than 2,000 miles, in isolated and frequently unimportant communities. The imperative necessity of reform which was felt in Egypt cannot be felt here under such circumstances, and neither can it be possible to introduce the system of mixed courts upon so extensive a plan as to serve the purpose everywhere and in a uniform manner.

But supposing that the scheme may be inaugurated successfully, would it, after all, be in the direction of progress so entirely as may be thought at first sight? To-day we enjoy the benefit of the extraterritorial system, perfectly. It is our own laws which are administered among us, and these are administered by our own functionaries, assisted by unofficial citizens in an important way. We do not always have trained officers, and doubtless some grievous wrongs have been done in China in the name of justice, yet persons of Anglo-Saxon or other origin may be better satisfied with this imperfect system than to submit to codes of practice and law which must necessarily vary in many respects from the system to which each has been accustomed in his natural home.

While it is possible for us to reason in this way, may it not be possible for the Chinese to reason in the same manner with even more force? If their people are obliged often to put up, in their prosecution of foreigners, with what they may consider failures of justice, they at least are not judged by codes and in courts foreign to their education and experience, the intricacies of which, if made to suit us, would long remain inscrutable to them. The elaborate and expensive systems of Europe may not be at all suitable for the purposes of justice here, as applied to the Chinese.

Complicated as is the extraterritorial system, it has this merit, it is not difficult for Asiatic States to assent to it, for it is one with which they have long been familiar. Japan and China, as has been shown, have based their own relations upon it. Both fret under it as imposed by foreigners, not so much because of any injury it has worked in its right application, as because its intent has been strained sometimes and because foreigners in zeal for reform have instilled wrong ideas of the objects of foreign States. But even so, it is easier for an Asiatic State to yield foreigners broadly to the jurisdiction of their own officers than to attempt to establish quasi national mixed courts whose judges can be named only under guarantees. The indignity of the extraterritorial system may come home to them sometimes. The indignity of having to accept foreign dictation in the appointment of officers in their own pay could hardly be felt less.

Is it not true, moreover, that progressive measures to be successful must be undertaken within normal lines of experience and capacity? We may accomplish much in China by the force of example. I hope that our own courts and the courts of other countries are doing much in their way. If the lesson to be drawn from them shall be adopted into the Chinese system, which, bad as it is, must have many merits, progress will run in a right direction. It is by the amelioration of the native system rather than by fastening upon the Chinese still another abnormal and exotic institution that I think the best results may be accomplished.

There is no country, I feel sure, which wishes to perpetuate here unnecessarily the extraterritorial system. To this government our own has said more than once, that it will be ready to lay down that system when China shall have demonstrated that it is no longer a necessity. To Japan we have said the same thing, and in both countries an effort is being made to learn what our laws are, with a view possibly to ascertain how far they may be safely incorporated among their own. To this good work we have contributed largely in various ways, and notably by offering educational facilities to the youth of both countries. Is it too much to hope that under all the influences at work both countries will come sooner or later to enter upon efforts of & very positive sort to demonstrate that their administration, when it touches our own, is not to be condemned and may be intrusted safely with the administration of justice?

It would be idle to deny, however, that the mixed courts proposal is one which is greatly favored by foreigners in China. There is an abiding distrust of the native courts, resultant from bitter experiences on the part of foreigners and from the general ignorance which prevails among us of Chinese modes of reasoning and procedure. But so far as the proposal can be pursued, having regard to existing treaty stipulations and to Chinese methods and rights, I am in favor of it.

To be more exact, there is much in the treaties which will justify us in demanding that the native courts shall be open to our suitors and that our own officers shall be allowed to sit upon the trial to assist the native magistrate in the investigation of the facts and the law, and in the preparation of a careful record. When so constituted the given court will have many of the features of a mixed court. We can perhaps yield as much to native officers in our own courts. This at least was my own practice while at Shanghai, and it is justified by the view of my government, as expressed in the dispatch of February 18, 1869, from which I have already quoted.

We may indeed go further, and endeavor to secure from this government the adoption of rules of procedure upon such trials which will conform more or less to our own practice, and still later the adoption of a code by which commercial cases shall be decided in the native courts. If the regulations and the code as proposed agree measurably with the principles familiar to us, a degree of uniformity in practice and in judgments may be expected which will leave little to be desired at the moment, and the encouragement given to China will be greater, as I think, than if we pursue the idea of mixed courts. For after all these can be expected to last only during the period of transition, and may of themselves bar efforts in the direction of the only progress which will be normal, that by which China shall move towards the establishment of a more satisfactory yet purely national system of jurisprudence.

There may be some who will say, and certainly with great force, that we are not looking now to results which, if possible at all, must be very distant; that we need at the moment a system which will give better results to the persons actually upon the scene. To such I answer that if mixed courts properly so called can be introduced in any near future, we shall not hasten the day by departing in advance from the position which has been created for us by the treaties. Nor, as I think, shall we hasten the day by attempting at the moment to commit the government to the proposal to establish such courts. Whatever may be the ultimate object, the object now is to take tentative steps intended to secure a measure of benefit at once, and which will leave us at liberty to move for broader results later on, in view of farther experience and a larger study of the subject.

We come now to the defects of the Chinese system, and to a consideration of the measures which may be undertaken in order to secure a more satisfactory condition of things so far as our interests are affected thereby.

In the protocol of 1876, the following language is used:

“There can be no doubt that the state of the Chinese judicial establishment, as it affects foreigners, is unsatisfactory. No code of procedure worthy to be called such exists. The magistrates, secretaries, and constables are often corrupt. Judgments are secured only after a great deal of exertion, and persistent efforts have to be made to secure their execution. Serious annoyances arise from, the fact that it is often difficult to discover the officer who has jurisdiction in given cases, and to whom the consular officer should apply to secure a hearing for his countrymen, and again because so far as foreigners are concerned no Chinese appellate courts exist. For the latter-reason questions which should be decided by appeal can only be treated by political recourse through the diplomatic agents, and become the subject of long and annoying negotiations.”

To this statement should be added the further fact that in matters of complaint, both criminal and civil, but particularly in the latter, the Chinese officials frequently place difficulties in the way of the appearance of the prosecutor, and that no adequate records are kept, so that attempts to secure revision of their action is attended with unnecessary difficulties. It happens sometimes, moreover, that the consular officer is refused the position and authority at the trial to which he is entitled by treaty, or, if not by treaty, by the necessities of the case as growing out of the peculiarities of the Chinese system.

Adhering, then, to the proposition that all cases, criminal and civil, are to be heard in the court of the defendant, and in view of the statement just made of the defects of the present situation, I submit that the better administration of justice in cases in which foreigners are complainants requires: 1st. That the courts in which, at the several ports, the complaints of our people, criminal and civil, are to be heard and determined should be designated.

2d. That the right to appear in person and with their witnesses, and to have compulsory process to compel the attendance of native witnesses, should be acknowledged.

3d. That all trials should be open and the consul of the complainant entitled to be present, to sit with the magistrate, and to assist in placing the evidence before the court.

4th. That in graver cases and in all cases, when demanded, a full and accurate record of all the proceedings, the evidence, &c., should be made.

The reforms more urgently needed, as I think, are embraced in the foregoing four-paragraphs. We may move, however, to secure further:

5th. The declaration of the rules of procedure which are to govern in the trial of mixed cases against Chinese.

6th. The declaration of the laws of China, in commercial matters more particularly or, in default of such laws, for the preparation of a code to be used in cases in which Chinese are defendants.

7th. The establishment of a court of appeal for the revision of all proceedings of the courts of first instance.

Upon these several propositions I remark as follows:

In regard to the first, it will not be necessary as I think to go further than to commit the government to instruct its provincial officers to declare to the consuls at the several ports in what courts such matters are to be heard. Circumstances differ at the several ports, and it might be difficult for the government here to name the courts, or even to adhere rigidly to arrangements made under the rule.

In regard to the second, the right of personal appearance, as has been shown, has not always been admitted. It is essential to any system which may he considered at all satisfactory, and the same may he said of the right of the complainant to the compulsory attendance of witnesses. It happens frequently in China that native witnesses are very averse to making an appearance in court.

In regard to the third proposal, the considerations which demand that trials shall he open are obvious, and the principle is substantially acknowledged in the Chinese system. It is only in the case of foreigners that ordinary matters are heard with closed doors. In speaking of the presence of the consul and his functions, it is to be said that the Chinese system does not admit of the intervention of unofficial persons as counselors and advocates, that such persons are in fact unknown among the Chinese, and that suitors are not always treated with becoming deference. In a general way it may be said that a foreign suitor would have extreme difficulty, if unassisted by his national officer, in placing his case before the court and in securing a record.

It is not to be forgotten, on the other hand, that what we demand from the Chinese in this respect will be demanded by them in return in cases where their complainants are concerned as against our own people. It is desirable, therefore, not to be over-explicit as to the functions of the consular officer, lest something may be demanded in return which would be inconvenient for us to admit. A great deal must be left, under the circumstances, to the tact of the given consular officer when sitting in a Chinese court, and to be determined, upon the other hand, by the established rules of our own courts when Chinese officers are present to watch the proceedings of our courts. The Chinese system, although undefined, is elastic, and experience has demonstrated, as I believe, that when we have once secured for consular officers a standing in the court, they will be able, without difficulty, to aid their nationals perfectly in the presentation of their matters.

In regard to the fourth proposal, no part of a judicial officer’s duty is more important and nothing is more essential to the interests of justice than that a complete record shall be made. Such records do not seem to be required by Chinese law, at least are not provided for in the penal code, and, so far as my observation has extended, have never been made in mixed cases excepting upon the request of the foreign official interested.

In regard to the fifth proposal, I should say that, subject to the general proposals herein made, the preparation of a code of procedure is not so essential a matter as to demand attention in the capital. It is the part of courts everywhere to frame their own rules, and these may be worked out best, as I think, by the local officials and the consuls concerned. There is, moreover, much in the Chinese procedure to which we could not formally assent. A Chinese magistrate who had been forbidden to use the bamboo upon a recalcitrant witness would consider that his opportunities to do justice had been practically cut off, yet no foreign representative would care to approve the use of torture. Our presence in their courts will invariably discourage its use and may bring about its discontinuance, but to-day it is an integral part of their system to which they adhere with the greatest tenacity. This was shown at Shanghai and here when the mixed court rules were under discussion.

In the sixth proposal, I have had in view not only the fact that their commercial law is but little better than an indigested series of precedents based upon local customs and local decisions, but also the further fact, that any code which they may consent to frame will be very imperfect at first and built up by slow degrees. I have not proposed that such code shall be made applicable to foreigners, but, of course, if it shall come to be sufficient there will be many reasons why foreigners should adopt it. It is enough to say that there is no hope to-day that the Chinese could be brought to provide a code at any near date under which we could judge our people and they theirs.

As for the court of appeal proposed under the seventh head, I fear that we must consider it also a matter to be kept in view and worked for with no immediate prospect of success. As matters go, all appeals against the decisions of the native magistrates in cases in which our people are concerned become matters for political representation here in the capital. In putting forward, then, a proposal for the establishment of an appellate court, we shall have frequent opportunities to urge the matter upon the foreign office.

It is a proposition which stands by itself, and which can be thrown into definite form when the right moment arrives.

In submitting this memorandum to my colleagues, I must apologize for its length. It has been drafted for momentary use and without time to compress it into briefer form.

In submitting it I desire also to record my impression that the judicial situation as it affects foreigners is every year becoming less unsatisfactory. The Chinese officials not only evince an increasing degree of trust in our courts, but they are more ready to listen to the complaints of our people. In fact, some instances have recently occurred in which the native magistrates have made haste to repair, unmoved by our consuls, injuries done to the interests of our people by their own. Under such circumstances forbearance becomes more easy and there is room for hope that systematic and well-conceived efforts to secure better conditions will not altogether fail.

The question affecting the mixed court at Shanghai will be dealt with in a separate memorandum.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.
Peking, October 4, 1879.

[Inclosure 2 with No. 505.]

memorandum on the mixed court at shanghai.

In considering what may be done to improve the mixed court (so-called) at Shanghai, reference may be made to the following printed papers: 1st. To a memorandum by Mr. Alabaster, Her Majesty’s vice-consul, not dated, but prepared in 1866. With this memorandum, as printed at Shanghai, will be found the rules originally adopted by the Taotai and consular body, and a set of rules for hard-labor prisoners.

2d. The regulations of the court framed by the Tsung-li Yamên (foreign office) in 1868, and published, as approved by the foreign legations, in Mr. Mayer’s compilation of the Treaties, &c., at page 222.

3d. The report of Mr. Davenport, Her Majesty’s vice-consul, published in the commercial reports of Her Majesty’s consuls for 1872. (China No. 2.)

4th. The reports of Mr. Yates, United States vice-consul-general; Mr. Haas, Austro-Hungarian vice-consul; and Mr. Alabaster, Her Majesty’s vice-consul, published in the commercial reports of Her Majesty’s consuls for 1875. (China No. 5, Part II.)

5th. The report of Mr. Gardner, Her Majesty’s vice-consul, published in the commercial reports of Her Majesty’s consuls for 1879. (China No. 1.)

The several officers named have all acted as assessors in the mixed court, and have spoken of its defects from personal experience of the working of the court.

Reference to the mixed court is made also in the Chefoo agreement (Mr. Mayer’s Treaties, page 46), and in the protocol signed by the foreign representatives at Peking in 1876.

The mixed court at Shanghai might be styled, with more exactness, a Chinese court for the foreign settlements at Shanghai.

In earlier years, Chinese offenders, arrested by the police of the English and American settlements, were sent to the district magistrate by the English or American consul, with a written statement of the offense committee. Criminal charges other than those brought forward by the police and all civil complaints were laid before the Taotai or magistrate by the consul concerned, by letter, and decided by the native official, usually after an ex-parte examination of the persons complained of.

This condition of things proved to be intolerable, and the consular body at Shanghai, in 1864, moved for a reform. It seemed to the consuls of that date, of whom the writer was one, that it was desirable to secure: 1st. The appointment of a native officer to act as magistrate of first instance in all minor cases, civil and criminal, brought forward by our people against Chinese at the port, including police cases reported by the foreign police force.

2d. Recognition of the right to delegate officers to sit with the native magistrate so appointed in order to watch proceedings, and to assist complainants in the presentation of their matters.

3d. An understanding with the intendant of circuit, under which he would hear person ally graver matters, assisted by the chief consular officer of the foreigner concerned, and appeals from the decision of the magistrate of the court above mentioned.

These proposals having been thrown into the form of rules by Sir Harry Parkes and myself, acting as a committee of the consular body, were laid before the intendant of circuit, who approved them, and appointed a wei-yuen, or deputy, to act as magistrate, in accordance with their provisions.

Various attempts were made during the ensuing three or four years to place the court upon a more satisfactory basis; and, more particularly, to secure for it the recognition of the Imperial Government. These culminated in the acceptance by the foreign office here, in 1868, of the rules published in Mr. Mayer’s book.

It will be noticed, on reference to the rules so agreed upon, that an officer of the rank of subprefect is deputed to reside within the settlement, and has jurisdiction in grave criminal cases, which are to be dealt with by the magistrate of the district.

An appeal to the Taotai may be taken when a foreigner is concerned, and he is dissatisfied with the judgment of the court of first instance.

In practice, however, criminal cases of less importance than those contemplated by the rules, particularly those in which foreigners are not directly concerned, are referred to the district magistrate.

More important civil cases have sometimes been heard by the Taotai, assisted by the mixed court magistrate, and sometimes by the magistrate alone.

The failures of the mixed court, as stated by the different foreign officers who have acted in it, are as follows:

Mr. Davenport (report of 1870) declares: I. That the jurisdiction of the court is “too circumscribed;” that the magistrates’ warrants, &c., run only within the limits of the settlements, and that difficulty has been found in reaching the property of defendants when situated in the interior.

II. “That the rank of the magistrate is too low;” that the subprefect, so-called, is considered merely a “deputed officer,” and does not enjoy the authority which would belong of right to an officer of independent functions. He points out, in this connection, that the magistrate can use the “bamboo” and “cangue,” but cannot inflict the other punishments laid down in the penal code; that his seal is a wooden one, provided by the provincial government, and not of brass supplied from Peking; that many defendants are superior to him in rank, over whom he can exercise jurisdiction, and that his pay and allowances are inadequate.

III. That the magistrate meets with difficulties growing out of the fact that there is no reciprocity between his court and the supreme court; that is to say, that while a consular officer sits with the magistrate for the trial of complaints against Chinese, Chinese officials have no functions in the supreme court.

IV. “That the inadequacy of punishments inflicted encourages crime.”

V. “That British subjects are reckless in their dealings with the natives,” making advances without security and contracts without regard to formalities.

Mr. Davenport recommends— 1st. That the mixed court should be placed under the direct authority of the intendant, and all writs should be issued in his name.

Under this system he believes that conflicts of authority between the mixed court and the district magistrate would be avoided; that the court would enjoy greater consideration in the eyes of the natives, &c.

2d. That all cases between Chinese and British subjects should be tried by the consul and intendant of circuit.

3d. That a system of hard labor would have a deterrent effect upon criminals, and might be instituted by the municipal council.

Mr. Yates (report of 1875) states briefly: I. That the magistrate is a wei-yuen, or deputy, and, as such, disinclined to deal with graver criminal cases. Such cases are referred to the district magistrate, and in his court there is no provision for the appearance of prosecutors or the presence of consular officers.

II. That the magistrate appears to be unable, or to fear, to bring to bear in important civil cases any means to enforce his judgments excepting persuasion, the promotion of composition between the parties, and the imprisonment of the judgment debtor.

Mr. Yates believes that the mixed court should be made a Foo Min Tung Chih Yamên, and states that this would give the magistrate “the judicial authority of a district magistrate for the district comprised within the settlements.” He thinks that the system of punishment is essentially Chinese, and while he fails to see how it can he changed, believes that it answers very well.

Mr. Haas (report of 1875) is of opinion— I. “That the regulations of the court are vague, and give nearly no power to the magistrate.”

II. That the actual position of the Chinese magistrate is not that of a real magistrate, but that of a delegate of the Taotai.

He advises— 1st. That the magistrate should be styled Tung-Chih, which would give him powers “adequate to the position.”

2d. That he should have a more liberal salary and sufficient allowances.

3d. That the prison and other accommodations of the Yamên should be improved.

4th. That the practice of sending offenders to the district magistrate should be abandoned.

5th. That the inspector of police should know the Chinese language.

Mr. Alabaster (report of 1875) declares that “the mixed court has been productive of immense advantages,” but that it is far from perfect, chiefly for the following reasons: I. “The absence of a definite code of law.”

II. “The unsatisfactory nature of the punishments.”

III. “The want of permanence in the officer attached to it, and the dependent position of the magistrate.”

In regard to a code of law, Mr. Alabaster alleges that the penal code of China, while “suited to the conditions of ordinary Chinese life, must fail utterly in a mixed community like that of the settlement,” and instances the facts that “wrecking is considered by the Chinese quite justifiable;” “forgery is only venial;” “receiving stolen property is no offense at all:” while “petty assault” is visited almost as aggravated manslaughter.

In regard to the punishments, he declares that “it is scarcely too strong language to say that they reflect discredit on all concerned, whether the authorities who authorize them, the officers who inflict them, or the public who permit them.”

In regard to the want of permanence, he alleges that the foreign assessors are frequently changed, and that the officer who so acts should “look forward to it as his career in life.” He advises: 1st. That the Chinese should be urged to adopt the “Code Napoleon,” or, better still, the “Indian criminal code,” as the basis of the classification of crime and the measure of its punishment; or, at least, that “graver cases should be tried more formally and deliberately, the prisoner being committed for trial as in European countries, and the exact nature of the charge to be brought carefully considered before the trial.”

2d. That a jail be established on the model of those used at Alipore and elsewhere in India, in which “the criminal is considered simply as a subject for a course of treatment under which the energies which are ruining him and injuring society may be so directed that he becomes a valuable member of society.”

3d. That a permanent assessor be appointed by concerted action of the Chinese and foreign governments interested.

4th. That it is very desirable “to make the magistrate more independent,” and that “the conflict of jurisdiction between him and the district magistrate should be set at rest, and to this end that the settlements should be erected into a distinct Chinese jurisdiction.”

The report of Mr. Gardner (1878) is the fullest of the series (some of the others deal, in fact, only with special points), and is very interesting indeed.

It is divided, on the criminal side, into three parts, in which are considered— 1st. The police system at Shanghai, as established and controlled by the foreign municipal body, to which Mr. Gardner gives merited commendation.

2d. The code of laws enforced, in which connection he declares that the penal code is taken as “a guide, the sentences being carefully proportioned to the offenses;” and—

3d. The penal discipline used, which, like Mr. Alabaster, he pronounces “very unsatisfactory indeed.” He urges at great length the establishment of a general prison.

On the civil side, Mr. Gardner states that the magistrate is “not a commissioned officer; he is simply a servant of the Taotai; his rank is inferior to that of many merchants and some shopkeepers; defendants and witnesses of wealth and position coolly ignore his summonses.” A second defect, in his opinion, “is the absence of fees, which results not only in a great deal of vexatious litigation and contumacy, but throws upon the court the labor of discovering the issues to be adjudicated upon.”

Scattered through the various reports are allegations that offenders who are sent to the district magistrate for trial generally appear upon the streets in a day or two, and that those who are sentenced by the mixed court magistrate to the bamboo, the cangue, or confinement, frequently evade the punishment to which they have been sentenced. In civil matters, the payment of judgments is generally sought to be enforced by imprisonment, but judgment-debtors are not held if they fall ill, and, whether as the result of the very bad sanitary condition of the prison or of “mild poisons taken for the purpose,” they often fall ill and escape further difficulty.

Notwithstanding the very unsatisfactory exhibit which is thus made of the mixed court, it is due to the magistrate who has presided over it since its inception in 1864 to say that not only the various officers whose reports have been quoted from, but the public generally give him credit for great industry and a large measure of honesty, and that, in particular, he has given abundant proofs of his good disposition by the enforcement of municipal ordinances. I think that he has never failed to sustain efforts to suppress gambling, &c., to promote sanitary conditions, and to enforce taxation, while upon more than one occasion he has rendered valuable assistance in promoting the opening of streets and other works of an extraordinary nature. His patience, too, has sometimes exceeded that of his foreign coadjutors, while if he has ever appealed to native prejudices in order to win popularity, the instances have never been so marked as to attract public notice. Considering his origin, which was very humble, and the great difficulties which he has had to encounter, he has done very well, and enabled us to declare in a very positive way that the so-called mixed court has been a very useful institution, and that it should be sustained and strengthened.

Upon the several points advanced, I remark as follows:

The grade of subprefect, provided for in the mixed court rules as established by the foreign office, in 1868, appears to be satisfactory. A subprefect (Tung Chi), duly qualified, is an officer of the fifth grade, while a district magistrate (Chih Hsien) is an officer of the seventh grade. (Mayer’s Chinese Government, sections 282–289.) It “is to officials of the grade of prefect, subprefect, and magistrate, but notably to the latter, that the primary dispensation of justice in China is committed.

It would seem, however, that a subprefect may be commissioned from Peking or in the provinces; that his status is greatly affected accordingly, and that the magistrate of the mixed court, holding, as he does, a seal issued by the provincial government, is not regarded altogether as the equal even of his colleague, the district magistrate.

The foreign office, in making the rules of 1868, intended, no doubt, that this should be the fact, for in the fourth rule they have distinctly declared that all grave offenses “punishable by death or the various degrees of banishment, where by law a local officer with an independent seal would send up the case for revision to the provincial judge,” shall be reserved for the jurisdiction of the district magistrate.

While it is not possible for the writer to know what administrative difficulties may lie in the way of commissioning the mixed court magistrate directly from the capital and of placing in his hands, as an officer of greater rank than the district magistrate, the jurisdiction now reserved to the latter by the rules, it would appear to be the measure best adapted to improve the condition of the court, and the one which would meet with the least resistance on the part of the government.

I should propose, then, that our efforts be directed in the first instance to secure for the mixed court magistrate the actual rank and authority of a Tung Chih, or subprefect.

The abolition of the fourth rule would follow, I suppose, as a matter of course, but as an alternative it might very well be asked, at least, that in the graver cases contemplated the district magistrate and the mixed court magistrate should act together, the latter as senior member of the court, and that all trials should take place in the yamên of the latter, and in accordance with the rules already prescribed by the foreign office.

The rank and authority accorded to the magistrate by granting him a proper commission would probably remove many of the difficulties which have been encountered on the civil side of his court, and it does not seem necessary to ask for any amendment of the rules in that direction, unless it he to abrogate the clause of the sixth rule, which provides that all civil decisions shall be submitted to the Taotai. A provision under which either side may appeal to the Taotai the case on appeal, to be heard by the Taotai and consul sitting together, would appear to be more practical.

It is always to be remembered that the intendant of circuit (Taotai) resides at Shanghai; that his jurisdiction is far broader than that of a prefect or magistrate, and that he can always be called upon to issue writs of an extraordinary sort, or to take any action which may be outside the authority of the magistrate.

As to the failures of the penal code, it is to be said, I think, that we cannot well appeal to the government to undertake the general revision of that ancient and much revered body of laws. It is the less necessary to do so, because, however high may be its place in the Chinese system, the local magistracy do not appear to observe its provisions with any very great degree of care; each magistrate, in point of fact, seems to proceed according to his own ideas of justice, doubtless with some general regard for the code, but with no great pains to measure his punishments by a strict adherence to its provisions. Mr. Gardner says that the code “is studied only as a guide,” and that “its severe enactments are never carried out in their entirety by any Chinese court.” Mr. Alabaster, while complaining that “receiving stolen property is no offense at all by the code,” points out that “it is not the common offense it was before some of the chief offenders were sentenced to the chain-gang.”

The penal code may fail in many instances, therefore, but the fact may not interfere with justice. Should it prove to do so, there is no reason why we should not point out the given failure to the government, and we should probably accomplish more in this way than by questioning the merit of the whole system.

An essential feature of the code is the penal discipline laid down in it, and I feel no surprise in this connection at the strictures so freely indulged in by Messrs. Alabaster and Gardner. The cruelties which it sanctions are known to all of us, but it has fallen to the assessors who have sat in the mixed court to witness them. The effect so produced will be indicated when I state that in one instance where a countryman of my own complained that the bambooing administered to some persons who had committed an almost deadly assault upon him was a farce, I urged him to attend at the court himself in order to witness the punishments, and the result was that he begged the court to remit some part of the sentences.

It is nevertheless true that the system is, in the language of Dr. Yates, “essentially Chinese,” and that we cannot hope to work out the reform of it by any representations which we may make to this government. Change will come about in the course of time, doubtless, as the result of the better education of the members of the official and literary classes, and the special efforts of individuals of their own race. The Chinese must tread the paths which we have trod, and we need not despair of their doing so, when we go back even a few scores of years in the experience of our own governments and remember the barbarities which were practiced in the name of justice, and the neglect of all better ideas of administration which characterized the prisons on both sides of the Atlantic.

The foreign community at Shanghai deserves great credit for much that it has done to instill favorable impression of Western administration into the minds of the Chinese of that great emporium. No native city of the empire can compare with it; whether we have regard to the condition of its streets and sewers, to its regard for sanitary measures, or to its police establishment. Justice has been dealt out impartially by the courts of the several foreign nations represented there.

Her Majesty’s Government has established a prison, which, in extent and in completeness of its appointments, leaves nothing to be desired. The community, acting by its municipal council, has a prison also, intended, primarily, for the safe-keeping of offenders while detained for examination, and to be presented to their respective courts. In this, however, room has been found to confine native offenders under sentence, and in connection with it a hain-gang has been provided for. Further proof of the elastic nature of the Chinese administration is afforded by the fact that the magistrate of the mixed court sentences his countrymen to hard labor in this gang with as much freedom, apparently, as to the cangue or bamboo.

Mr. Gardner says: “There is room for about 80 prisoners” (from the mixed court). “Their maintenance is paid for out of the municipal rates. They are put to labor on the roads. Their health is remarkably good. The fact of having regular work to do is highly deterrent to the class of swindlers, and as to habitual criminals, the habit of steady labor acquired often lasts a long time, and sometimes effects a complete reformation of character.

There is, perhaps, a degree of danger to the municipality created in this way. The death of a man while at work might cause some expression of public ill-will. The system ought, therefore, to be managed with much caution, and in concert with the native officials; but carefully managed and adequately developed it would seem to offer a very ready means of improving the penal discipline of China so far as the given locality is concerned.

I see no reason why, as the result of careful management, men of the judgment-debtor class might not be committed to a municipal prison for safe custody, and under such control as to assure creditors against the frequent failures of health which characterize the class.

The occasion which exists for the preparation of a commercial code has been spoken of in the general memorandum already submitted. For whatever reason, no one of the persons whose reports I have quoted alludes to this important matter. Are we to conclude that the results given in the court in civil cases have been so satisfactory that nothing is to be desired in that direction? If so, no work which our officers at Shanghai could do would be more useful than the preparation of a series of reports based upon the decisions of the court.

The suggestion of Mr. Gardner that a tariff of fees should be provided, in order, as I understand him, to prevent the presentation of unimportant and vexatious matters, and to secure a more careful procedure; and the remarks of Mr. Alabaster that a more careful and deliberate procedure is desirable, should receive attention upon the spot. The practice at the United States consul ate-general has been to require a written statement of the matter in issue, criminal or civil, excepting in petty cases, to be submitted to the consul-general, and to be by him referred to the court on behalf of his countryman. It was seldom found possible, however, to secure a rejoinder or plea in answer until the parties were actually before the court, and it may be said, generally, that carefulness of procedure will be promoted not so much by the establishment of rules as by carefulness and attention on the part of the so-called assessors who sit in the court.

The suggestion—which recurs more than once in the reports—that the pay and allowances of the magistrate are inadequate, is, no doubt, well founded, and it may be possible to mention this, matter to the government here. In such case it is desirable to keep in mind the fact that the magistrate should not be paid a gross sum to cover his salary and the cost of maintaining prisoners, &c. His salary and the pay of his secretaries, &c., as a matter of course, should be determined in advance, and the allowances for the prison, &c., should be sufficient to meet the necessary expenses actually incurred.

To recapitulate: In order to make the mixed court more efficient, to accomplish, in fact, all that we can reasonably hope for at the moment and to pave the way for still greater results in the future, it appears desirable— I. To secure for the magistrate an imperial commission as Tung Chih (sub-prefect).

II. To secure the amendment of the mixed court rules so as to avoid the reference of any matters to the district magistrate, or, failing this, to provide for joint action of the mixed court and district magistrate in grave criminal matters, the latter sitting in the mixed court in such cases.

III. To urge the government to make suitable provision for the court, the various native members of it to be paid regular stipends, and an allowance made sufficient to cover other actual expenses.

IV. To advise our officers to use their best endeavors to secure the most careful procedure possible, and to this end to urge the adoption of rules of procedure.

V. To encourage the efforts of the assessors in the court and the community of Shanghai to provide for the more satisfactory penal discipline of offenders.

VI. To bear in mind the occasion which exists to frame a code for commercial issues, and to direct our respective officers, as a preliminary stei, to report the precedents already established by the court.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.
Peking, October 14, 1879.

Rules for the mixed court at Shanghai, instituted April 20, 1869.

notification.

The undersigned is instructed by Her Britannic Majesty’s minister plenipotentiary and envoy extraordinary, &c., &c., &c., to declare the following rules for the mixed court to be in force for a period of one year from this date unless otherwise ordered.

W. H. MEDHURST,
Her Britannic Majesty’s Consul.

Her Britannic Majesty’s Consulate,
Shanghai, April 20, 1869.

An official having the rank of sub-prefect will be deputed to reside within the foreign settlement. He will have a jurisdiction in commercial suits, and in civil and criminal cases, generally, within the foreign settlements. He will have an official residence, and will be furnished with the cangue, the bamboo, and the minor means of punishment. He will provide food and lodging [for prisoners].

He will decide all civil and commercial suits between Chinese residents within the settlements, and also between Chinese and foreign residents in cases where Chinese are defendants, by Chinese law.

He will be authorized to examine Chinese judicially; to detain them in custody, and to punish them by putting them in the cangue, by flogging, and by other minor punishments.

2. Where a foreigner is concerned in a cause to be tried a consul or his deputy shall sit with the sub-prefect at the trial; but where Chinese only are concerned the sub-prefect shall adjudicate independently—the consuls shall not interfere.

3. Where defendant is a native in foreign employ, the sub-prefect will first communicate particulars to the consul (of the nationality concerned), who will be bound to place the parties before the court without attempting to screen or conceal them.

A consul or his deputy may attend the hearing, but he shall not interfere if no foreign interest is involved.

The servants of non-trading consuls shall not be arrested unless with the sanction of their masters.

4. In cases where Chinese subjects are charged with grave offenses, punishable by death and the various degrees of banishment, where by Chinese law a local officer with an independent seal would send up the case for revision by the provincial judge, who would submit it to the high authorities, to be by them referred to His Majesty or the board of punishment, it will still be for the district magistrate of Shanghai to take action.

Inquests, when needed, are to be held by the district magistrate of Shanghai independently of the sub-prefect.

5. A Chinese criminal escaping to the foreign settlements can be summarily arrested by the sub-prefect without warrant from the district magistrate or aid from the municipal police.

6. Suits between natives and foreigners shall be decided equitably and impartially, and in accordance with treaties. The treaty provision is to be followed in cases where the foreigner has a consul.

When the foreigner has no consul, the snb-prefect sitting with a foreign (consular) assessor shall try the case, submitting the decision for the consideration of the Taotai. Should either party to a case be dissatisfied with the sub-prefect’s decision, application for a new trial can be made to the Taotai or to proper consul.

7. Foreigners who may be charged with any offense, if represented by consul on the spot, shall be dealt with by them as the treaties provide. Unrepresented foreign offenders will be tried and sentenced by the sub-prefect, the finding being submitted for the Taotai’s approval, who will consult with some treaty-power consul on the subject. Where the offenders are Chinese the sub-prefect will inflict the proper legal punishment.

8. The necessary staff of translators, linguists, writers, and servants will be engaged by the sub-prefect, as also a foreigner or two for general purposes, by whom also foreign offenders having no consul will be brought to trial or kept in custody when necessary.

All expenses are to be drawn from the Taotai monthly.

Acts of extortion or annoyance on the part of any of the employés shall be severely punished.

9. The sub-prefect shall keep a daily certified record of arrests made and cases tried, giving the names of the parties arrested and recording the grounds of decision in each case. This shall be open to the inspection of the superior authorities. Should the sub-prefect be inefficient or notorious, he will be denounced and removed from office, another being appointed in his place.

10. When the sub-prefect has tried a case, should it be ascertained that plaintiff’s charge was false or exaggerated, said plaintiff, whether native or foreigner, shall on conviction be mulcted by the sub-prefect in accordance with rules which will be jointly drawn up by the sub-prefect and consuls and submitted for the Taotai’s approval, and in the interest of justice native and foreigner must in this respect be treated with perfect impartiality.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 505.]

report of the committee on judicial questions.

The result your committee has arrived at, after examining most carefully the existing treaties as well as the practice of the different consular and other courts in China, is, that while there can be no doubt that as far as criminal jurisdiction is concerned the authorities of the accused alone are entitled to take cognizance of the case, the text of some of the treaties is far from authorizing the adoption of the same view with regard to civil cases. In practice, however, many if not all of the foreign courts established in China have been leaning more or less toward the principle that even in civil cases the court and the laws of the defendant alone are to be appealed to.

This state of things is the more unsatisfactory as while it exists de facto it is based more upon the convenience of foreigners than upon their clearly expressed treaty rights, and it opens the way to recriminations from the Chinese side which it would be difficult, in many instances at least, to meet fairly.

Your committee is therefore of opinion that it would be desirable for all the governments having treaties with China to agree to and act upon the same principle in civil as well as in criminal cases, viz, the general adoption of the rule that the legally constituted court of the defendant, respectively, of the nationality to which the accused belongs is to be considered as the one to be applied to

This principle would involve, of course, the recognition of the fact that the laws applied should be those of the nationality of the defendant or accused.

This principle once universally recognized and there can hardly be any doubt but it will work satisfactorily, at least in the open ports: it would become the duty of the representatives of the treaty powers to obtain the consent of the Chinese Government to it, and subsequently to propose measures which, the principle of reciprocity in China admitted, would work so as to present no difficulty on the part of the Chinese, while on our own side the action of the foreign courts would be left unhampered.

Of such measures, the adoption of which would have to be recommended to the Chinese Government and more or less earnestly to be insisted upon, your committee would consider the most important to be the following: 1st. The designation of the courts in which, at the several ports, the complaints of our people, criminal and civil, are to be heard and determined.

2d. The right of the complainants to appear and to produce witnesses in court without being subject to any indignity.

3d. The enforcement of the attendance of native witnesses.

4th. The publicity of all trials; the consul of the complainant being entitled to be present, to sit with the magistrate, and to assist in placing evidence before the court.

5th. The keeping of a full and accurate record in all graver cases and whenever it should be demanded.

And after these more urgently needed reforms have been obtained—

6th. The declaration of the rules of procedure which are to govern in the trial of mixed cases against the Chinese.

7th. The declaration of the laws of China iii commercial matters, or, in default of such laws, the preparation of a code to be used in cases in which Chinese are defendants.

8th. The establishment of a court of appeal for the revision of all proceedings of the courts of first instance.

While action on the part of foreign representatives with regard to these questions will depend more or less on the sanction to be obtained from their governments of the principle that the court of the nationality to which the defendant or accused belongs, is alone to be considered as the one to be appealed to, there is one question at one of the open ports which calls urgently for immediate action on the part of the foreign representatives, and which, in the belief of your committee, can be taken up without waiting for further instruction.

This question concerns the so-called mixed court at Shanghai. While it cannot he denied that the general influence and working of the court have been not unsatisfactory, the want of power on the part of the magistrate as well as some other defects has been seriously felt.

Your committee propose, therefore, to move the Chinese Government— 1st. To grant to the magistrate an imperial commission of sub-prefect.

2d. To agree to the amendment of the mixed court rules so as to avoid the reference of any matters to the district magistrate; or, failing this, to provide for joint action of the mixed court and district magistrate in graver criminal matters, the latter sitting in the mixed court for such cases.

3d. To make suitable provision for the court; the various native members of it to be paid regular stipends, and an allowance to be made sufficient to cover all actual expenses.

Your committee would at the same time recommend that, in view of a further amelioration of the mixed court, the foreign officials sitting as assessors with the Chinese magistrate should be instructed: 1st. To use their best endeavors to assure the most careful procedure possible, and, to this end, to urge the adoption of rules of procedure.

2d. To continue in their own endeavors, as well as to encourage the community at Shanghai in theirs, to provide for the more satisfactory penal discipline of offenders.

3d. To bear in mind the occasion which exists to frame a code for commercial issues and to report, as a preliminary step toward this end, the precedents already established by the court or elsewhere.

While recommending thee several suggestions to the attention of their colleagues, your committee begs at the same time today before you two memoranda, drawn up by Mr. Seward, on the general question of jurisdiction and on the mixed court, which memoranda have proved of the greatest interest and usefulness to the committee itself, and are, therefore, likely to be so in no Jess degree to the other representatives.

Peking, October 31, 1879.
THOMAS FRANCIS WADE.

M. v. BRANDT.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

J. F. ELMORE.

A. KOYANDER.

Seen and agreed to.

J. H. FERGUSON.

FERD. de LUCA.

HUB. SERRUYS.

R. G. y OSSA.

HOFFER de HOFFENFELS.

PATENOTRE.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 505.]

protocol.

The report of the committee upon the administration of justice having been this day read before a general meeting of the representatives of treaty powers assembled in Peking, it was agreed that the attention of the Chinese Government should be immediately in vi ted to the propositions therein contained relating to the mixed court at Shanghai, and that Mr. Seward, minister of the United States, should be requested to prepare the draft of a collective note to the Tsung-li Yamên for the purpose. It was further agreed that those propositions which concern the larger question of the administration of justice in general would be submitted to the several governments represented at the conference, and that their instructions should be solicited.

4th November, 1879.
THOMAS FRANCIS WADE. (England.)
M. v. BRANDT. (Germany.)
GEORGE F. SEWARD. (United States.)
J. H. FERGUSON. (Netherlands.)
J. F. ELMORE. (Peru.)
FERD. de LUCA. (Italy.)
HOFFER de HOFFENFELS. (Austria-Hungary.)
A. KOYANDER. (Russia.)
RAMON GUTIERREZ y OSSA. (Spain.)
PATENÔTRE. (France.)
HUB. SERRUYS. (Belgium.)

[Inclosure 5 in No. 505.]

joint note of the foreign representatives to the tsung-li yamên.

Peking, November 10, 1879.

The undersigned, comprising all the representatives of foreign powers now in China and interested in the subject, desire to place before Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies certain considerations affecting the administration of justice at the port of Shanghai which have enlisted their attention.

Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies are aware that districts exist at Shanghai which are known as the English and American settlements, and that they contain a considerable population of foreigners of different nationalities, and more than a hundred thousand Chinese,

Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies are aware also that this important community has grown up since the port was opened to trade, and that its existence has called for action on the part of the local authorities intended to enable your own people and the foreigners resident there to live together in comfort and safety, and to provide the means for the speedy determination of all cases of complaint arising between them.

One of the most important steps so taken was the creation in 1864 of a Chinese court for the settlements having jurisdiction over all natives offending against the persons and property of foreigners or against one another, or against whom civil reclamations were to be made.

Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies are aware, further, that the rules devised for this court by the provincial authorities were examined by the Yamên in 1868, and that a code of regulations based upon the old ones was prepared by the Tsung-li Yamên and communicated by the local officers for their guidance.

These rules have been in operation for more than ten years, and while they have failed, as the undersigned believe, to secure perfectly the results which were expected, it is only candid to admit that they have conduced largely to the advantage of the interests involved.

In point of fact, the undersigned are not disposed to indulge in any complaints whatever, although it becomes unavoidable, in asking Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies to consider the necessity of some reform, to point out the evils which have fallen under their notice.

The undersigned feel that it is no part of their duty to speak of the court so far as it relates to issues between subjects of your own empire. It was established, however, to deal more particularly with complaints, civil and criminal, brought forward as against your people by our own, and the undersigned, in speaking of its defects, therefore, do no more than second the purposes which your government had in view in creating it.

The undersigned recognizing, then, the efforts which have been made by your government and by the provincial officers to supply a court which would be competent to deal with such matters promptly and effectively, and the merit of the services rendered by the officers who have acted as judges of the court, desire to call the attention of Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies to those matters which deserve a special notice.

The first of these is the fact that the grade of the officer who presides over the court is lower, apparently, than was intended by the government, and insufficient to enable him to perform efficiently the very important labors devolving upon him.

The rules of 1808 provide that “an official having the rank of sub-prefect will be deputed to reside within, the foreign settlements” as judge of the court. In fact, the officers who have presided in the court have been deputed by the provincial anthorities, and whatever may have been their grade they have not possessed the authority which an imperial commission and seal would have conferred.

Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies will be able to determine with greater certainty than ourselves the extent of the disability thus imposed upon the magistrate of the foreign settlements court. It is represented to us, however, that the magistrate is sometimes unable, in consequence of this disability, to secure the arrest of offenders and to enforce the attendance of defendants in civil matters and of witnesses. It is said even that sometimes the magistrate is unable or afraid to enforce the execution of his own judgments.

Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies will doubtless agree with the undersigned that the failures of the court so indicated are very grave indeed, that they are in fact of fundamental importance, and that the remedy should be applied as soon as possible.

The undersigned are aware that there may be administrative difficulties in the way of granting an imperial commission to the magistrate, but they are confident that your government will be disposed to remove these when you remember the vast importance of the international interests which center at Shanghai, and the annoyances which result when complaints and reclamations are made here.

The undersigned are informed further that the magistrate “is not well provided for, that the support of the establishment is a direct charge upon an allowance made to him in gross, and that in particular the prison attached to the court is insufficient in size and otherwise defective.

The undersigned are prepared to believe that the matter of the manner in which the given officer is compensated and his necessary outlays met is one upon which there may possibly exist some misconceptions, and to admit that they concern more immediately your own system of administration. It seems unnecessary for them to go further in this connection, then, than to say that they are strongly of opinion that the magistrate should receive a stated stipend; that the clerks and bailiffs attached to the office should receive their pay in the same way, but independently of the magistrate, and that allowances for the other expenses of the Yamên, including the prison, should be determined in view of actual necessities and paid upon accounts rendered.

The defects of the prison call, however, tor further remark. It results naturally from its insufficient size that it is defective from a sanitary point of view. It is true, moreover, that it is not well devised, and that even when there are but a few prisoners to be cared for, their condition is such that many fall ill and have to be released. It happens in this way that some persons escape due punishment, while others suffer consequences from their imprisonment far more grave than their offenses would call for.

Imprisonment, again, is frequently used to force the payment of judgments given by the court. The defective condition of the prison makes a further hardship then, not only as respects prisoners, but also as respects creditors. For it happens very often that judgment-debtors fall ill, whether as a result of the badness of the prison or of drugs taken, and are released; thus securing at one and the same time freedom from arrest and the opportunity to still further avoid their just obligations.

There is, moreover, no perfect segregation of prisoners, and they can be communicated with at all times by persons not connected with the Yamên, and for any purpose.

The third matter which calls for attention is the provision of the rules under which graver criminal cases are referred to the district magistrate. It is not understood why such reference, would be necessary or desirable if the magistrate of the foreign settlements court should be clothed with the proper authority of a sub-prefect, for his rank would then be superior to that of the district magistrate. But, however this may be, great inconvenience has been found to attend such references. The Yamên of the district magistrate is in the native city at a considerable distance from the settlements.

The incumbents of that office have many important duties and functions of their own; they are changed frequently in the usual course of official employment, and they are not often acquainted with the peculiar matters which arise in foreign intercourse. It happens, moreover, for whatever reasons, that the district magistrates assume to judge cases in which foreigners are concerned in their absence, in the absence of their witnesses, and without communication with the consular officer concerned. The result is the miscarriage of justice and the encouragement of crime.

The undersigned desire, then, to express the hope that the rules will be so amended as to do away with such references to the district magistrate, or, if there be administrative difficulties of such a sort as to render this impossible, that the magistrate be directed to hear all cases in which foreigners are concerned in concert with his colleague, the magistrate of the foreign settlements court, at the Yamên of the latter, and in the manner prescribed by the rules for the trial of cases when the latter sits alone.

In submitting their views to Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies the undersigned desire to remark further that they recognize fully the difficulties which attend the administration of justice in all countries, and the necessary divergencies between systems adopted by each in view of peculiar wants and circumstances. It is the earnest hope that further consideration of the whole question of judicial relief as between foreigners, and natives will lead to results mutually satisfactory to China and to foreign, states, and to that more perfect harmony in the progress of relations which all desire.

The present communication has reference only to the foreign settlements court at Shanghai. There are other questions relating to judicial relief and embracing all the ports to which the undersigned may hereafter call your attention.

The undersigned avail of this opportunity to renew to Your Imperial Highness and your excellencies the expression of their high consideration.

No. 134. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 134.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, November 21, 1879. (Received January 7.) No. 510.]

Sir: Recurring to my dispatches numbers 482 and 499, I have now the honor to transmit to you certain papers, as follows, which exhibit the action of the foreign representatives at this capital, in conference assembled, in regard to commercial grievances: 1st. A note verbal submitted to the conference by the German minister.

2d. A protocol signed by all the representatives.

3d. The statement of grievances referred to in the protocol.

4th. A note to the foreign office transmitting the statement of grievances.

In this connection I hand to you, also:

5th. A general introductory note mentioning the fact that the foreign representatives had been in conference, and their intention to address themselves to the foreign office in regard to the three questions, trade, justice, and intercourse, which they have had under consideration.

In reporting to you, regarding trading questions, I cannot do better than to state, at the outset, the interpretation of the treaties to which the greater number of representatives adhere the provisions of the Chefoo Convention, showing an adjustment of certain difficulties arising in the course of trade, proposed by the British minister, but not ratified as yet by his government; and, lastly, the views of the Chinese Government as set forth in a circular letter addressed to Chinese ministers abroad in March of last year.

1st. The intent of the treaties as generally read.

After the Chefoo Convention was made in the summer of 1876, the foreign representatives then present here, the English minister of course excepted, concluded to address their several governments setting forth the unsatisfactory nature of the adjustment of trading questions proposed in the convention. My own advices on the subject will be found more particularly in my dispatch No. 177, dated December 5, 1876. With that dispatch I transmitted to the Department a protocol signed by my colleagues of Russia, Germany, Spain, and France, and myself & large part of which is devoted to the subject now in hand. I quote from the protocol, to indicate the views held by the representatives named, as follows: The stipulations of the treaties, regarding of course the most favorable stipulations of the several treaties as applying to all of the foreign powers, may be summarized thus:

Imports, on which the import duty has been paid, can be sent inland without being subjected to any other tax than the transit duties, which may be levied according to the tariff in force at the conclusion of the given treaty (practically the earliest treaty), and may not be raised in future.

On native produce, transported from the interior to an open port, or on imports sent inland, these transit duties may be discharged by one payment.

The amount of such payment has been fixed, for imports sent inland and for produce bought in the interior by a foreigner for exportation, at one-half the import or export tariff duty.

In the case of imports the rights and privileges granted by the treaties attached to the goods themselves, and not to the person of the proprietor, whose nationality is of no importance.

All other taxes, lekin included, must be considered illegal.

2d. The proposals of the Chefoo Convention.

These are contained in Section III of the convention, and are as follows:

I. With reference to the area within which, according to the treaties in force, lekin ought not to be collected on foreign goods at the open ports, Sir Thomas Wade agrees to move his government to allow the ground rented by foreigners (the so-called concessions) at the different ports to be regarded as the area of exemption from lekin; and the Government of China will thereupon allow I Chang in the province of Ha-Pei Wu-Hu, in Au Hni, Wen-chow in Che Kiang, and Pei-Hai (Pah-hoi) in Kwangtung to be added to the number of ports open to trade, and to become consular stations. The British Government will further be free to send officers to reside at Chung King to watch the condition of British trade in Sze-Chǔen. British merchants will not be allowed to reside at Chǔng King, or to open establishments or warehouses there, so long as no steamers have access to the port; when steamers have succeeded in ascending the river so far, further arrangements can be taken into consideration.

It is further proposed as a measure of compromise that at certain points on the shore of the great river, namely, Ta Tǔng and Ngan-Ching in the province of An Hui; Hu-Kǒuw in Kiang-Si; Wu-sueh, Lu-chi-kow, and Sha-shih in Hu-Kuang, these being all places of trade in the interior, at which, as they are not open ports, foreign merchants are not legally authorized to land or ship goods, steamers shall be allowed to touch for the purpose of landing or shipping passengers or goods; but in all instances by means of native boats only, and subject to the regulations in force affecting native trade.

Produce accompanied by a half-duty certificate may be shipped at such points by the steamers, but may not be landed by them for sale, and at all such points, except in the case of imports accompanied by a transit-duty certificate, or exports similarly certified, which will be severally passed free of lekin on exhibition of such certificates, lekin will be collected on all goods whatever by the native authorities. Foreign merchants will not be authorized to reside or open houses of business or warehouses at the places enumerated as ports of call.

II. At all ports open to trade, whether by earlier or later agreement, at which no settlement area has been previously defined, it will be the duty of the British consul, acting in concert with his collegues the consuls of other powers, to come to an understanding with the local authorities regarding the definition of the foreign settlement area.

III. On opium Sir Thomas Wade will move his government to sanction an arrangement different from that affecting other imports. British merchants when opium is brought into port will be obliged to have it taken cognizance of by the customs, and deposited in bond, either in a warehouse or a receiving hulk, until such time as there is a sale for it. The importer will then pay the, tariff duty upon it, and the purchasers the lekin, in order to the prevention of the evasion of the duty. The amount of lekin to be collected will be decided by the different provincial governments according to the circumstances of each.

IV. The Chinese Government agrees that transit-duty certificates shall be framed under one rule at all ports, no difference being made in the conditions set forth therein, and that so far as imports are concerned the nationality of the person possessing and carrying these is immaterial. Native produce carried from an inland center to a port of shipment, if bona fide intended for shipment to a foreign port, may be by treaty certificated by the British subject interested, and exempted by payment of the half-duty from all charges demanded upon it en route. If produce be not the property of a British subject, or is being carried to a port not for exportation, it is not entitled to the exemption that would be secured it by the exhibition of a transit-duty certificate. The British minister is prepared to agree with the Tsung-li Yamên upon rules that will secure the Chinese Government against abuse of the privilege as affecting produce.

The word nei ti, “inland,” in the clause of Article VII of the rules appended to the tariff regarding carriage of imports inland and of native produce purchased inland apply as much to places on the sea-coast and river shores as to places in the interior not open to foreign trade, the Chinese Government having the right to make arrangements for the prevention of abuses thereat.

Upon these proposals the foreign representatives of 1876 remarked, in the protocol already quoted from, as follows: The right of the Chinese Government to levy lekin taxes is thus formally recognized. From the operation of the rule, are to be excepted only the so-called foreign concessions, i. e. (with the exception of that of Shanghai, within which a certain number of Chinese live, and which may be considered as possessing a local consumption of its own), the small area occupied exclusively by foreigners, and, for certain ports, hardly more than the houses inhabited by them.

The transit-pass system, moreover, is rendered less secure. This will be understood when it is remembered that the transit charge (half-tariff charge) is properly a commutation of the transit dues, and that the treaties expressly denounce as illegal the collection of any other dues on foreign goods or foreign-owned native produce. If the right to buy lekin taxes is admitted, they may be imposed on goods and produce without regard to transit passes (that is to say, on goods and produce which have already paid the commutation charges as well as upon those which have not).

While no advantage has been obtained by the Chefoo convention with respect to the complaints against the levy of illegal taxes, an approval of its stipulations would prove injurious to trade, and would deprive foreign powers of the right to protest against unfair taxation; by such approval they would, on the contrary, bind them-selves to recognize the unlimited imposition of lekin by the Chinese Government.

3d. The position of the Chinese Government.

This is given in the circular of 1878, a copy of which was transmitted to the Department from Shanghai a few weeks since, and an additional copy of which will be found herewith.

We hold that by the treaties foreigners— a. May import foreign goods into China on payment of the tariff duty.

b. May convey duty-paid foreign goods into the interior, and either, as Chinese merchants do, pay duties at each custom-house, and taxes at each barrier passed, or by payment of the tariff transit due, may free their goods from such duties and taxes, en route to any places, however distant, named by them, and entered in their transit certificates.

c. May purchase native produce in the interior, and, if intended for foreign export, and supplied with transit certificates, may bring it to a treaty port exempt along the route from all duties and taxes, it being merely charged the commutation half-tariff transit due at the barrier nearest the port. If not provided with transit certificates, such produce has to pay all duties to which it is liable when in the hands of native merchants.

You will observe that radical differences in the construction of the treaties are thus exhibited—

1st. As to lekin taxes.

Foreign representatives generally claim that no taxes or dues whatever may be levied upon our imports, excepting tariff import duties and transit duties, and that these latter may be commuted by a single payment, the rate of commutation being one-half the tariff import duty.

The Chinese assert, on the contrary, the right to levy any taxes which they see fit on imported goods, after the import duty has been paid, excepting only goods covered by transit passes while so covered. On foreign-owned produce for exportation they make the same claim.

2d. As to ownership.

They admit the right of foreigners to take out inward transit passes, but do not admit that natives may. They thus make the privilege of the treaties personal to the foreigner and deny that it attaches to the goods.

It must be acknowledged that if the Chinese view is accepted, the efforts heretofore made to secure by treaty stipulations foreign imports and foreign-owned native produce from undue and irregular taxation have proven more or less futile. For if imports may be taxed either at once after they have been landed and passed the customs proper, or after they have reached an inland center, being so far protected by transit passes, then the government may really levy what duties it pleases before allowing such goods to reach the consumer. And similarly, if native produce can be taxed before the transit begins, or at any time, if not covered by passes, then it is subject to such levies as may be demanded up to the moment when the foreigner tales it into his actual possession under certificate or exports it.

That the framers of the treaties did not intend such an abortive system will be seen at once upon roading the treaties. The French text is especially clear. I quote from it as follows: Art. XXIII. Toutes inarchandises francaises, après avoir acquitté dans l’un des ports de la Chine les droits de douane liquidés d’aprés le tariff, pourront être transporters dans l’intérieur sans avoir á subir aucune autre charge supplémentaire que le paiement des droits de transit suivant le taux ntodéré actuellement en vigour, lesquels droits ueseront susceptibles d’aucune aiiginentation future.

Sides agents de la douane chinoise, contrairement á la teneur du présent traité, exigeaient des rétributions illégales, ou prélevaient des droits plus élevés, ils seraient punis suivant les lois de l’empire.

This article refers, of course, to imports only. In regard to exports, it may be said that there is no express provision against the levy of duties upon native produce before it passes into foreign hands (or thereafter, unless it is covered by certificates), but that we may clearly, upon the broadest grounds, demand that no duties shall be levied upon such produce in excess of the tariff and transit duties, differentially, that is to say, which are not levied irrespective of the purpose to export the goods, and uniformly.

It is my impression that I sent to the Department from Shanghai a printed transcript of the articles of all the treaties which refer to the transit-pass system, duties, &c.

At any rate, a compilation of the treaties themselves, edited by Mr. W. F. Mayers, and published at Shanghai in 1877, was transmitted to the Department from Shanghai in that year, at my request and, referring to it, I may, without further discussion, call your attention to the following stipulations: Page

Article X. British treaty of 1842 3

Declaration regarding transit dues, 1843 4

Article XXVIII. British treaty of 1858 15

VII. Supplementary treaty of 1844 30

XXIII. French treaty of 1858 51

XXIII. French treaty of 1858 65

XIII. United States treaty of 1844 79

XV. United States treaty of 1858 88

Rule VII. Supplementary United States treaty of 1858 225

Article XXIV. German treaty of 1858 122

XIII. German treaty of 1847 131

XXXIII. Belgian treaty of 1865 141

XXVII. Danish treaty of 1863 146

X. Netherlands treaty of 1863 153

XXVIII. Portuguese treaty of 1862 160

XXIV. Italian treaty of 1864 168

XXVIII. Italian treaty of 1864 172

XXVIII Austrian treaty of 1869 176

IX. Peruvian treaty of 1874 192

It will be evident to you, from what has preceded, that the attitude of the English legation has occasioned much anxiety to the representatives of other powers. The fact that the English minister felt able to enter upon a general discussion of the business, or, at least, was prepared to take part in the recent conference, was not altogether conclusive that his government had abandoned the Chefoo convention, for it might be that he hoped to win the others over to his position. And, so far as I was concerned, a further element of uncertainty was imported into the business by my knowledge that the German minister, while on leave of absence recently, had visited London and met the English minister, who was also on leave. It was possible for me to suppose, under these circumstances, that the two had, in concert with their respective governments, agreed upon a programme to be carried out here, which agreement, for whatever reason, they thought best to keep to themselves until the right moment should arise to disclose it.

Under all the circumstances it appeared to me wiser not to take an active part at first in the discussion of trading questions. I asked, therefore, at the outset to be excused from acting upon the committee appointed to consider commercial questions, reserving my interference until they should come before the full body of representatives. As it happened, however, the committee on commercial questions concluded, at their first meeting, to invite me to attend their sessions, and to take part in their deliberations, and I was not a little pleased to note at once upon doing so that the whole matter was being discussed as if no previous arrangements, whether of the British minister, or of the British and German ministers together, would interfere.

An inspection of my correspondence from Shanghai and from this capital will show that the position taken up in the protocol of 1876 was essentially that to which I have long adhered. I entered the conference, then, with no uncertain views, and disposed, moreover, to distrust the utility of any proposal which should look to a change of existing stipulations. I could not see that the Chinese Government would have less difficulty in the execution of any new proposals to which we could assent tan in the execution of existing stipulations. And moreover, the whole structure of our relations with this empire is unusual and abnormal, and I could but fear that the displacement of this or that part of it might result disastrously. While disposed, however, to take a conservative course, it was only the part of wisdom to enter with my colleagues upon a further study of the whole business lest some feature of it might have escaped my attention, and in order that no proposals to improve matters should pass without consideration.

It would be idle to attempt to review in this letter all the proposals which were advanced, whether on the part of those who have been longer on the scene or those who have had less experience in this singular land. It is sufficient to say that at an advanced moment it became evident that while the tendency of opinion was favorable to new treaty stipulations, much divergence of views existed as to the changes which were necessary, and that we could not hope to reach any agreement in the limited time at our disposal. It happened then that the German minister came to me and stated that which at London, on the occasion of which I have already alluded, he had placed before our colleague, the British minister, and the British foreign office, a plan for the adjustment of matters within the lines of existing stipulations; that the substance of this plan had been communicated from Berlin, without reference to its origin, to other powers and had already been accepted by several. He then put the plan into my hands, and asked if I would unite with the British minister and himself in urging its adoption by our remaining colleagues. The document referred to will be found among the inclosures transmitted herewith. I responded at once that I did not regard his proposals as entirely satisfactory, but that I would give them candid consideration. I added, however, that I entertained doubt whether we were proceeding wisely. The time had nearly arrived when several of our colleagues having their residence at Shanghai or elsewhere must leave Peking for the winter, and that in my opinion it would be desirable to prepare as a first step a declaration of grievances. Having done this we could take time to consider remedies. Mr. von Brandt accepted my suggestion at once, and the result was the introduction by him, at the next meeting of the diplomatic body, of the note verbale which forms inclosure No. 1 with this dispatch.

The proposition to prepare a statement of grievances, and to transmit the same to the foreign office as a preliminary step to the further discussion of the business, was accepted by the conference, and we proceeded at once to review the statement prepared by Mr. von Brandt, with the result shown in the protocol, and the note to the Yamên. (In-closures Nos. 2, 3, and 4.) It happened at the moment when this proposal was advanced before the conference that a letter was placed before us addressed to the doyen of the diplomatic body by the Chamber of Commerce at Shanghai, advocating the view that new treaty stipulations are not so much needed as the right enforcement of existing stipulations. It was undoubtedly of influence in determining the conference to accept the plan presented by Mr. von Brandt.

Under this new phase of the business, it is likely that a discussion will be brought about between the diplomatic body and the foreign office directed, in the first instance, to the accuracy of the statement of grievances. This discussion will necessarily involve questions as to the facts declared, and questions as to the meaning of the treaties. It will naturally lead to a further discussion in regard to remedies, and before this takes place it will become necessary for the foreign representatives to decide whether they will stand for the execution of the treaties or propose new arrangements. My own disposition still is to stand for the execution of the treaties. I do not for a moment suppose that we can secure the perfect execution of the treaties. Illegal taxes will be levied in spite of all that can be done by us. But it may be that we can so defend the transit-pass system that excessive levies will be prevented; that, intact provincial levies will be brought so low that there will be no occasion to evade them by taking out transit passes. To effect this, much vigilance will be required, but it is to be remembered that the struggle against such levies is one with which the central government sympathizes in a measure. They are imposed in the provinces, often without the knowledge of the general government, often perhaps in excess of the intentions of the higher provincial authorities. As against such levies we can always plead while standing on liberal ground. It is competent for us, for instance, to say that while we are familiar with high tariffs, we at least levy all our duties once for all, and in accordance with the tariffs carefully considered and solemnly proclaimed. And, indeed, if we cannot secure good results under the present treaties, how may we do so? If there is not good faith and competence in the government as respects present stipulations, will there be better faith or more competence if other stipulations are made?

The situation as respects trade is like the situation as respects jurisdiction. We have imposed the extraterritorial system upon China, because we cannot trust their jurisprudence. We have imposed treaty tariffs and transit arrangements, because we cannot trust their fiscal and administrative system; we meet many evils under the extraterritorial system and many under the system of treaty tariffs, but both were imposed because of the necessities of the case, and both are of measurable advantage. We must make the most of them until the days of better administration arrive, and those days will arrive the sooner if we stand firmly for the rights accorded to us by treaty. Attempts to revise, diplomatically, arrangements which are not logical when regarded from the point of view of the sovereign rights of the state, may bring about a greater degree of confusion than at present exists, to the injury, as we may well believe, of native as well as of foreign interests.

While holding these views, I feel bound, of course, to study the subject further, with my colleagues, and without them, I shall feel bound, too, to take no step looking to a change of treaty, without first reporting to yourself for instructions all the facts and considerations involved.

I respectfully ask for your approval of the action taken by me as reported in this despatch.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 510.]

Note verbals of the German minister.—Translation.

The minister of the German Empire has the honor to submit to his colleagues, the representatives of the other treaty powers now assembled at Peking, the following ing suggestions:

The discussions which have been going on during the last six weeks on the subject of inland taxation have shown that while there exist nearly unanimous views on the necessity of taking steps to do away with the defects of the present system, and while there exists even a certain degree of unanimity with regard to the measures to be recommended for this purpose, the working out of the details of any scheme, either to be proposed immediately to the Chinese Government or to be submitted Just to their home governments for their approval and sanction, is a question not to be disposed of within the limit of time at the disposal of the conference.

Under these circumstances, the minister of the German Empire ventures to submit to his colleagues the proposal that what should be done first ought to be, to lay before the Tsung-li Yamên a statement of the grievances under which foreign trade, import and export, is suffering. In this way the discussion would be opened, first on the grievances themselves, then on the remedies to be applied, and it would be possible to obtain from the Tsung-li Yamên a statement of the views of the Chinese Government on these points, perhaps even certain proposals for reforms or alterations of the existing system, without binding the foreign representatives or the treaty powers to any definite line of action as would be the case if the discussion was opened by elaborate proposals being laid before the Tsung-li Yamên.

Once the discussion engaged, the foreign legations in China would be at liberty to act as they thought fit, and either to arrive at an immediate understanding with the Yamên on the basis of the now existing treaties, or, should a departure from this basis prove necessary or desirable, to ask for the instructions of their, governments. In either case, the material collected during the discussions of the present conference will be of the greatest value.

Should this view meet with the approval of his colleagues, the minister of the German Empire would propose that the joint statement, to be laid before the Tsung-li Yamên, should mention the following facts: 1. That, contrary to the treaties, in which it is stipulated that foreign goods once having paid the import duty shall pay no other taxes before they reach the first barrier in existence at the time of the conclusion of the treaty, taxes of different kinds are levied on foreign imports at many places as soon as they leave the hands of the foreign importer, often even before the Chinese purchaser is allowed to take them out of the foreign “godown.”

2. That, contrary to the treaties, by which it is stipulated that none but transit duties and only those which existed at the time of the conclusion of the treaty shall be levied, other duties and taxes are levied on foreign goods.

3. That, contrary to the treaties, at several of the open ports, and in some of the provinces of the empire, transit passes are either not issued at all, or that arbitrary and unnecessary conditions are imposed in the issue of passes, or that, when issued at the port, they are not respected in the interior of the province.

4. That, contrary to the treaties, foreign imports forwarded inland under transit passes are often stopped and vexatiously detained by the officers at the stations in order to extort illegal fees, or to further the interests of Chinese guilds having made special arrangements with Lekin collectorates or other Chinese offices.

5. That, contrary to treaty, taxes are often levied on foreign imports carried inland under transit passes immediately after their arrival at the place of destination, or when broken up into parcels for local consumption.

6. That, contrary to the laws of the empire, tax stations not authorized by the Chinese Government or the highest provincial authorities are constantly opened.

7. That, contrary to the laws of the empire, the tariffs under which inland duties are levied are neither published nor for sale.

8. That, contrary to the laws of the empire, very frequently no receipts are given for duties levied.

9. That, contrary to the treaties and to the laws of the empire, officials guilty of having levied illegal taxes or disregarded transit passes are not punished.

10. That the recovery of illegally-levied duties, even if the fact itself is acknowledged by the Chinese authorities, is, if not impossible, at least very difficult, and in the best case accompanied with unnecessary and vexatious delay.

11. That, contrary to the treaties, every difficulty is thrown in the way of foreigners asking for transit passes to bring down Chinese produce from the interior, and that in many instances such passes are either entirely refused or granted only under conditions arbitrarily imposed or contrary to treaty.

12. That, contrary to the treaty, on native produce, and especially on silk, differential duties are levied when sold to foreigners, and that the levy of these duties is farmed out to certain companies, which are enabled thereby to monopolize the trade in certain articles.

13. That, contrary to treaty, attempts are made at several ports to levy inland transit duties on exportation of produce bought in the port.

14. That, contrary to treaty, attempts are made at some of the open ports to levy coast-trade duty on goods duty-free by treaty.

15. That while the treaties grant to foreigners the right to visit the interior and freely to trade there, the action of the Chinese authorities tends to render the right illusory by depriving them of safe means for the transport or the storing of their goods, in refusing to allow them to use their own native-built boats or hire houses for short periods.

16. That, contrary to treaty, the respective value of foreign coins and native taels is fixed arbitrarily and in excess of their true relation to each other, so that by these means a burdensome and illegal tax, amounting often to as much as 12 per cent. on a hundred dollars’ worth of goods, is imposed on foreign trade.

A declaration might be appended to such a statement of grievances, setting forth that the foreign representatives, while demanding redress and a stricter and better execution of the treaties, are perfectly willing to listen to any proposals the Chinese Government might have to make to them, and to redress on their side any abuses which the Tsung-li Yamêa might have to complain of on the part of foreign merchants.

Peking, November 3, 1879.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 510.]

Protocol on inland taxation.

The representatives of foreign powers here assembled for the purpose of considering the relief of foreign trade with China from undue taxation, having had submitted to them, in writing or otherwise, various measures devised to this end, it was this day agreed that, as proposed in note verbale presented on the third instant, by Monsieur Von Brandt, minister of Germany, a statement of grievances therein inclosed, and adopted after revision by the conference, should be forwarded to the Tsung-li Yamên in a note, the draft of which was also prepared by Monsieur von Brandt, and that without prejudice to any change that delays on the part of the Chinese Government-might hereafter render necessary, the suggestion of remedial measures should be left in the first instance to the Tsung-li Yamên.

Peking, 8th November, 1879.
THOMAS FRANCIS WADE.

M. von BRANDT.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

J. H. FERGUSON.

J. F. ELMORE.

FERD. de LUCA.

HOFFER de HOFFENFELS.

A. KOYANDER.

R. G. y OSSA.

PATENOTRE.

HUB. SERRUYS.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 510.]

Statement of grievances referred to in the foregoing protocol.

1. That taxes of different kinds are levied on foreign imports at some ports as soon as they pass into native hands.

2. That levies are made on foreign imports in the interior which are not properly transit duties, or are in excess of the transit duties which were levied when the treaties were made.

3. That at several of the open ports, inward-transit passes are either not issued at all or that the issue is fettered by arbitrary and unnecessary conditions.

4. That inward-transit passes when issued at the port are not respected in the interior of the empire.

5. That foreign imports forwarded inland under transit passes are often vexatiously detained by the officers at the stations in order to extort illegal fees or to further the interests of Chinese guilds who have made special arrangements with lekin collectorates or other Chinese officers.

6. That the protection of the transit-duty certificate is denied to imports when they have passed the barrier nearest the inland market to which they may be consigned under the certificate.

7. That the exercise of the right of foreigners to visit the interior for purposes of trade is unfavorably affected by the want of proper regulations for the temporary storage or transport of their goods.

8. That all over the empire tax stations are constantly opened without due authority.

9. That the tariffs under which inland duties are levied are neither published nor for sale.

10. That very frequently no receipts are given for duties leaded.

11. That officials guilty of levying illegal taxes or disregarding transit passes are rarely, if ever, punished.

12. That the recovery of illegally-levied duties, even if the fact itself be acknowledged by the Chinese authorities, is, if not impossible, at least very difficult, and in the best case attended with vexatious and unnecessary delay.

13. That difficulties are frequently thrown in the way of foreigners asking for transit passes to bring down Chinese produce from the interior, and that in many instances such passes are either entirely refused or granted under conditions arbitrarily imposed.

14. That on native produce, and especially on silk, duties are levied after sale and before the goods are delivered to the purchaser, and that levy of these duties is farmed out to certain companies, which are enabled thereby to monopolize the trade in certain articles.

15. That at certain ports, in excess of the export duty, a half tariff duty has been demanded upon the exportation of produce which has been bought at the port.

16. That in some instances half tariff duty is levied on exportation upon goods that have been manufactured out of native produce in the port itself.

17. That in some instances export duty is levied on produce duty-free by treaty when it is carried coastwise.

18. That in some instances differential duties to the prejudice of the foreigner are levied on native produce carried coastwise, in excess of the export and coast-trade duties.

19. That the respective values of foreign coins and native taels are fixed arbitrarily and in excess of their true value, thereby imposing a heavy burden on foreign trade.

20. That the tonnage dues are applied but in part to the provision and maintenance of lights, buoys, beacons, and the like.

Approved:
T. WADE.

M. v. BRANDT.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

J. H. FERGUSON.

J. F. ELMORE.

FERD. de LUCA.

HOFFER de HOFFENFELS.

A. KOYANDER.

RAMON GUTIERREZ y OSSA.

PATENÔTRE.

HUB. SERRUYS.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 510.]

Identic note to the Chinese Foreign Office, transmitting the foregoing statement of grievances.

Peking, December 10, 1879.

By the note which the undersigned had the honor to address to the Prince of Kung and the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên, His Imperial Highness and their excellencies are already aware that the question of inland taxation on foreign goods as well as on native produce intended for exportation, which has given rise to so many complaints on the part of the foreign representatives, and to much discussion between them and the Tsung-li Yamên, was about to he brorght before His Imperial Highness and their excellencies.

Taking into consideration the declarations repeatedly made during the last few years by the Tsung-li Yamên that the Chinese Government were willing to enter upon a joint consideration of the question, the undersigned have thought that the presence at Peking of all the representatives of foreign powers now in China, and interested in the question, would offer a good opportunity for approaching it. To this effect they have drawn up a list of those subjects to which, for one reason or another, they consider themselves entitled to demand attention, and they now have the honor to lay this statement before His Imperial Highness and their excellencies.

It is in no captious spirit that the undersigned approach the question, but with the earnest desire and hope that a joint consideration of the points to which consideration is directed may bring about a satisfactory understanding.

Nothing is further from the undersigned than a wish to add to the difficulties of the Chinese Government, or to embarrass the working of its financial system. On the contrary, they are anxious that their countrymen should pay all lawful taxes and duties. In seeking to relieve them from all other burdens they believe indeed that they are acting only in accord with the declared policy of the Government of China. Only a few weeks ago, on the 23d September, an inperial decree was promulgated, setting forth the harm done by the present state of taxation, and promising inquiry and redress. It is with full confidence in this imperial promise that the undersigned look for an answer from His Imperial Highness and their excellencies, appointing an early date for the joint consideration of the matter submitted.

The undersigned renew, &c., &c., &c.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 510.]

Introductory dispatch to the Tsung-li Yamên on the conferences of the foreign representatives.

Peking, November 8, 1879.

The undersigned have the honor to inform the Prince of Kung and the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên that they have been engaged in conference upon the internal taxation of foreign trade in this country; upon the administration of justice, and upon the conditions of intercourse, whether in correspondence or otherwise, between Chinese and foreign officials in the province.

In these three categories may be said to be included almost every matter to which attention seems to be demanded, whether for the removal of what may be characterized as a grievance, or for the introduction of changes that will modify what is in appearance either unreasonable or inexpedient.

The undersigned will very shortly be prepared to lay before His Imperial Highness and their excellencies the conclusions at which their deliberations have enabled them to arrive.

The course now pursued by the undersigned being simply in accord with the spirit of, declarations repeatedly made by His Imperial Highness and their excellencies, the undersigned are the more convinced that the propositions which they are about to submit to them will receive the most careful attention.

The undersigned renew to His Imperial Highness and their excellencies the assurance of their highest consideration.

THOMAS FRANCIS WADE,
Minister of Great Britain.

M. von BRANDT,
Minister of the German Empire.

GEORGE F. SEWARD,
Minister of the United States.

J. H. FERGUSON,
Minister of Holland.

J. F. ELMORE, Minister of Peru.

FERD. de LUCA,
Minister of Italy.

HOFFER de HOFFENFELS,
Minister of Austria-Hungary.

A. KOYANDER,
Chargé de Affaires of Russia, Representative of Denmark.

RAMON GUTIERREZ y OSSA,
Chargé d’Affaires of Spain.

J. PATENOTRE,
Chargé d’Affaires of France.

HUB. SERRUYS,
Chargé d’Affaires of Belgium.

(Note.—For the reply of the Tsung-li Yamên to this introductory note, see inclosure No. 2 with Mr. Seward’s No. 523, later on in this volume.)

[Inclosure 6 with No. 510.]

The Tsung-li Yamên to the Chinese ministers abroad.

the chinese circular of 1878.

[Dispatch No. 181.—Inclosure.]

1. Since the treaties of Tientsin were ratified, China’s relations with foreign powers have invariably been conducted in accordance with their stipulations. Whatever complaints there may have been on the part of foreign governments on this head, have, in the main, been occasioned by accidents to individuals and the incidence of taxation. As regards the first class of complaints, it must be remembered that such things may occur in any country, and that no amount of foresight can effectually guard against them; while as to taxation, it is where there are no treaty provisions, or where treaty provisions are read two ways, that differences occur.

2. Treaties may be revised once in every ten years, and such additions, abrogations, or modifications as are introduced depend upon the voluntary assent of the contracting powers. The first revision of the British treaty was concluded by the Yamên and the British minister in 1869; but notwithstanding that friendly negotiations had extended over as much as two years, the British Government refused to ratify the arrangements of its representative, and the revised treaty has never been in force. For a year past the revision of the German treaty has been going on. Among the proposals of the German minister there are some to which it is impossible for China to assent; and so, although there has been much discussion, no settlement has yet been arrived at. In this matter of treaty revision, a mutual interchange of views is a preliminary of much importance, and it appears to us that there are four cardinal points regarding which, it would seem, that we have, up to the present, failed to make the Chinese views understood. They are—1. Transit; 2. Lekin taxation; 3. Exterritoriality; 4. The most-favored nation clause. We propose to state our views in connection with them for your excellency’s information.

3. As regards dues and duties paid by foreigners generally, we hold that by the treaties of Tientsin foreigners— (1) Can import foreign goods into China on payment of the tariff duty;

(2) Can re-export duty-paid foreign goods to a foreign country, and obtain drawback of the import duty originally paid;

(3) Can convey duty-paid foreign goods into the interior and either, as Chinese merchants do, pay duties at each custom-house and taxes at each barrier passed, or, by payment of the tariff transit due, can free their goods from such duties and taxes en route to any places, however distant, named by them, and entered in their transit certificates;

(4) Can purchase native produce in the interior, and, if intended for foreign export and supplied with transit certificates, can bring it to a treaty port, exempt along the route from all duties and taxes, by simply exhibiting the certificate at each custom-house and barrier passed, it being merely charged the tariff transit due at the “last barrier” (i. e.,, the barrier nearest the port); or, if not provided with transit certificates, then such produce has to pay such duties and taxes to which Chinese merchants are liable;

(5) Can export native produce on payment of an export tariff duty;

(6) Can convey native produce from treaty port to treaty port on payment of an export duty at the port of shipment, and a coast trade half-duty at the port of discharge;

(7) Can, after payment of the coast trade half-duty as above, convey such native produce into the interior on the payment of the duties and taxes at the custom-house and barrier passed en route, in the same manner as Chinese merchants.

The above is, in a general way, what foreigners trading in native and foreign goods are entitled to as regards payment of duties in accordance with treaties and regulations.

4. As regards transit inwards, however, foreigners have maintained that to say goods are exempted en route from a port to the place mentioned in the transit certificate is not enough. They have held that foreign goods which have once paid transit dues cannot subsequently be called upon to pay any local charge whatever. To this interpretation we cannot agree. By the treaties foreigners have the option of taking out or not taking out transit certificates. If transit certificates are applied for, the treaty stipulations require that the place to which the goods are going must be named and entered in the certificate. Why is this so? It is because the certificate is only to free the goods from the treaty port to the place named in the certificate; arrived there, the certificate becomes waste paper, and the goods thereafter differ in no respect from ordinary uncertificated goods. Again, the foreign merchant, having the option of taking out or not taking out transit documents, it thence results that foreign goods of two kinds are found at the same place in the interior at the same time, namely, certificated and uncertificated. The certificated goods traveling in a given direction under certificate from the treaty port to a place named, are by treaty exempt from taxation everywhere en route; while the uncertificated goods, transported in any direction at pleasure, are everywhere liable to the incidence of local taxation. When the certificated goods have arrived at their place of destination, and by the canceling of the certificates have become uncertificated, they, like all other uncertificated goods, are thenceforth liable to taxation.

The certificate once canceled on arrival at the place of destination, how can it be possible to distinguish, among equally uncertificated goods, which had paid and which had not paid transit dues? It is evident, therefore, that complete exemption from taxation everywhere, and for all future time, is not the meaning of the treaties, but simply that goods are to be freed from all taxes en route. In a word, as we understand the inward-transit privilege, a certificate only protects goods from charges en route from port to place; but this is already a great privilege, for on payment of transit dues, the foreigner can at pleasure send his goods to any market, however distant, without further liability to taxation.

5. As regards transit outwards, foreigners have held that goods may be brought down under transit certificate even when not intended for foreign export, but meant for resale in China; and have gone so far as to say that, even without certificates, no tax ought to be charged in the interior on goods ordinarily exported to foreign countries. Now, as Chinese merchants have to pay all taxes en route it is obvious that the only way foreigners could bring down goods free would be under certificates; and therefore, without certificates, goods must pay, no matter what may be their subsequent destination. And again, since native trade would be subjected to unfair competition if foreigners were permitted to bring down produce under transit certificate and then send it to another part of China for sale, it follows that the produce that is entitled to transit privilege can only be such produce as is intended for foreign export. In a word, as regards native produce outwards, the case is just the same as with foreign merchandise inwards, the transactions differ, but the amount of duty charged is the same; for, just as a foreigner can take foreign goods to any part of China on payment of a full and half duty, so he can go to any part of China, and thence take Chinese produce to a foreign country on payment of a similar full and half duty.

6. Lekin is continually objected to by foreigners. But is it not just as well known that Chinese merchants are opposed to it too, and that the government regards it only as a temporary expedient? Independent powers must be guided by national necessities in fixing their taxation. In these troublous times the demands on the government are very heavy, and it is impossible to avoid having recourse to special measures; we maintain that all such matters should be left to be determined by China herself, and that the foreigner has no more right to interfere with or object to them than China would have to interfere with or criticise the action of a foreign government in raising loans or increasing taxes. If foreign merchants desire to escape the Lekim, they can escape it; all they have to do is to supply themselves with transit certificates when taking foreign goods into the interior, or bringing native produce out of the interior; if they do not carry transit certificates they must pay the Lekin, for, in the absence of transit certificates, all goods are alike and indistinguishable, and must in the interior pay Lekin, according to the rule of the locality.

7. As regards jurisdiction, i. e., exterritoriality. By the treaties, foreigners in China are not amenable to the jurisdiction of the Chinese authorities, i. e., they are exterritorialized. As they have disputes among themselves, their own authorities are to settle them; if they commit an offense, their own authorities are to punish them according to their own national laws. But foreigners claim much more than this; they interpret this exterritorial privilege as meaning not only that Chinese officials are not to control them, but that they may disregard and violate Chinese regulations with impunity. To this we cannot assent. China has not by any treaty given foreigners permission to disregard or violate the laws of China; while residing in China they are as much bound to observe them as Chinese are. What has been conceded in the treaties in this connection is merely that offenders shall be punished by their own national officials and in accordance with their own national laws. For example, if Chinese law prohibits Chinese subjects from going through a certain passage, foreigners cannot claim to go through that forbidden passage in virtue of exterritoriality. If they go through it, they thereby break a Chinese law; their own national officials are to punish them in accordance with such laws as provide for analogous cases in their own country. In a word, the true meaning of the exterritoriality clause is, not that a foreigner is at liberty to break Chinese laws, but that if he offends, he shall be punished by his own national officials.

Again, seeing that China has agreed that the judicial powers shall be exercised by foreign consuls within Chinese territory, foreign governments should, on their side, take care that none but good and reliable men are appointed to these posts. Several states, however, appoint merchant consuls. Now, in so far as concerns that part of a consul’s duty which comprises the reporting and clearing of ships, and the shipping and discharge of sailors, China does not object to its being discharged by merchant consuls. But in China a consul’s duties comprise judicial functions as well, and the importance of such functions is such as to seem to demand the appointment of bona fide officials to consular posts; moreover, where cases regarding joint investigation occur, it is neither convenient nor dignified for a Chinese official to sit on the bench with a merchant consul who may have been fined for smuggling the day before, or who, in his mercantile capacity, may, perhaps, be personally interested in the case at issue.

8. The most-favored-nation clause is found in all the treaties, and it is well that it should be so, for it is difficult for China to distinguish between foreigners, or say which belongs to which nationality; and so much is this so, that even non-treaty power foreigners are trusted like the others. The object of the foreign negotiator in introducing this clause was to prevent his own nationals from being placed at a disadvantage as compared with others, and to secure that all should be equally favored. Now, this is precisely what China desires. But foreign governments, although their objects in negotiating for the most-favored-nation clause were similar to those of China, are not always fair in their interpretation of it. For example, if China, for a consideration, grants a certain country a new privilege on such and such conditions, this would be of the nature of a special concession for a special consideration. Should other countries come forward and, in virtue of the most-favored-nation clause, claim to participate in the new privilege, although China need not necessarily exact a similar consideration in return, yet it would be only just to expect that in enjoying the privilege they would consent to observe the conditions accepted by the power to which it was originally granted. But, far from this being the case, there are some who, while demanding the privilege, refuse to be bound by the conditions attached to it. This is the unfair interpretation to which China objects. In a word, as regards this most-favored-nation clause, we hold that if one country desires to participate in the privileges conceded to another country, it must consent to be bound by the conditions attached to them, and accepted by another.

9. Over and above the four points commented on, there is the missionary question. China, recognizing that the object of all religious systems is to teach men to do good, has by treaty assented to missionaries coming to teach their doctrines in China, and has also guaranteed protection to them and to their converts. But among the missionaries are some who, exalting the importance of their office, arrogate to themselves an official status, and interfere so far as to transact business that ought properly to be dealt with by the Chinese local authorities; while among their converts are some who look upon their being Christians as protecting them from the consequences of breaking the laws of their own country, and refuse to observe the rules which are binding on their neighbors. This state of things China cannot tolerate or submit to. Under the exterritoriality clause foreigners are to be dealt with by their own national authorities; but, as regards Chinese subjects on Chinese soil, it is only the Chinese authorities who can deal with them; and Chinese subjects, whether Christians or not, to be accounted good subjects, must render an exact obedience to the laws of China. If any offend against those laws, they must, one and all, Christians and non-Christians alike, submit to be dealt with by their own native authorities, and the foreign missionary cannot be permitted to usurp the right of shielding them from the consequences of their act.

10. In order that negotiations for treaty revision maybe facilitated, what is required is reciprocal consideration and mutual forbearance.

We accordingly address to your excellency this communication. To recapitulate: (a.) In the matter of inward transit, we hold that certificates only cover goods from a treaty port to the place named in the certificate, exempting them from all taxes en route, and that, arrived at that place, they thereafter differ in no respect from uncertificated goods, and must, like all uncertificated goods, pay whatever charges the barriers passed thereafter may collect.

(b.) In the matter of outward transit, we hold that, produce not yet bought by foreigners, or bought but not covered by transit documents, is liable to all local charges; and that goods brought down under transit passes for foreigners must be sent to foreign countries, and cannot be allowed to go to other Chinese port for sale, to the disadvantage of native-owned goods which have not had the benefit of transit pass.

(c.) In the matter of Lekin, and taxation generally, we hold that China, as an independent state, has the right to levy whatever taxes she pleases, in whatever manner she may think best; and we consider it unfair on the part of other governments to question our proceedings or put difficulties in our way, seeing that we only collect special taxes because special circumstances call for them.

(d.) In the matter of jurisdiction, we hold that the exterritoriality conceded in the treaties does not free the foreigner from observing the rules which Chinese have to observe; and, seeing that consuls have judicial powers, we think the importance of the trust requires that they should be bona fide officials, and not traders.

(e.) In the matter of the “most-favored-nation” clause, we hold that, when any country claims to share the privileges conceded to another, it is hound to observe the conditions accepted by that other likewise.

(f.) In the matter of the missionary question, we hold that within Chinese territory it is only the Chinese officials who can be allowed to exercise authority over the Chinese people; and that, Christians or not Christians, Chinese subjects must, one and all, pay due respect and obedience to the laws of China.

What China wishes to do is to carry out the treaties in such a way as to give full effect to all their stipulations, and place all foreigners in China on the same footing; but she cannot allow those treaties to be wrested to mean something essentially unfair to the Chinese people, nor, in attemping to adjust national resources to national wants, can she assent to any interference with her sovereignty as an independent state. What the treaties aim at is the maintenance of peaceful relations, and it will be found that nothing contributes to this end more powerfully than a due recognition by either state of the independence and sovereignty of the other.

Your excellency will go in person to the foreign office and read this dispatch to the minister of foreign affairs, and, if requested, leave a copy.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 510.]

Propositions submitted by the German minister.

According to article 24 of the German-Chinese treaty of 1861, there can be no doubt that merchandise, on which the tariff duties have been paid in a Chinese port, can be conveyed into the interior without being subject to any other duties than the transit duty; this transit duty to be levied according to the rates in force in 1861, and not to be raised in future.

The same rule applies to produce carried from the interior to a port.

On produce carried from the interior to a port, or on imports carried inland from a port, the whole of the transit duties to which they are liable can be discharged by the payment of half the tariff import or export duty respectively.

From these stipulations it is evident that on imports, or native produce to be exported, no other duties or taxes can be levied but the transit duty, as it existed already in 1861, and that the imposition of other duties, may their names be lekin tax or anything else, is contrary to treaty, as far as the German treaty is concerned.

Such is the position taken up by the Imperial Government in the question of inland taxation. On the other hand, the Imperial Government is willing to give due consideration to the actual state of affairs as well as to the wishes and wants of the Chinese Government, and, jointly with the latter and the treaty powers, to search for an equitable solution satisfactory to all parties concerned.

According to the repeated declarations of the Chinese Government, the lekin tax, which would occupy the most prominent position if a practical solution of the question of inland taxation were attempted, is a temporary one, with the abolition of which the Chinese Government intends to proceed as soon as the financial state of the empire will permit.

Under these circumstances the Imperial Government would have no objection to consent for a certain time to the levying of a moderate and fixed lekin tax on imports forwarded inland, or produce purchased in the interior for exportation, provided the levy of such a tax were surrounded by the guarantees necessary for the security of commerce, and provided the goods in question were not protected by transit passes.

As such guarantees, the Imperial Government would consider, besides the issue of rules regulating the amount of the tax and the mode of levying it, as well as the responsibility of the officials intrusted with the levy, the creation of a port area, within which no other duties could be levied on foreign goods except the treaty import and export duty, and the uniform application of the transit pass system at all the open ports and throughout all the provinces of the empire.

The Imperial Government is, however, willing to go still farther, and, the above-mentioned guarantees once obtained, to consent even to an augmentation of the transit duty. This concession would, however, be subject to the condition that on the one hand it should be a temporary one and liable to be revoked, and that, on the other hand, it should be left to the choice of the foreign merchant to use either the old arrangement or the new one.

The Imperial Government is of the opinion that such an arrangement might, perhaps, be framed in adopting a proposal laid before Mr. Medhurst, Her Britannic Majesty’s consul, by the chamber of commerce at Shanghai, on February 1, 1869 (cf. 12, China correspondence with the chamber of commerce at Shanghai), and that an understanding might be arrived at on the basis that packages containing foreign goods to be forwarded from the open ports into the interior, and having paid the import duty and a raised transit duty, should have a stamp affixed to them by the Chinese customhouses at the open ports, and pass freely through the whole empire without being subject to the payment of any other tax.

In order to reserve to the foreign commerce the possibility of reverting to the former agreement, in case the Chinese Government should not sufficiently protect, against other duties, those goods forwarded under stamp, the now-existing transit pass system should be maintained, so as to leave it to the choice of the importer at the open port to forward the goods under stamp against the payment of the raised transit duty through the whole empire, or against the payment of the now-existing transit duty to certain places, named beforehand, in the interior.

With regard to Chinese produce purchased in the interior for export, a similar agreement might be arrived at, or an agreement like the one proposed by the non-ratified English convention of October, 1869, by which all duties would have to be paid in transitu, and the surplus over and above the treaty transit duty returned by the Chinese authorities if the produce be exported within a certain specified period.

Peking, August, 1879.
M. von BRANDT.

[Inclosure 8 in No. 510.]

Letter from the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce to the doyen of the diplomatic body at Peking on the subject of treaty revision.

Shanghai General Chamber of Commerce,
Shanghai, October 22, 1879.

Sir: As most of the representatives of foreign powers are now assembled at Peking? where it is understood that negotiations for treaty revisions are in active progress, I have the honor to submit, for the consideration of your excellency and your colleagues, a brief statement of the committee’s views on several of the important questions under discussion.

The opinions of this chamber on the subject of treaty revision were set forth at some length in a letter addressed by their London committee on November 12, 1877, to Lord Derby, then Her Hajesty’s principal secretary of state for foreign affairs. A copy of this document is inclosed herewith.

The committee, while adhering generally to the views expressed therein, ventures to avail itself of the present opportunity with special reference to the vexed questions of transit dues and inland taxation on imports. The difficulties which beset the treatment of these questions are fully appreciated by the chambers, but the committee is anxious to reiterate its conviction that foreign interests are more likely to be promoted by the maintenance and enforcement of present treaties than by any of the new stipulations which have been proposed of late years.

As a matter of fact the Chinese Government, while admitting the validity of the treaty tariff on imports and the exemption of foreign goods under transit passes from all other taxes, claims and exercises the right to tax such goods at discretion after they have reached their specified destination, and to tax foreign goods, not covered by transit passes, wherever they may be found.

The committee cannot do better than to refer to the letter of its London representatives to Lord Derby for a statement of the chamber’s reason for holding that the Chinese view is incompatible with the provisions of the British treaty of Tientsin. But there is an equally clear divergence from the stipulations of earlier and still subsisting treaties, which the committee think should not be lost sight of.

The American treaty, signed at Wanghia in 1844, provides (Article XIII) that “imported goods, on their resale or transit in any part of the empire, shall be subject to the imposition of no higher duty than they are accustomed to pay at the date of this treaty.”

Article XIII, of the Swedish treaty, signed at Canton in 1847, provides that “imported goods on their resale or transit in any part of the empire shall be subject to the imposition of no other duty than they are accustomed to pay at the date of this treaty.” The effect of these two articles seems to be— 1. That the privilege attaches to “imported goods” irrespective of ownership.

2. That the privilege extends not only over the transit of the goods, but to their resale in any part of the empire.

3. That neither a higher duty nor any other duty can be levied on foreign goods than those which were customary when the treaties were signed, that is to say, nothing more and nothing less than the transit duties provided by the British treaty of Nanking. After the signature of the treaties of Tientsin, these transit dues were fixed by common agreement at one-half of the tariff import duty, but since the establishment of the transit pass system, the Chinese Government has only partially recognized the privileges as attaching to the goods and not to the owners.

Furthermore, so far from the protection extending to “resale in any part of the empire,” according to the treaties quoted, the very name of “transit pass” seems to have lent itself to the successful assertion of the principle that foreign goods are covered only during transit to a specified place, and that they are at the mercy of Chinese taxation afterwards. How trifling in fact must he the value of a transit pass to an owner of foreign goods in the interior appears conclusively from the customs returns, which show how small a proportion of imports is protected by such certificates.

I would also beg leave to refer to the fact that according to the earlier treaties the area within which foreign goods were free from inland taxation practically extended from the port of entry to the nearest barrier then existing. The committee feels that to restrict this area, as has been proposed, to that of the foreign settlement at each port would be to surrender a treaty right without adequate return, to admit a dangerous principle, and to open the way to endless complications.

Although the value of the lekin tax to the revenue of the empire is admitted on all sides, it is understood that the Peking government itself acknowledges that the tax is abnormal, more or less beyond its control, and one which it would not be sorry to see abolished. If this be so it maybe hoped at least that, in the revision of the treaties, nothing will be admitted by foreign powers which will, by recognition or otherwise, encourage the continuance of a tax to which its very authors object.

To conclude, the committee believes it is expressing the opinion of the whole mercantile community of Shanghai in stating that the present treaty provisions regarding transit dues and inland taxes are ample, if China will only carry them out without evasion, in spirit as well as in letter; what seems to be needed is only a clearer restatement of their terms, with a declaration by China that lekin, or any analogous tax on foreign goods, is wholly illegal. This point the committee begs most earnestly to urge as of the highest importance.

If such a declaration were made by imperial proclamation and enforced by competent tribunals, so that the humblest Chinese trader would feel himself protected against inland exaction on imported goods in his possession, the burden of the present tariff would weigh very lightly on foreign trade. But until the central government can give some more adequate guarantee than has hitherto been offered against irregular levies at provincial barriers, any advantages supposed to be secured by treaty through the optional or enforced payment of commutation dues at the port of entry must be to a great extent illusory.

I have, &c.,

F. B. FORBES,
Chairman.

His Excellency Sir Thomas Francis Wade, K. C. B.,
Her Britannic Majesty’s Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary, Doyen of the Diplomatic Body, Peking.

[Appendix to inclosure 8 in No. 510.]

Letter of the Chamber’s London Committee to Lord Derby, on the Chefoo convention, dated London, November 12, 1877. [Extract.]

shanghai general chamber of commerce.

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Derby, P. C.,
Her Majesty’s principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, &c., &c., &c.:

My Lord: * * * * *

19. Your lordship will observe that the section of the convention which deals with international jurisprudence has been passed over somewhat lightly by the Shanghai chamber; and we may be permitted to explain that this is not because the subject fails to be recognized as one of great practical importance, but because it requires comprehensive treatment by trained lawyers, and cannot even be discussed to advantage without having all the data thoroughly sifted.

The chief gain from the introduction of the subject into the convention is the recognition, now, we believe, for the first time accorded to Her Majesty’s supreme court for China and Japan.

20. Passing to the purely commercial portion of the convention, the Shanghai chamber (as noted in their letter) heartily approve the concession of new trading ports, two on the Great River and two on the coast. This is looked upon as a step in the right direction, and is doubly welcome as some modification of the dictum of Lord Russell that the fewer open ports we had the better. The Shanghai chamber would, however, go still further, and would urge the desirability of the whole of China being thrown open for the establishment of trading points wherever it may be found worth while for the Chinese Government to place a custom-house, and the European Governments consular stations.

21. The point upon which the committee are most anxious to bring their views before your lordship is the stipulations affecting the collection of inland duties. The Shanghai chamber, in their letter, notice at some length the manner in which this subject has been treated in the previous prolonged discussions which have arisen with regard to it.

22. The wording of clause 28 of the treaty of Tientsin, which refers to it, provides in clear and specific language that British subjects may convey imported goods to any part of the interior of China on payment of a commuted transit duty amounting to half the tariff duty, which commutation is to “exempt the goods from all further inland charges whatsoever.”

23. A “rule,” however, which was appended to the tariff some months after it was signed, tends to complicate and needlessly to limit the due operation of this provision, and the faithlessness of the Chinese officials has, to a large extent, rendered it a dead letter.

24. It was found by experience to have been a mistake to secure the option of commuting the inland dues as a personal privilege to British subjects instead of a privilege in re or an exemption attaching to the goods themselves, irrespective of the persons by whom they might, after payment of the commutation dues, be owned.

25. With this exception, however, the clause in the treaty of 1858, seemed all that was required; and the merchants in China desire nothing better than that its clear intentions should be fulfilled.

26. They have, however, for years past been met by a variety of ingenious arguments tending to show that, owing to the peculiar fiscal system of China, the principle of a single payment in commutation of all inland dues could not be carried out.

27. But this argument is receiving a practical answer by the gradual extension of the very practice so long pronounced impossible, as is shown in the letter from the Shanghai chamber; and whatever force may previously have attached to it, it at least became clear, in 1869, that it was not one which the Chinese Government were themselves disposed to advance, seeing that in connection with Sir Rutherford Al-cock’s convention of that year they voluntarily proposed a single payment commutation for all inland dues, but with the important modification that it was to be compulsory instead of being optional, as provided by the treaty of Tientsin.

28. This suggestion was opposed by the China merchants when Sir Rutherford Alcock’s convention was under consideration, because it was clearly discerned that its effect would have been merely to add 50 per cent, to the import duty with no better guarantee than before against surcharges in the interior.

29. All that appears in reality to have been wanted was to give a new impetus to the old treaty provisions; to do away with the personal bearing of the exemption, which, as it was provided for in the “transit duty commutation clause,” had the appearance, on the surface, of an invidious race distinction, and finally to get rid of any remnants of obscurity in the meaning of the agreement.

30. What has now been done, however, seems rather to tend in the opposite direction. New elements of obscurity have been introduced, and if twenty years have been spent wrangling over the comparitavely simple wording of the Tientsin treaty, it is to be feared that no person now living will see the end of the controversies which will rage over the indefinite arrangement set forth in the Chefoo convention.

31. The subject appears to have been complicated by the introduction, in connection with it, of a collateral question regarding a special tax, known in China by the name of lekin, and, in contravention of the principle that the payment of the commuted transit dues should exempt British goods from all further inland taxation, lekin is now for the first time recognized in a treaty by a kind of sidewind.

32. This “lekin” is a tax which has been most complained of as having been levied in violation of treaty stipulations. It is raised in all kinds of ways, according to the caprice of the different provincial authorities, and has been burdensome to trade as much on account of its uncertainty as its magnitude.

33. The Shanghai Chamber of Commerce submit that this tax is practically either an additional import duty, in which case its levy on British goods is in contravention of the treaty, or it is an inland duty, and as such commutable by a single payment.

34. Assuming that by the true meaning of the Chefoo convention lekin is included with the other commutable inland duties, the intention of the new provisions would appear to be to exempt the area of the foreign settlements at the different ports absolutely from its collection.

35. On the surface this seems to be not only innocent hut advantageous to the foreigner. But if this were really all that is intended, it would scarcely have been worth while making this solemn engagement about the matter. It can hardly, however, be doubted that the stipulation has, in the minds of the Chinese Government and its advisers, a far more important bearing. By an obvious inference, the specific exemption of the area of the foreign settlements from the levy of this tax implies full authority to levy it on the other side of the boundary.

36. The effect, therefore, of the proposed provision would to be impose this tax with all the authority of a special treaty at every open port in China. The small patches of ground in the occupation of foreign merchants would be exempt, but the Chinese towns would not escape; so that goods designed for consumption in the immediate district could only be freed from the tax by the payment of the extra half duty as commutation dues, if, indeed, the Chinese officials, whose rapacity is notorious, would not find means to levy the lekin after all even when the commuted rate had been paid. The result of this would be to reintroduce the nationality question in a most objectionable shape and lay the foundation for endless disputes.

37. There can, however, be no doubt that an additional tax levied at the port is, whatever it may be called, neither more nor less than an additional import duty, which is precisely what the Chinese negotiators intend that it shall be, and precisely what the interests of our commerce render it incumbent on the merchants to oppose.

38. It is, in fact, the attempt made in the Alcock convention of 1869 (see paragraph 28) in a new shape. Sir Rutherford Alcock was plainly asked to allow 50 per cent, to be added to the import duty, on the bare promise of the goods being thenceforth franked all over the empire in accordance with clause 28 of the Tientsin treaty, the very thing which had been declared impossible. Sir Thomas Wade is asked to allow the Chinese to levy any amount of taxation they like upon foreign goods the moment they leave the limits of the settlement, or say within half a mile of the wharf at which they are imported. Assume the amount thus levied to be the half-tariff duty, and we have Sir Rutherford Alcock’s rejected agreement, minus the promise quantum valeat, that the goods should not be further taxed in the interior.

39. The only arrangement compatible with the spirit of the existing treaty would appear to be that sketched out by the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce on page six of their letter, namely, that imported goods should, on payment of the import duty, be freed from further taxation while within the limits of the port, which can be easily defined according to the actual topographical divisions; and that goods upon which the commuted transit due has been paid should be “exempted from all further inland charges whatsoever,” as provided by clause 28 of the Tientsin treaty.

40. The prosperity of English trade requires that the imposts upon it shall not only be kept within reasonable limits, but also that the machinery for their collection be simplified by all feasible means, as it might be possible even to paralyze the trade by complicated regulations for freeing it from taxation.

41. It would, therefore, appear far better to revert to the clear and simple provisions of the Tientsin treaty, and insist upon their being carried out without evasion.

While we adhere to the letter of our engagements and hold the Chinese to theirs, all goes well; but when we encumber these simple stipulations with complicated rules and qualifications, checks and counter-checks, we are but too apt to miss the point we aim at while involved in the mazes of endless discussion.

It would be impossible to estimate the loss which the manufacturing and other interests in this country suffer every year through the trade being hampered by the subtleties of chicanery resorted to in China. We have a treaty, plain and simple. All that we have to do is to insist upon its fulfillment, and there can be no doubt, whatever plausible arguments may be advanced, that the Chinese have no valid excuse for failing to carry out its provisions in their spirit as well as in their letter.

42. The question of inland opium duties has been introduced into the convention apparently with very little show of reason, seeing that the Chinese Government besides receiving an import duty are at liberty to tax opium as much as they please after it has left the hands of the original importer.

43. They now, however, wish to make the foreign importer and the foreign customhouse responsible for the due collection of an important portion of the inland imposts, the design in this evidently being the same as that above indicated with regard to manufactured goods and other imports, to increase the import duty under false pretenses. If it be thought proper to help the Chinese to levy additional, duties upon opium, or upon any other goods, by means of the foreign customs and within the foreign settlements, it should be done in a straightforward manner, that is, by simply increasing the import duty at present collected.

But for the English Government to make itself even indirectly answerable for the collection from Chinese of an impost of indefinite amount, varying at each port according to the caprice or the necessities of local authorities who are not even specified, would surely be to introduce a most inconvenient precedent to say the least.

44. The Shanghai chamber also venture to express a hope that the present opportunity may still be availed of to obtain a few minor concessions from China which would be of great practical benefit to trade.

45. One of these is bonded warehouses. The principle was conceded in the Alcock convention, but, as already noticed, in exchange for increased duties which it was felt the trade generally could not bear. It needs no argument to support this request, and at the ports chiefly interested ample conveniences already exist for giving effect to this reasonable accommodation to commerce.

46. The unsatisfactory state of the currency in China probably inflicts a greater tax on trade, both foreign and native, than even the irregular imposts of the Mandarins; and it would be a great advantage if an opportunity could be taken to urge the Chinese Government to establish a mint for coining dollars, with adequate guarantees for the maintenance of the standard adopted.

47. Upon the conservancy of the rivers, especially the Wangpoo, we have the honor to address a separate letter to your lordship inclosing one received from the Shanghai chamber. It would probably not be difficult to induce the Chinese to move in this matter, and the admirable manner in which they have accomplished the task of lighting the coast proves that they are fully capable of performing such duties when they are once brought to feel that they are incumbent upon them.

48. In conclusion, we trust we may be permitted to say that, though objecting to specific parts of the Chefoo convention, the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce fully recognize the zeal and talent displayed by his excellency Sir Thomas Wade in furthering our trading interests in China. They cannot, however, but be conscious of the extremely difficult circumstances under which he negotiated, not only on account of the grave international question which he endeavored to settle simultaneously with the commercial portion of the convention, but also from the oblique form in which the representatives of the Chinese Government thought it advisable alone to deal with the comparatively simple question of the inland duties.

We have, &c.,

A. MICHIE,

F. D. BARNES,
Members of the London Committee representing the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce.

London, November 12, 1877.

No. 135. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 135.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Pelting, November 25, 1879. (Received January 7, 1880.) No. 512.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith the report of the committee, appointed at the recent conference of foreign representatives at this capital, to consider the changes needed in the forms of intercourse between foreign and native officials, together with two memoranda presented to the committee by the two senior interpreters of the services represented and a protocol adopted by the conference.

The report of the committee does not differ essentially from the conclusions reached by the ministers who considered the subject in 1876, shown in the protocol transmitted to the department with my dispatch No. 177.

I beg leave to ask for authority to sustain my colleagues in an effort to secure the adoption of the changes proposed.

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 512.]

Report of the committee upon official intercourse.

The question which your committee has had to consider might be generally described as the question of etiquette, a term which may be held to include the conditions of personal relations and of official correspondence alike.

It is in the provinces that the change seems more particularly to be called for, though in these, as elsewhere, there has been improvement of late. Up to a recent date the chiefs of provincial governments were on some occasions all hut inaccessible to consular officers desiring to see them on business or to pay them a visit; accessible only if the foreign official would accept admittance into the Yamên by such entrance as would be the only one open to a Chinese of rank corresponding to the consuls when waiting on the provincial superior as his subordinate. This state of things has been modified, and greatly for the better.

It seems unquestionably desirable that whether at a port or in the interior, a consular officer, having occasion to speak to the governor-general or governor of a province on business, should be assured access to the high authority, and that neither, when admitted into his Yamên nor into his presence, he should be treated as the subordinate of the high authority no matter what the inferiority of his official rank. The Chinese perfectly understand what is due from host to guest, and no more should be asked for.

In the forms of correspondence between the consular officers and provincial authorities, high and low, some changes have long been called for. The earlier treaties assigned to consular officials certain conditions of co-ordination with Chinese officials which have in themselves a certain value, and which, at all events, it is not proposed to disturb. But the prescription of forms in correspondence which at first sight appear the logical consequence of this co-ordination of grades was not equally happy.

The whole subject is treated exhaustively in the two memoranda appended, the one prepared by Monsieur Devéria, interpreter of the French legation, and the other by Monsieur Arendt, interpreter of the German legation. Both gentlemen recommend substitution for the form, more or less objectionable, in which foreign consuls and high provincial authorities have addressed each other, the term “wên i,” to “correspond officially,” to which no objection can be taken on the part of the foreigner, and to which it will scarcely be possible for the Chinese to object. The term, though official, marks nothing as to the rank either of the writer or person written to.

In correspondence between the legation and the Tsung-li Yamên the term “chao hui,” heretofore used in accordance with treaty, should be retained.

It has been usual for the high provincial authorities, in their dispatches to consular officers, to prefix to the word indicating the consular officer addressed, when there was occasion to mention him in the body of the document, the word “kai.” This, the accepted form of the high officer’s dispatch “cha,” which is literally an “instruction” considered, is idiomatically correct, but it is as objectionally depreciatory as the term “cha” itself. It would be desirable to substitute for it, when the consul is spoken to, the word “kuei,” which, with the noun, forms the second person of politeness; and when he is spoken of, as in a communication to the consul’s superior, he is to substitute his surname. The old form in the latter case might be translated, “This consul”; the proposed substitute, “Mr. Consul, so and so.”

memorandum upon official intercourse by mr. c. arendt.

With reference to the form of correspondence between Chinese and foreign officials of unequal rank it is my opinion:

1. That the term “cha hsing,” which has been in use until now for dispatches from governors-general to consuls, &c., and which, in Article XI of the treaty of Nanking (Mayers, p. 3), is translated by “declaration,” but in reality designates an “instruction” sent from a higher official to a direct subordinate, should be completely abolished.

But I hold also that—

2. The term “shin chin” or “shin chin,” translated by “statement” in the treaty of Nanking and by “memorial” in Article VII of the United States treaty of 1858 (Mayers, p. 86), which has been used by consuls writing to governors-general, is equally inadmissible. To prove this it is only necessary to keep before one’s eyes the facts that (a) according to fol. 11 vers. ult. of the first volume of the Chinese official quarterly almanac, subordinate civil officers in writing to the superior provincial authorities make use of the characters “shen wen,”* (b) that the inspector-general of customs in addressing the Tsung-li Yamên employes the characters “shen cheng.” This shows that the character and its combinations should only be used by subordinates addressing their direct superiors,† and are not fit therefore for correspondence between foreign and Chinese officials.

3. In trying to find other expressions for those to be discarded in future, I understand the task before us to be to substitute for them characters which have upon them no mark whatever of either superiority or inferiority, or equality of rank or position, on the one side or the other.

Such a general expression containing simply the idea of official correspondence without any by-thought seems to be supplied by the Chinese characters “wen yi,” which indicate simply the transmission “yi” of an official document (“wen”) from any civil or military officer to another, as is proved by many passages in the official Chinese quarterly almanac (1. 1. and fol. 16, 199, of the part treating of military officers).

For there it is said at every moment that as regards the mutual transmission of official documents addressed by the one to the other (“wen yi”), this one will use such and the other such characters. “Wen yi” seems to me, therefore, to be the general term needed for the purpose before us.

4. I hold, therefore, that the characters “wen yi” would form a very appropriate basis for dispatches from the governor-general, or any other very high officer, to a consul-general or consul, and vice versa; or from an official lower than a taotai to a consul or consul-general, and vice versa, with one word for all cases when officials of unequal rank, or considered an such, write to each other in an official form.

5. To show the manner in which this system would work, in detail, the following remarks will suffice:

I. In the body and at the end of the dispatch where in the dispatches between the Yamên and the legations or consuls and taotais the characters “wei chas hui shih,” “so and so sends a chao hui or communication,” are employed at present, we would write in the above-named cases “wei wen yi shih,” “so and so hereby transmits a dispatch.”

The expression corresponding to” wei tzu chas hui,” “therefore I send this chao hui, or communication,” would be “wei tzu wen yi,” “therefore I send this official document,” for “hsee chih chao hui che” “a necessary communication,” it would be “hsee chih wen yi che” “a dispatch necessary to be sent,” and for “yo chao hui” “the above is a communication sent to so and so” it would be “yo wen yi,” “the above official paper is sent to so and so.”

II. On the title page of the dispatch, where the yamên, legations, &c., at present use the words “chao hui,” “a communication,” as a noun substantive, I believe, for idiomatical reasons, that a transposition of the characters wen yi would be recommendable, and one should write “yi wen” “a dispatch to be transmitted.” So also in the body of the dispatch for “I have received your chao hui” it should be I think “I have received your wen yi.”

III. The characters “lai wen,” literally the dispatch that has come from you, i. e. “your dispatch,” which occur frequently in chao huis, ought not to be changed in dispatches between officials of unequal ranks.

IV. Where the writer wants to express the idea of reply, characters such as “fu wen” “a dispatch in reply,” corresponding to “chao fu” “a communication in reply,” and “wen fun” “to reply in an official form,” ought to be used.

V. On the envelope of the dispatch, the characters used in chas huis communications between the Yamên and legations, &c., viz: “kung wen tsze chih,” “a paper on public business sent to so and so” ought either to remain unchanged “or yi wen tsze chih” “an official missive sent to so and so,” substituted for them. The former expression seems to me preferable for merely international reasons.

Where on the envelope of communications (chas huis) the words “tang tai k’ai ch’ai, to be opened on his raised platform,” appear in Peking, the likewise common phrase “tang tiang k’ai ch’ai,” “to be opened in his hall,” might be used by governors-general writing to consuls, &c., but as a mere form of politeness, consuls writing to governors-general, &c., might retain the former phrase, “to be opened on his raised platform.”

VI. The use of the character “kai-in” addressing the person to whom the dispatch is written, as “kai ling shih,” “the consul in question,” should be entirely discarded and “kuei ling shih,” “the honorable consul,” and so on, invariably substituted for it.

VII. The principle of elevation of characters to the top of the column or above it, should be the same in the new form of dispatches as it has been until now in chao huis, and no deviation of any kind from it be permitted.

VIII. VIII. It ought to be expressly stipulated that the whole phraseology of the dispatch should be in accordance with the general principle, and no expression indicating superiority be admitted nor any expression indicating inferiority be demanded.

6. Whilst, therefore, the new form of wen yi would be applicable in every case without hurting sensibilities on either part, so that also, for instance, I think, a consul might well accept this form from an inferior Chinese official, I hold on the other hand that the form of chao hui, which by the established usage of long years, though not in its original Chinese application, is expressive of absolute equality, might be conveniently retained in all those cases in which it has hitherto been made use of. So that there would be two, but only two, forms, the chao hui in all cases where it has existed until now, and the wen yi for all other cases without exception.

7. I would think it important to stipulate that, besides the seal, no other circles, marks, &c., in red ink, should be admissible neither in chao huts nor in wen yis, as they are a decided sign of superiority on the part of the writer.

The number of columns on one page ought to be in all cases mutually the same between foreign and Chinese officials.

8. As the term chao hui has become, as already mentioned, in the course of time an explicit expression of perfect equality (by which it differs from the entirely general term of wen yi), its extension to all other cases would probably not only meet with much opposition on the part of the Chinese, but also be less acceptable to consuls, &c., receiving dispatches from inferior Chinese officials.

9. As there is, in fact, nothing to find fault with in the form of chao hui as hitherto in use, I do not think it would either be necessary or convenient to extend the form of wen yi to those cases in which, until now, chao hui has been employed.

10. About the correspondence in the form of half official and friendly letters, nothing need be said. It has to my knowledge never given rise to objections on the one part or the other, and may remain as it was (only it might be well to stipulate that the character pi instead of pên must never be used and cannot be demanded).

I think it only right to state at the end, that by far the greatest part of the above arguments have not originated with myself but have been supplied to me in conversation with my colleagues and others. So, before all, the reference to the Chinese official almanac, only some of the details have been worked out by me.

Peking, September 28, 1879.
C. ABENDT.

memorandum by mr. deveria.

Règlement régissant la forme de missives officielles (sueny) échangees entre fonctionnaires civils de tous rangs.

Les autorités supérieures (dites du Tche-ly), dans leurs correspondances officielles avec les fonctionnaires de leur département, se serviront de la formule “pancarte;” les fonctionnairs sous leurs orders se serviront de la formule “exposé.”

Le Tchefou (préfet), écrivant á son assistant (Tso-Eurh), se servira de la formula “exposé.”

L’assistant se servira vis-à-vis de lui de la formule “soumission de rapport.”

II en sera de même des sous-préfets, Tche-tcheou et Tche-hsien, vis-à-vis de leurs assistants, et réciproquement.

Les sous-préfets (tche-tcheou) dites du tche-ly, dans leurs correspondances officielles avec des préfets, tche-fou-se, serviront de la formule “soumission de pancarte;” le préfet usera de celle de “communication à l’enere noire.”

Le directeur universitaire correspondant avec le trésorier de la province (fan-sse) ou le grand juge provincial (nieh-sse) addressera sa missive à ces personnages, mais au has de la suscription il ajoutera “aux soins de ses sécrétaires.”

Les trésorier et grand juge, dans leur correspondance avec le directeur universitaire se serviront de l’expression “signification confinée aux soins de nos sécrétaires pour être remise au directeur universitaire.”

Dans sa correspondance avec les Taotais le directeur universitaire se servira de l’expression “pancarte,” en retour de laquelle le Taotai se servira de la formule “lettre soumise á—.”

Les directeurs des métiers impériaux—Tche tsao—dans leurs correspondances avec les Tche-fou (préfets) et les Tche hsien (sous préfets de 2de classe) se serviront de la formule “pancarte.”

Les Tche-fou et les Tche hsien en s’addressant à lui useront de la formule, “soumission de subordonné.”

Tels sont les renseignements ofiiciels fournis par 1’Almanach trimestriel administratif.

A part cela les individus dépourvus de fonctions mais ayant un titre nobiliaire se serviraient vis-à-vis des fonctionnaires de tous rangs de l’expression “déliberation.”*

Les fonctionaires se serviraient vis-á-vis d’eux de la même formule.

Les savants ou docteurs enseignants ou hommes considérable en Chine et qui n’exercent pas de fonctions officielles se serviraient de l’expression “information.”

Les autorités leur répondraient suivant la meme formule. Le même Almanach contient le règlement relatif aux visites officielles échangées entre les fonctionnaires chinois.

Les Tsan tsiang, les Yeou Ki, se servent de la formule.

Les Fou sze, les Chao-pei, se servent de la formule.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 512.]

protocol.

The report of the committee upon official intercourse having been this day read before a general meeting of the representatives of treaty powers assembled in Peking, it was agreed that the attention of the Chinese Government should be invited to the propositions therein contained; but verbally and not in correspondence.

November 7, 1879.
THOMAS FRANCIS WADE.

M. v. BRANDT.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

J. H. FERGUSON.

J. F. ELMORE.

FERD. de LUCA.

HOFFER de HOFFENFELS.

A. KOYANDER.

R. G. y OSSA.

PATENÔTRE.

HUB. SERRUYS.

* The same objection as against “shen “would, in my opinion, also hold good against “hsiang,” an explanation as it may be proved from the official almanac that “hsiang wens” or explanation statements are only addressed by subordinates to their superiors, and never replied to in the same form.

† There is only one exception to this rule, viz: When a prefect, in writing to his second (the T’ung-chih), uses by courtesy the expression “shen wen,” the latter replies then by a “tieh-cheng” or ““submission of report.” This solitary case can have no influence on the matter in question.

* Ne se trouve pas dans l’Almanach. C’est le Ta King, Hoei Tien Kin 328, fos. 92, 97, chapitre—, qui attesterait l’exactitude de ce renseignement.

No. 136. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 136.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Pelting, December 4, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880) No. 523.]

Sir: I had the honor to hand to you with my dispatch No. 510, a copy of an introductory note to the Tsung-li Yamên by the foreign representatives at this capital at the close of their recent conference in regard to the condition of trade, justice, and intercourse, and intended to pave the way for the special representations to follow. I now inclose another copy of the note for your convenience in referring to it, and a copy of the response made by the prince and ministers.

You will notice upon reference to the latter paper that the Yamên declares its readiness to receive and consider such representations as may be put forward by us, but that this statement is accompanied by remarks of a half moral, half philosophical sort upon the relationship of host and guest.

It is not easy to say what the Yamên has intended to indicate in these remarks. They may look to an assertion that we should not ask for more in China than we are prepared to give in our own lands, or they may have been dictated by the idea, ever present to the Chinese mind, that it is not becoming on our part, as the guests of the empire, to demand too much from our host, the government. It would be a mistake probably to consider them as glittering generalities only.

The Yamên has followed up this note by a second one, with which a copy has been sent to us of its circular of last year to its representatives abroad (see my dispatch No. 510),* and an intimation that it contains a declaration of their understanding of the treaties.

The earlier note from the Yamên called for no reply, but the second could not be passed by. It is, in effect, an invitation to us to enter upon a discussion of the treaties apart from the grievances which we have set up, and this, of course, would lead to nothing.

My colleagues and I have thought it well, therefore, to respond to this note, saying only that we have received it, and that we were already acquainted with its contents, meaning, of course, to imply that our representations had been made in full view of it.

The views of the diplomatic body in regard to the matters which require attention at the moment in connection with the administration of justice have been fully made known to the Yamên by letter. Those relating to intercourse are to be explained personally and not by correspondence, at least at the outset. The more serious questions, those occurring in the course of trading relations, have been presented in outline only in correspondence, and their presentation must be supplemented by the production of evidence and by personal explanations of its bearing. I shall hope at an early day to report the progress which has been made in the directions so indicated.

I have, &c., &c., &c.,

GEOKGE F. SEWARD.

(Note.—For text of inclosure No. 1, being the introductory note of the foreign representatives to the Tsung-li Yamên, see appendix 5 to Mr. Seward’s No. 510, page 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 134] of this volume.)

[Inclosure 2 in No. 523.]

Reply of the Tsung-li Yamên to the foreign representatives.

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication in reply.

Upon the 21st instant I had the honor to receive a collective note from your excellencies, stating that your excellencies have been engaged in conference upon the internal taxation of foreign trade in this country; upon the administration of justice; and upon the conditions of intercourse, whether in correspondence or otherwise, between Chinese and foreign officials in the provinces.

Your excellencies state that in these three categories may be said to be included almost every matter to which attention seems to be demanded, whether for the removal of what may be characterized as a grievance, or for the introduction of changes that will modify what is in appearance either unreasonable or inexpedient; and that you propose to present the conclusions which you have reached, to which you are assured that this Yamên will give the most careful attention, &c., &c.

In response I beg leave to remark that it seems to me that the intercourse between the various nations of the earth exists upon the friendly basis of host and guest, from which host and guest alike seek to derive benefit and to avoid injury. In the discussion of any matter, if it is profitable to both host and guest, then there will be no divergence in their language. If it be advantageous to the guest and works no harm to the host, the latter may perhaps assent to it. But if it be advantageous to the guest and detrimental to the host, then it ought, of course, to be again considered in all its bearings.

The personality of host and guest is not fixed. Each in his own land is the host, and those opposite to the host are the guests. To-day I [the pronoun “I” represents the reader of the dispatch rather than the Prince] may be the guest and another person the host. Supposing that he goes beyond the ordinary requirements of courtesy in order to consult my convenience, then, to-morrow, he being the guest and I the host, could I require him to conform to ordinary rules in order that my convenience as host should be consulted by him?

Persons of high intelligence are able to consider at once the entire concerns of all the world with an impartial, kindly regard.

It will certainly be the duty of the ministers and myself to give careful consideration to the further note which your excellencies propose to address to us.

Peking, November 26, 1879.

To their excellencies Sir Thomas Wade, Mr. von Brandt, George F. Seward, Mr. Ferguson, Dr. Elmore, Mr. de Luca, Mr. Heifer von Hoffenfels, Mr. Koyander, Mr. Ossa, Mr. Patenôtre, Mr. Serruys.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 523.]

The Tsung-li Yamên to the foreign representatives.

(Informal.)

This office some time since transmitted to the representatives of China abroad a memorandum in which was set forth its understanding of the treaties.

I have now the honor to hand to your excellency herewith a copy of this memorandum, in Chinese and foreign text, and beg your excellency to give it your consideration.

Cards and compliments.

November 29, 1879,

The foreign office to the foreign representatives.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 523.]

Reply to the Yamên’s note forwarding copy of instructions to Chinese ministers abroad.

December 3, 1879.

Sir Thomas Wade presents his compliments to the Prince of Kung and the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên.

Sir Thomas Wade received upon the 30th November a semi-official note from the Yamên addressed to himself and his colleagues, the representatives of the treaty powers recently assembled in Peking.

There was forwarded with the note, in English and foreign languages, a printed copy of the instructions issued by the Tsung-li Yamên to the missions of the Chinese Government abroad in March, 1878, with which the representatives addressed were requested to acquaint themselves.

Several of the foreign representatives, as the Prince and ministers are aware, have already left Peking. Copies of the note have, however, been forwarded to all.

At the request of such of his colleagues as are still here, Sir Thomas Wade acknowledges the note which His Imperial Highness and their excellencies have done them the honor to write. He is to add that the substance of the Yamên’s instructions to Chinese missions is believed to be generally known to the representatives of the treaty powers.

* See inclosure 6 to No. 510, page 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 134] of this volume.

No. 137. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 137.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, December 8, 1879. (Received January 27.) No. 526.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith a letter which I have received from the consul-general, transmitting one addressed to me by the Chamber of Commerce at Shanghai, in which the belief of the chamber is stated that the Swatow Guild, a combination of Swatow merchants, doing business at the open ports in China, has a recognized connection with the collection at Shanghai of lekin taxes on opium, and that its power in this respect is used to forward its own interests in the trade.

The fact that the collection of lekin taxes is sometimes committed to guilds of native merchants, and that such guilds are able, directly and indirectly, to promote their own interests in this way, and to displace other traders, native and foreign, has already fallen under the observation of the diplomatic body here, and has been included in the list of trading grievances lately transmitted by us to the Tsung-li Yamên. (See my dispatch 510, inclosure 3, grievance number 14.* )

It is not singular that, when trade and the opportunities for enterprise are rendered inelastic by repressions everywhere exercised, the efforts of traders should take the form of combinations intended for their defense against the government, and the removal of opposition on the part of those who do not share in the expenses and responsibilities of the combinations so made.

Broader opportunities for enterprise and a right regard for the interests of individuals would go far to break down such combinations, but as things are, this is not to be hoped for in China.

Foreigners cannot join the guilds. They are therefore at especial disadvantage, and it is the more necessary for their national representatives to give them all proper support.

I have, &c., &.,

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 526.]

Mr. Bailey to Mr. Seward.

Shanghai, November 25, 1879. No. 730.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose a letter addressed to yourself by F. B. Forhes, esquire, chairman off the Shanghai General Chamber of Commerce, upon the subject of the case of Messrs. Duff and David versus The Swatow Opium Guild, and cognate subjects.

The secretary of the chamber, Mr. George R. Corner, called on me in person to-day and handed me the letter with the request that I should transmit it to you by the first opportunity, which is accordingly done.

I have, &c.,

DAVID H. BAILEY.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 526.]

Mr. Forbes to Mr. Seward.

Shanghai General Chamber of Commerce,
Shanghai, November 22, 1879. No. 554.]

Sir: The recent suit in the mixed court of two British subjects, Messrs. Duff and David, against the association known as the Swatow Guild, has brought to light certain facts which are of grave importance and cause deep anxiety to the mercantile community of Shanghai. Any discussion of the merits of the case itself is, at present, beyond the province of this chamber, but the committee feels that no time should be lost in protesting against the disregard of treaty stipulations involved in the position held by the Swatow Guild, under sanction of the Chinese authorities.

The committee has reason to believe that the collection of the lekin tax on opium at Shanghai and Chin Kiang is entrusted to members of the Swatow Guild, either as direct agents for the authorities, or, more probably, as farmers of the revenue in question. To whatever extent this arrangement may be officially undeclared or disguised, the power exercised by the guild is so far effectual that payment of lekin is said to be refused from China outside of the association, who are further liable to be denounced for attempting to smuggle the very drug on which the tax has been declined. The result is that the members of the guild, being enabled to close to others the only lawful outlet for opium, have acquired for themselves a practical monopoly of the trade at this port.

Unfortunately, legal evidence about matters in which the local authorities are interested is never easily obtained in China, and, in this instance, is now impossible to produce. The reason is not far to seek. Since the proceedings in the mixed court the Taotai has issued a proclamation in which he declares the statements of the plantiffs in this case to have been unfounded and malicious, and warns his people to beware of bringing wanton and calumnious accusations in the future. To the Chinese, who are accustomed to read between the lines of such documents, this proclamation is a significant hint to say nothing at all, and the committee has therefore not been surprised within the last few days to be met with blank assertions of ignorance from trustworthy natives who were previously ready to give full information.

The difficulty of obtaining evidence is further complicated by the fact that the Swatow Guild has been for many years in undisputed enjoyment of its privileges, which, as the committee is informed, date back to an arrangement made when His Excellency Ting-Jih-Chang was Taotai of Shanghai. However this may be, it is notorious that for a long time past Swatow men have been the exclusive traders in opium here, either as principals or as brokers for non-members of their guild, and the quiet acquiescence of other Chinese merchants in this state of things goes far to prove that it has official sanction. It is probably not too much to say that the arrangement is accepted by every one who is not ready to take the risk of evading the lekin tax altogether.

The committee has been verbally informed by Mr. Davenport, Her Britannic Majesty’s consul here, that he is sending to His Excellency Sir Thomas Wade such information as he has been able to procure, including, the committee understands, certain important admissions by the present Taotai as to the connection between the Swatow Guild and the opium lekin office. I can only regret that circumstances have precluded the committee from supplementing Mr. Davenport’s statement by any direet evidence.

It hardly needs argument to show that a trading guild allowed to farm the inland revenue on commodities in which it deals, is a privileged corporation within the meaning of the treaties, and there is no reason why, if found to work successfully in the case of opium, the same system should not be extended to tea, silk, and piece goods. There are indeed serious grounds for belief that fiscal arrangements of this kind at the outports have had much to do with the virtual banishment of foreign importers, which it has been the fashion to ascribe to the greater prudence and economy of the native trader.

The Canton Co-hong monopoly, in spite of its one advantage of a collective responsibility enforced by the Chinese Government, was found so intolerable that it was solemnly abolished by treaty. It would appear, however, that the establishment of lekin, in the face of the treaties, has gradually led to other equally illegal combinations which, in port after port, and in one thing after another, threaten to hedge in foreign trade with privileged guilds, worse than the old Co-hong in proportion, as the interests affected are larger and more difficult to combat, because while effectually screened they are not officially recognized before foreign powers.

If any additional motive were needed for a vigorous declaration of treaty rights with regard to lekin, the committee would respectfully urge that it may be found in the tempting facilities offered to the collectors of this tax for the evasion or open disregard of other vital stipulations. The committee cannot conceal its anxiety lest, if the present opportunity be allowed to pass without dealing firmly with this question, the development of foreign trade may be still further crippled, if not entirely arrested, by such underhand influences. This statement is submitted in the hope that your excellencies and your colleagues may feel that the circumstances are such as to call for a prompt consideration of an undoubted grievance.

I have, &c., &c.,

F. B. FORBES, Chairman.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 526.]

Mr. Seward to Mr. Bailey.

Peking, December 5, 1879. No. 205.]

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your dispatch No. 730, with which you have transmitted a letter addressed to me by the chairman of the Chamber of Commerce, dated November 22, and having reference to the case of Duff and David versus The Swatow Guild and the danger growing out of the alleged committal to the guild of the collection of lekin taxes on opium.

Other allegations of the same kind, notably in reference to the piece-goods trade at Ningpo, having fallen under the observation of my colleagues and myself, the subject will doubtless be presented to the government in as forcible a manner as the evidence will warrant.

Please be so good as to transmit the substance of this note to the chamber with an expression of my thanks for the information contained in their communication.

I am, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

* Note.—Printed on pages 174–175 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 134] of this volume.

No. 138. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 138.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, December 10, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880.) No. 530.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I have recently received from Mr. Cheshire, vice-consul at Canton, a copy of rules for the issue of transit passes, framed some months since by the local Chinese authorities, and promulgated without reference to the consulates or the legation.

I shall have occasion to refer to these rules again, and to lay a copy of them before you. They are very long, and for the moment we are not able to make a copy.

The rules seemed to me so objectionable that I at once placed them before my colleagues, and we agreed together that it is desirable to instruct our respective consuls at the several ports to declare to the authorities that they have no power to assent to any rules whatever without having received first the approval of the legation.

To my own circular letter, prepared in accordance with this understanding, I have added a request that our officers should exercise care when sending up statements of the grievances under which trade is suffering, to transmit also documentary evidence of facts alleged.

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure in No. 530.]

Circular to consuls in China.

Peking, December 3, 1879.

The fact, having been brought to my knowledge that the Chinese authorities at some of the ports have framed, with or without the concurrence of the consuls, regulations for the issue of transit passes, I have to call your attention to the matter, and to request you to inform the authorities that you have no authority to agree to any regulations so made or proposed, without having first obtained the sanction of the legation.

It is my desire and that of my colleagues to frame here, in concert with the government, all the rules necessary to the proper working of the transit pass system. This is desirable for the sake of uniformity and in order that the best possible arrangement may be secured.

In responding to this dispatch, please be so good as to hand to me copies in duplicate, in English and Chinese, of the form of transit pass inward and of the transit certificate used for produce coming outward, or in case these forms have been sent to the legation, please refer to the dispatch with which they were transmitted.

I desire to call your attention, further, to the fact that in urging upon the attention of the government here the failures and abuses of the transit pass system, and the irregular and undue taxation of uncertificated imports, and of jroduee intended for exportation, we find no lack of allegations that abuses exist, but the proofs are, in many cases, wanting. You are requested, therefore, to present to me such proofs in documentary form whenever it is possible for you to do so.

I am, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 139. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 139.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, December 11, 1879. (Received February 19, 1880.) No. 531.]

Sir: My engagements have been such since my return from the United States that I have not been able to address you in regard to several matters which are of serious concern in this part of the world. One of these is the pending dispute between China and Japan regarding the Lew Chew Islands.

It is not my purpose in writing to you now to make an extended statement. It is by no means easy to learn here either the position of the Japanese Government or the considerations upon which they rely to justify their policy towards the Lew Chewans and toward the Chinese in respect to the Lew Che wan matter. You will be advised, however, of the views of the Japanese, and of the facts which constitute their case by Mr. Bingham. In presenting to you, therefore, considerations which tell in favor of the Chinese, I shall put you in position to reach your own conclusions upon the whole matter.

As I understand the ministers of the foreign office here, they do not claim that Lew Chew is an integral part of their empire. They assert that the island kingdom has paid tribute to China, and in this and other ways sustained a relationship savoring of dependency. They admit, on the other hand, that the kingdom has been subjected also to certain requirements o£ the Japanese, which have become, as it were, constitutional, and they ask only that the status of the islands shall revert to what it was, as so indicated, before the recent steps taken to make it an integral part of the Japanese Empire.

From their own point of view this proposition is a conciliatory one. They are either unaware that Japan has ever made conquests in Lew Chew, or they ignore those conquests as not having been followed by possession and control. A similar claim of conquest was set up by the Japanese over Formosa five years ago, when they invaded the island ostensibly to punish the aborigines for the maltreatment of some of their own people, while all the world knows that Formosa has been perfectly free from Japanese domination for a very long period. The case, as between Japan and Lew Chew, is undoubtedly stronger, although certainly the Japanese have not, until recently, exercised any very direct or positive interference in the affairs of the island kingdom.

Leaving aside, however, the merits of the claims set up by Japan, of which, as I have indicated, I may not be perfectly well informed, I proceed to state the nature of the relationship which has long existed between China and Lew Chew. This relationship is very perfectly indicated in a series of papers translated from the Chinese by Dr. Williams and published in the “Journal of the North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society,” for 1866.

The first of these is a request for investiture made by Shang Han, King of Lew Chew, to the Emperor, Chia Ching, in 1807. It begins as follows: Your Majesty’s servant, Shang Han, grandson of the King of the Central Mountin Lew Chew, respectfully memorializes the throne, requesting that he be confirmed in his succession to the princely station, which will at once encourage him in his loyalty and render illustrious the great statutes of the empire.

You will notice upon reference to this petition, or paper, a copy of which I inclose, that the King of Lew Chew declares that although “his little State lies in the far distance, and is only a foot of ground for size, yet even away in mid ocean it has an established government, and during successive generations its rulers, having received investiture, have guarded the frontiers”; and, having made this preamble, proceeds to name his ancestors who have received such recognition from the Imperial Government. These begin with Shang Chi, “who was indebted to the favor of the Emperor Shun Chi for conferring on him the dignity of King in A. D. 1655,” and then are named, successively, Shang Ching, who received investiture from Kanghsi in 1683; Shang Ching also from Kang Hsi in 1719; Shang Muh, from Chien Lung in 1757; and Shang Cheh from Chia Ching in 1801.

The investiture of Shang Han, applied for in 1807, was completed in 1809. At the same time an imperial rescript was sent to Lew Chew from Peking, confirming the father of Shang-han in the regular line of kings, although he had died before he had had the opportunity to make the usual application for investiture. More lately, in 1866, Shang Ta, who had come to the throne, applied for investiture, which was granted to him. From 1655 to 1866, therefore, the Lew Chewan kings received investiture from China.

The investiture so granted was not a careless ceremony or performed secretly. The procedure followed in the instance of Shang Han in 1809 will illustrate the point. The petition asking for investiture was carried to Peking by two envoys, and two imperial envoys were appointed to carry to Lew Chew the imperial proclamation of investiture, and other official documents. A copy of the proclamation is appended to this dispatch, and also a copy of the imperial patent, or commission. Certain presents were also sent to Lew Chew. The manner in which the action of the Imperial Government was received is stated in a further representation sent up to the throne of China by the King, as follows: Your servant, attended by the whole body of officials and dignitaries, and a concourse of people, met the envoys in the Pavilion of Grace, where we humbly implored long life and perpetual peace to the august sacred person. I then received the proclamation and patent, and deposited them in the envoy’s hall. Having selected a lucky day [October 1], I first took the mandate commanding that the late Shang Ching, my father, be installed as King in the regular succession, and then the edict ordering that worship be paid (on your behalf) to the former King, Shang Wan, and to my late father, Shang Ching, and fulfilled every particular. On the 15th of November I reverently received the proclamation and patent of investiture, which confirms your servant as King in the Central Mount; and accepted the dragon-embroidered satins, and also the variegated silks and other articles, conferred on the Queen. Your servant then, with all the officials around him, prostrated ourselves on the ground to give thanks for such bounty. I then begged the envoys to let me have the two documents to put in the archives of the kingdom, among its precious things, and asked them to examine the old records to satisfy themselves that all had been done properly. They did so, and I have put them in our treasury.

It would be difficult to conceive a procedure more formally directed to the purpose than that which has been described. The application to the Emperor of China is precise in all its parts. The Emperor’s responses are equally precise, and the ceremonies at the capital of Lew Chew are performed in the presence of “the whole body of the officials and dignitaries and a large concourse of people.”

It is not possible, then, that there is any mistake about the matter. The kings of Lew Chew having observed for a period of two hundred years the practices described, acknowledged in the clearest manner a certain dependence upon the Imperial Government inconsistent with the idea that the state was a feudatory of any other power.

The first case of investiture mentioned in the petition of Chang Han took place in 1655. It was a “remote ancestor” of his who was so favored, but it appears from Chinese records, as Dr. Williams points out in the article to which I have already referred, that a Lew Chewan prince sent an embassy to China in 1373, and that the Emperor Yung-loh bestowed investiture on Bu-nei, King of Lew Chew, in the year 1400. Dr. Williams mentions further that during the Ming dynasty (1368 to 1644) Lew Chewan embassies came to China sometimes twice a year, sometimes once in five years, but that during the present dynasty they have come once in two years. The embassies thus sent up have not been purely political, and the tribute which has been brought to China has not been a money payment, significant of dependence, or a feudatory condition. And herein consists one of the most interesting facts in the relations of China with the surrounding petty states.

Manchuria, the home of the present dynasty; Mongolia, divided into a number of jurisdictions, all owing direct allegiance to China;’Thibet, in which an imperial commissioner is resident, each have relations with China peculiar to themselves; but Corea, Lew Chew, Siam, Annam, and Burmah have sustained relations with their great neighbor which, although singular, may be described in a few words.

It appears to have been the practice of these states to send up complimentary missions to Peking. They may be called complimentary because they have been voluntary both as respects their times and the matter carried with them.

The embassies have brought, in fact, what may be more properly styled presents than tribute, the extent or value of which has depended upon the ability or generosity of the given ruler, and not at all upon the demands of the Chinese Government. And not only is this true, but it is true, further, that the Chinese practice has been to give presents in return. The latter point you will find illustrated in the papers regarding the investiture of Chang han sent herewith.

It has been suggested that the relationship thus indicated has an analogy to the middle-age experiences of Europe, when the Pope was considered in a manner the dispenser of imperial honors, but the example is not a good one, for the reason that the prerogative of the papacy was held to grow out of the regency conferred upon the Pope as the representative of Heaven upon earth, while the regard paid to the Emperor of China would seem to be a natural recognition of his position as an earthly potentate of extraordinary sway, and his benevolence in leaving to the petty states around him a complete autonomy of their own.

It is not too much to say that it has been within the power of China for a very long period to overrun and subdue these petty states. The fact that she has not done so is creditable to her rulers, and might very well draw from them expressions of gratitude and respect. A great people filling all their territory to the limit of its sustaining power, but remaining for centuries self-contained, regardful of their own dignity and place, but regardful also of the rights of the petty powers about them, is a spectacle not very common in the history of the world. It is one upon which we may pause to raise the question whether a state capable of such conduct has not, for some reason, a poise and balance of judgment and temper greater than we have been in the habit of attributing to her, and which entitles her to a large measure of respect and esteem.

Something similar to the deferential intercourse observed between China and the surrounding petty states has existed between the Turkish Empire and the inferior powers of Central Asia. Vambéry says: It was the practice in the middle ages for the three Khanates of Turkestan to receive as investiture from the Khalif of Bagdad a sort of court office. This old system has not been abandoned even at the present day, and the princes, on their accession to the throne, are wont still to solicit, through the medium of an extraordinary embassy to Stamboul, these honorary distinctions. The Khan of Khiva assumes rank as Cupbearer; the Emir of Bokhara as Reis (guardian of religion); and the Khan of Khokand as Constable. * * * But the bond which unites them with Constantinople goes no further.

The analogy is not perfect, of course, but it illustrates the disposition of rulers of less importance in Asia to look up to those whose position is of greater importance, and to place themselves in an attitude of respect by assenting to forms which imply a certain dependence.

I am not sure that the Chinese Government would, admit that their relations with Lew Chew do not indicate a more decided dependence than I have described. The facts, however, are those which I have set forth. That is to say, the Chinese have no resident officers in Lew Chew; they assess no taxes there, nor any determined tribute; they do not require the Lew Che wans to assist them in war; they do not consider themselves bound to assist the Lew Chewans; they do not concern themselves about her internal affairs; they receive presents from the King, and they make presents in return. On the other hand, their investiture of the Lew Chewan kings is something more than a mere recognition of them. It is a reward for loyalty on their part, and a declaration of a disposition to respect their nationality, and the sovereignty of their rulers. We find the situation singular, no doubt, but so, in our eyes, are many things which are common in Asia. So long as Asia is practically polytheistic, polygamic, and autocratic, while the West is monotheistic, monogamic, and constitutional, we need not feel surprise at divergences of any sort between their ways and our ways. While this is the relationship between China and Lew Chew which existed for a very long period, and which has only been put an end to by recent acts of Japan, against which the Lew Chewans have protested, China acknowledges, on the other hand, that Lew Chew has been required to deliver to the Prince of Satsuma, in Japan, for a very long period, an annual contribution of produce, understood to be 8,000 piculs or about 500 tons of rice. It may be stating the case too strongly to say that China makes this acknowledgment, but at any rate, as I understand the matter, she does not deny that this was the case. Beyond this, however, China makes no admissions, and so far as I can judge, believes there are no admissions which she should make.

In asking, therefore, that Lew Chew should be permitted to revert to its ancient constitution, the Chinese would expect the Lew Chewans to send up their missions as in the past, and to grant investiture to their kings, but would not object to the continuance of the tribute heretofore sent to Japan.

It is very possible that China and Japan may not be able to maintain such an attitude toward Lew Chew as I have indicated. The Japanese could receive their tribute, but they might, at any moment, object that the simple recognition of the Lew Chewan King, implied in the ancient form of investiture, had been wrested from its proper significance, and used to reduce the King to vassalage. If, then, the two governments would agree to give up all claims in Lew Chew, the one to abandon its demand for an insignificant amount of tribute, and the other the political forms which have been customary, each agreeing to respect the independence of the islands, the situation would be more logical in our view, and less likely to lead to further complications.

The Chinese may or may not attach political importance to the possession of Lew Chew by themselves or by the Japanese. I do not think that they have considered that part of the question, or care about it. It can add nothing to the importance of either state to reduce the islands to its control. They are small and distant and their defense would be of serious concern in case of a foreign war. But with the Chinese the point of pride is tenaciously held. They believe that Japan, without prior consultation with them, and by methods pursued in a covert manner, has subjected to its control a petty state, their dependency. It is deemed an affront to them in the face of their own people and the world, as well as an outrage upon the innocent islanders. So the Chinese do not take the matter at all quietly, and their resentment is of a sort which will last a long time.

The interference of General Grant took place under these circumstances. He was appealed to with great anxiety by China, and he promised to speak to the Japanese, not by way of discussion or condemnation of their acts, but to represent the unwisdom of any policy which would estrange the two countries. He was on safe ground in promising to do this much for China, and he appears to have performed his task with tact. What may come of it cannot yet be told.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 531.]

request for investiture.

Your Majesty’s servant Shang Han, grandson of the King of the Central Mount, in Lew Chew, respectfully memorializes the throne, requesting that he be confirmed in his succession to the princely station, which will at once encourage him in his loyalty, and render illustrious the statutes of the empire.

Your servant is well aware that his little state lies in the far distance, and is only like a foot of ground for size, yet even away in mid-ocean it has an established government, and during successive generations its rulers, having received investiture, have here guarded the frontiers.

I look up to the imperial benevolence, vast and expanded beyond expression, and am profoundly sensible that all here are unable adequately to express our thanks.

My remote ancestor, Shang Chi, was indebted to the favor of the Emperor Shun Chi for conferring on him the dignity of King, in A. D. 1655, and granting him a royal seal, which constituted him King in the Middle Mount, and forever tranquillized his maritime feudality.

His successor, Shang Ching, was indebted to the letters patent and proclamation of the Emperor Kang-hi, who, in the year A. D. 1683, thereby constituted him the King.

His son, Shang Shun, died when he was the heir; and the next in succession, Shang Yih, deceased before he could apply for and receive investiture.

The next was Shang King, who, through the bedewing favor of the same Emperor, was confirmed in his seat in the year 1719. At the same time the deceased Shang Yih was retrospectively recognized as having been legitimate King.

Your servant’s high progenitor, Shang Muh, recently received investiture in the year 1757, from the Emperor Kien Lung.

His son, Shan Cheh bade adieu to this world while still heir-apparent, and left the succession to his son, Shang Wan, who, by the high favor of Your Imperial Majesty, was installed as King in the Middle Mount in the year 1801, and fulfilled the duties of his princely station with reverence and diligence One morning he fell sick, and the remedies of the physicians were powerless to arrest his disease; he departed on the long journey in August, 1803.

Your servant’s father, Shang Ching, had no opportunity to ask investiture, for he suddenly left the world; and I, a mere youth, am called on to succeed to his post and take the inheritance.

As the obligations of a feudal prince are strict, I dare not style myself so without authority. Therefore, to perpetuate the kingly power and observe the requirements, I now request Your Majesty’s investiture. I shall then be able to salute your decree in this sea-girt spot, where I keep ward over your frontier, and bow down before your command in this wave-worn corner of your realm, whence I can send up my tribute and my reverence.

I have now specially commissioned my personal minister, Yang Kih Tien, with the councilor Liang Pang Pih, who are to hasten to the vermilion ante-room to hand in this memorial request.

Humbly prostrating myself, I look up to ask that the sacred kindness may grant to me, as it was granted to my predecessors, that an imperial envoy be sent here to perform the ceremony of installing me in my kingly dignity.

On Your Majesty’s part, such an act will render more illustrious the fullness of the statutes. On my part, it will invite me to more reverence and obedience in every particular. It will, no doubt, strengthen this remote possession for generations to come, and, honored by the crowning blessing, Your Majesty’s favor will continue through succeeding ages unimpaired.

I humbly implore the penetrating glance to rest upon my memorial, and beg that the proper board may be required to carry my desire into effect. Your servant will await the arrival of these orders in trembling expectancy, and now carefully prepares his memorial for your imperial hearing.

Dated in the reign of Kia-King, 11th year, 8th moon, 7th day (or about September 1, 1809).

[Inclosure 2 in No. 531.]

Proclamation of the investiture of Shang. Han as King of Lew Chew, in the thirteenth year of Kia-King (1809).

In virtue of having received in course the behest of Heaven to exercise the post of Augustus over the world, we hereby make this proclamation:

To the end that We may magnify the instructions which We have received, and fulfill the statutes that require Us to tranquillize those who live in remote countries, and sedulously cherish those who are weak, that thus the people on and beyond our frontiers may be securely established, We do now greatly commend your earnest efforts to place yourselves under Our sheltering wing. You have thus manifested your hearty joy and satisfaction at this protection, and have hereby continued in the inheritance of your fathers. Your envoys have come to the court of ceremonies with their offerings and presents, and it is eminently right that this distinct recognition should be made known.

You, O! Kingdom of Lew Chew, receive your dignities from the Middle Civilized Empire. Though you lie like an islet in the waste of waters, you have received bounties large and abundant, and though a mere ocean-bank, your land is still confirmed to you.

You, O! Shang Han, grandson of the last King of the Central Mount, following your illustrious predecessors, have received their heritage that you may promote the welfare of your country and perpetuate the valor of your race. Your filial duty to them is an earnest of your loyalty to Us, for (by your envoys) you have strictly performed every rite of fealty in Our coronation palace, and the Golden Kraken can rest quietly in his ocean bed. You have fully exhibited through them your reverence, as they have come to our vermilion hall with the pleasure that the gamboling porpoise meets the wind. Robed in their courtly apparel, these envoys did not delay in presenting their gifts in Our court, and the products of your country proved in their hands the allegiance of Our frontier.

Now, therefore, as these masters of libations have made known to Us the desire of their Lord to be confirmed in his heritage, We have specially appointed Tsi Kwan, a revisor in the Han-Lin Academy, to be Our chief commissioner, and Fei Tsz-Chang, an under secretary in the board of works, to be Our second commissioner, to take this proclamation to you, O! Shang Han, and confirm you as the King of Lew Chew in the Central Mount.

Do you, all ye officials and laborers, ye scholars and people, together take him by your strength and reverence him in your hearts, that thus the prosperity of your state may be perpetual.

We look to you, O! King, to rule your people in peace, and unite all among them who are just and loyal to your sway. We hereby appoint you to be their ruler, that you may maintain in vigor the relations of a liege fief.

You are to be diligent in co-operating to promote peace and order along our frontier, and thus prove yourself worthy of the thrice-repeated commendation now bestowed upon you. Preserve unimpaired the inheritance of your country’s happiness, and be content that in the imperial palace dwells one who will not forget his kindness.

It is for these ends that this proclamation is now made. Let all, King and people, hear and know it.

Dated in the reign Kai-King, 13th year, 8th moon, 1st day (about September 1, 1809).

[Inclosure 3 in No. 531.]

The patent investing Shang Han as King (of Lew Chew) in the thirteenth year of Kia-King.

I, the sovereign Emperor, hereby make known My commands to Shang Han, a grandson of the King of Lew Chew in the Central Mount.

Whereas, your ancestors have for generations kept the outskirts of Our realm as a protective feudatory, sedulous to present their tribute at the proper time, and having all been honorable, worthy, and just persons, who have tried to follow that which is decorous, and maintain the proprieties of their stations, have thus approved themselves to Our constant commendation, and their illustrious fame has in consequence become known through all ranks of Our officers:

Now, therefore, having in course succeeded to the inheritance, you have sent your messengers to request Our commands. They knocked at Our frontier passes on their way, and have at last reached the court of ceremonies, whose officers have greeted them. Their strong desire was to reach this goal with their presents; hastening on their journey away from the waters where the sole-fish abounds. From those distant outskirts where the clouds hide the horizon they have reverently brought your palm-leaf missive expressing your respectful feelings.

We, on Our part, now return, over land and water, Our silken (i. e., imperial) mandates to your rural hamlet, in order to invest you with the lawful succession. We shall continue Our patronage to your truly loyal family and to your descendants, as we now exhibit Our high regard by sending these letters patent, which will call forth your constant allegiance. How glorious your race be!

We have accordingly now commissioned Tsi Kwan, a revisor in the Han-lin Academy, as Our chief envoy, and Fei Tsz-Chang, an under secretary of the board of works, as the second, who are ordered to your country, and confer to you (on Our behalf) the dignity of King of Lew Chew in the Central Mount. By them We have sent to you and your Queen presents of silks, letters, &c., all of which you will respectfully regard as the expression of Our favor, and receive at their hands, with your attendants, according to the prescribed ritual. They will all, as the stately bamboo dresses itself in new foliage, give you increased honor. They are substantial tokens of regard given to those who come to Our palace; therefore, carefully arrange them, and cherish and preserve them as one does his girdle jewels. All your people will regard them as evidence that you emulate the glory of your predecessors in their rule. Therefore, regard their instructions with trembling docility, whereby your land will be prosperous and famous, and you be enriched with unchanging and peaceful blessings.

Hear, therefore, and respect Our special behest.

List of articles bestowed on the King of the state.—Two pieces imperial dragon satin; three pieces lustrous variegated satin; three pieces variegated blue satin; three pieces plain blue satin; two pieces changeable satin; two pieces plain satin; three pieces brocade; four pieces gauze; four pieces heavy curtain gauzefour pieces pongee.

List of articles bestowed on the Queen.—Two pieces lustrous variegated satin; two pieces blue; one piece violet; two pieces plain blue satin; one piece changeable satin; two pieces plain satin; two pieces brocade; four pieces gauze; four pieces heavy curtain gauze.

Kia-King, 13th year, 8th moon, 1st day (about September 1, 1809).

No. 140. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 140.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, December 27, 1879. (Received February 19, 1880.) No. 542.]

Sir: I had the honor to hand to you on the 10th instant, with my dispatch No. 530, a copy of a circular letter which I was addressing to our several consuls in this empire requesting them to inform the local authorities that they have no authority to approve any locally proposed transit-pass regulations without having first obtained the sanction of the legation.

After this circular was dispatched, the German, minister called the attention of his colleagues to certain proposed rules for the issue of outward transit passes which he had received from the German consulate at Shanghai, with an intimation that they were likely to be put in force by the customs authorities.

After consideration, the several representatives agreed in conference to bring the matter to the notice of the foreign office, and to point out that all rules affecting trade ought to be issued by the central government and made applicable for all the ports.

In pursuance of this agreement, Mr. Brenan, interpreter of the British legation, was instructed by Sir Thomas Wade, doyen of the diplomatic body, to go to the foreign office and to read to the ministers a memorandum, a copy of which I inclose herewith.

The response of the ministers is given in a note by Mr. Brenan, a copy of which is also inclosed. It does not meet the views of the foreign representatives, as it does not clearly admit the principle that such rules should be uniform and should be promulgated here. One purpose that the foreign representatives had in view in calling the attention of the consuls and of the Yamên to the subject was to avoid the danger of having locally made rules quoted to us hereafter in support of proposals made here, and to which we might feel bound to object as in contravention of treaty stipulations. Our notice to the Yamên and to the local authorities through the consuls may be appealed to by us in such cases, to indicate that we have in no way assented to such local rules, and that they may not be brought forward to our disadvantage in any future discussion of the transit-pass provisions of the treaties.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 542.]

Memorandum for Mr. Brenan.

December 18, 1879.

If the ministers who receive Mr. Brenan at the Tsung-li Yamên to-day request any explanation, they must be informed that Mr. Brenan is not authorized in the present instance to do more than present the memorandum with which he is charged; that he is not at liberty to discuss the construction of the treaty right to which it refers; but that it will be of course his duty to report to the foreign representatives, through his minister, as doyen of the corps diplomatique, any observations that it may seem good to their excellencies to make.

T. F. WADE.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 542.]

Memorandum to be read to the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên by Mr. Brenan.

The foreign legations having been given to understand that the Shanghai authorities have it in contemplation to introduce certain regulations that would modify the transit-duty privilege, so far as this affects export produce, it has been thought desirable to declare that, in the opinion of the legations, no regulations affecting foreign trade should be framed except at Peking, and that there should be but one rule tor the issue of transit-duty certificates at all the ports.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 542.]

Memorandum of Mr. Brenan’s visit to the Yamên.

December 18, 1879.

Mr. Brenan went to the Yamên and was received by the ministers Tung-Wang, Ching-lien, and Chung-li.

A copy of the inclosed memorandum was laid before the ministers, who were requested to state what reply Mr. Brenan should take back.

Their excellencies stated that they also were of opinion that regulations made in the provinces should receive the sanction of the higher authorities in Peking. No report had been received by the Yamên with regard to the regulations referred to in the memorandum. The transit-certificate privilege was secured to foreigners under treaty, and any rules which the local authorities at the respective ports might make were only calculated to guard against abuses. The nature of these rules would depend upon the circumstances of each port, and it might be possible that, these circumstances differing, the rules could not in every respect be uniform. The Yamên would now call for a report from each port, and when a reply had been received the ministers would be prepared to confer with the foreign representatives.

B. BRENAN.

No. 141. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 141.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, December 27, 1879. (Received March 15, 1880.) No. 544.]

Sir: Recurring to my several dispatches regarding the Shanghai Harbor rules, I have now the honor to inform you that the several foreign representatives decided sometime since to ask the ministers of the foreign office whether they had anything to communicate to us further in regard to the matter, and that Mr. Holcombe was deputed to speak to the ministers in our behalf. I inclose herewith a copy of my note of instruction to him, a copy of his report of his conversation with the ministers, and a translation of a code of sixteen rules, proposed by the ministers, for the control of that part of the river at Shanghai which is used more particularly by native craft.

These rules were considered afterwards by the foreign representatives, and Mr. Holcombe was requested to go again to the ministers and to say that we find no reason to question the merit of the rules, and to ask them to communicate them to us as having been decided upon by the government. A copy of Mr. Holcombe’s report of his second interview is inclosed herewith.

The ministers have not yet written to us, but they will do so, no doubt, at an early moment.

This settlement of the matter in hand leaves the rules of 1878 to stand in the district where foreigners are more particularly concerned, and will prove satisfactory, as I believe, to the foreign community at Shanghai.

I have, &c.,

GEQEGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 544.]

Memorandum.—Instructions for Mr. Holcombe in regard to the harbor rules.

Peking, December 6, 1879.

By request of the diplomatic body, Sir Thomas Wade has arranged for you to visit the Tsung-li Yamên to-morrow to speak about the Shanghai Harbor rules.

The wish of the several ministers is that you ask the ministers of the Yamên simply whether they have anything to communicate to us in “regard to the rules in question in advance of a formal correspondence upon the subject, and in such case to let you know what it is.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 544.]

Minute of conversation between the ministers of the foreign office and Mr. Holcombe.

December 7, 1879.

Present, Their Excellencies Shen, Lin, Hsia, and four secretaries.

Mr. Holcombe opened the business by stating that he had been sent by Mr. Seward, at the request of the diplomatic body, to inquire of the ministers of the foreign office whether they had anything to say in reference to the enforcement of the rules for the conservation of the harbor at Shanghai; and, if so, to hear whatever they might see fit to communicate.

His Excellency Shen responded that the Yamên had just received from the southern superintendent of trade a set of sixteen regulations for the control of the Whangpoo River above the foreign concessions, which the Yamên would be glad to have Mr. Holcombe take and submit to the diplomatic body. After the foreign representatives had considered them, the Yamên, while they approved the rules, would still be glad to discuss any points in them which the diplomatic body might raise. He added that it was the intent of the rules that the harbor-master should act conjointly with and through the harbor-deputy in the control of the Upper Whangpoo.

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 544.]

Sixteen rules submitted for the conservation of the Whangpoo River south and outside of the foreign concessions.

1. A harbor office shall be established, and a deputy appointed, who, in concert with the police and district magistrates, shall have control of the water-way of the Southern Whangpoo, and shall determine the berthing places of all Chinese craft. Commencing at a point on the west bank of the creek opposite the little east gate of Shanghai, and south of the Shih-lin-pû Bridge, and running south a distance of about four li to the south jetty, and line has been determined and posts set as a limit; and similarly upon the east bank a limit has been fixed. From the south jetty to the arsenal and the Lung Hua pagoda, a distance of about eight li, if there are shoals in the river, or if, in any of the side channels or tributary streams coming within the jurisdiction of the harbor office, there are obstructions to the fairway, measures shall be taken to remove them.

2. The west bank of the river, and the jetties upon it, within the jurisdiction of the deputy, have been examined and measured and a chart made. Outside of the limits as marked, wooden piers not filled in may be built to a limit of 80 feet in length. But this limit must not be passed, and no stone nor solid jetties may be built outside the lines fixed. If any be built in violation of this rule they will be at once destroyed.

3. Chinese subjects who may desire to construct, upon the banks of the creek, jetties, to bind the bank, or to fill in the foreshore, &c., whether, within or without the lines determined upon, and whether such works will or will not interfere with the waterway, must in all cases first prepare a chart of the proposed works and submit it to the harbor office for consideration, and only after approval by the deputy can the work be undertaken. Works built in contravention of this rule will be destroyed, and the parties concerned will be punished.

4. If there are shallows without the lines fixed as above, which should be deepened, or banks anywhere in the river which ought to be dredged, their locality shall be determined by the harbor office, and a proclamation issued authorizing sea-going vessels to take the mud from the given places, for ballast, without payment.

5. If, in the opinion of the harbor office, there are jetties in existence which interfere with the channel of the river, or the movement of vessels, and ought to be removed, a notice shall be served upon their owners giving them three days’ time to commence their removal. If the work is not undertaken within the time named, the deputy shall secure their removal at the expense of their owners.

6. Within the area under the control of the harbor office are a great number of Chinese vessels, consisting of rice-junks and junks from Ningpo, Foochow, Canton, Shangtung, and Tientsin, which being of great draught cannot tie up to the bank, cast anchor without any regularity in midstream, and interfere with the movements of official steam-launches. An anchorage for such craft will be marked out by the deputy near the old custom-house, and in a broad part of the creek; and, within this anchorage, these vessels shall anchor in order, those from each locality together, ten vessels forming a tier, and each block being composed of several tiers, space being left between the tiers sufficient to avoid danger from collision, all of which shall be determined by the deputy, and violations of this rule shall be investigated by the deputy.

7. Sea-going vessels, or river craft, upon entering the jurisdiction of the harbor office, shall be directed where to anchor by a person sent from the office, and shall not be allowed to anchor at will. Ship captains who venture to disobey this rule will be summoned for examination. Ferry-boats and cargo-boats have their regular jetties and an officer who superintends them. They may proceed, as heretofore, without the interference of the harbor office; and small craft which are able to lie along the bank may fasten at such points as they please.

8. A person thoroughly conversant with the river and the varying depth of the water at the two daily tides, the shiftings of the sand-bars, and the currents, shall be directed by the harbor office to make a survey and chart of the stream, which shall be published by the office for the information of the ship captains. Points where shoals interfere with the passage of vessels shall be marked with bamboos, so as to be seen by all, in order to avoid them.

9. At Yang Chia-tû, upon the east hank of the river, are several mow of vacant land used for the deposit of mud, stones, and rubbish. A post shall be set there by the office as a mark, and if vessels have ballast on board or residents have rubbish, it must be transported by boat to this point for deposit. If, in violation of this rule, any persons throw earth, stones, or rubbish into the creek, they shall be fined, according to the size of the vessel, from tael 1 up to taels 12. If any are obstinate and refuse payment of the fine, they shall be dealt with by the district magistrate, and be punished with the bamboo or cangue, and the fine shall be paid to the harbor office.

10. The harbor office shall be provided with four police boats, which shall have charge of the lines marked as above stated, direct vessels where to anchor, watch against the throwing over of ballast by vessels and the clandestine building of jetties, &c. If violators of these rules are discovered, they will be reported to the harbor office for examination, but in order to avoid difficulties, the guard-boats will not make arrests or inflict fines. If they violate this provision they will be severely dealt with.

11. Captain Shen Chun Shan has four gun-boats patrolling the Whangpoo, in connection with the transportation of rice and other commodities. But his vessels are few and their duties excessive. If two vessels were withdrawn from him for the harbor office it would interfere with other official work. Captain Shen should, however, assist the harbor deputy in guarding the creek and keeping order. If at any time there is a need of additional gun-boats they may be detached from Captain Shen’s command, in order to avoid overlooking any interests.

12. The small steam-launch and the sampans which cruise about the harbor in order to save life, on occasions when the high wind and the rapidity of the tidal current interferes with the passage of craft, or causes them to drag anchor and come into collision or capsize, and which are used also as police-boats, shall, inasmuch as the four police-boats provided for the harbor office may be insufficient for their duties, also aid the harbor deputy in the performance of his duties, and so add to his force.

13. The number of ferry-boats at Shanghai is very great, and the intendant has a deputy who has control of them. Their owners plying all the year upon the Whangpoo, are fully acquainted with the stream; and as it is to be feared that the four police-boats will not be sufficient for the berthing of vessels, &c., a suitable ferryboat shall be selected and detailed to assist, and the harbor office shall make a suitable payment to the owners of this boat. Wang Chao Chi, an expectant district magistrate, has been for years in charge of the ferry-boats, and is fully informed as to the harbor; he shall be called upon to assist the harbor deputy, and if additional ferryboats are needed at any time, he, from his more intimate acquaintance, shall choose them.

14. Craft within the jurisdiction of the harbor office which fail to comply with these regulations, sailors who create disturbance, or vessels which may be suspected of being engaged in robbery, shall be dealt with by the harbor deputy, who shall send an officer from the district magistrate’s yamên, with a gun-boat, to make arrests and to take the offenders to the district magistrate for punishment.

15. Employés of the harbor office, or the persons on board the police-boats, gunboats steam-launches, &c., shall not be allowed to extort money from the inhabitants. Complaints of the violation of this rule may be made at the harbor office, and the offenders will be severely punished.

16. The upper district of the Whangpoo, thus put under the control of the harbor depuur, shall be conterminous with the lower district, which has been placed under the control of the harbor master (customs). In matters which concern both districts the harbor deputy shall, as occasion requires, consult with the harbor master, and shall act conjointly with him, in order to avoid any obstructions to navigation. Although the harbor deputy and the harbor master has each his own district, they shall act in concert to secure the interests of the public service.

The foregoing sixteen regulations have been decided upon after consideration of the present situation, and the deputy, Chang Chih Chun, the police magistrate, Wu, and the Shanghai district magistrate, Mo, have been directed to establish the harbor office and put the regulations into operation. Other matters, if any, which have not been provided for, may be made the subject of further consideration.

Respectfully submitted.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 544.]

Minute of conversation at the foreign office, December 18, between the ministers Tung-Wang-Ching, Chung, and Mr. Holcombe.

Mr. Holcombe, referring to his previous visit, informed the ministers that he had been requested to say that the diplomatic body had examined the sixteen rules for the conservancy of the Upper Whangpoo River, that these rules met with their approval, and that in case the foreign office would address to each of the representatives a letter, in terms similar to the draft which Mr. Holcombe was requested to submit to them, a response in approval would be received from each.

The ministers, after reading the draft, stated that they would consider the matter, and would send a dispatch, either in the form or the general sense of the draft submitted.

CHESTER HOLCOMBE.
Peking, December 18, 1879.

No. 142. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 142.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, January 12, 1880. (Received March 15.) No. 557.]

Sir: The following imperial decree was published on the 2d of this month: Chung How, senior member of the censorate, who, in obedience to our commands, went as our minister abroad, having presumed, without awaiting our permission, to return to the capital, let him, in the first instance, be handed over to the board of civil office to be severely dealt with, and be deprived of office pending the decision of the board.

Let the convention which he has made, together with the several papers in regard to the matter sent up by the foreign office, be made the subject of further consideration and of a memorial by a council composed of the members of the Grand Secretariat, the six boards, the nine lower courts, the Han-lin, and the censorate.

Respect this.

Chung How, the minister so dealt with, went to Russia at the end of 1878 to open negotiations for the return to China of the province or district of Kuldja and the “convention” is the treaty which he made with the Russian Government.

This decree has attracted great attention here, as it will elsewhere. The minister in question was a member of the foreign office when appointed to go abroad. He was the superintendent of trade at Tientsin fifteen years ago, and was present in that city as such officer when the massacre of 1870 occurred.

He was sent to France thereafter to express the regrets of this government for the massacre. His mission was successfully performed, and upon his return he became a member of the foreign office.

In 1876 he was sent to Manchuria to take the command of that extensive and important region, and remained there until summoned to go to Russia.

He is a Tartar, and esteemed a man of unusually large experience and of great discretion. He bears the reputation of being almost overcautious, even for a Chinese official.

We are bound, of course, to accept the declaration that Chung How left Russia without permission. He was on a special mission, however, and had made a treaty. He may have regarded his work as done. His intention to return was known here months ago, in good season, if I am not mistaken, to permit of his being instructed by telegraph to remain at his post. He arrived at the capital on the afternoon of the day when the decree appeared.

The offense of a minister who leaves his post without permission may be regarded as serious, but it is unlikely that Chung How would have received anything beyond a reprimand had his treaty been considered satisfactory. As it is, those who are familiar with Chinese political life cannot lose sight of the fact that one minister who was concerned in foreign negotiations, Ki Ying, the signer on the Chinese side of the Gushing treaty, was condemned to death for a like offense. The Chinese have made much progress since then, and it is not at all probable that a like penalty will be visited upon Chung How, but the fact is significant of the view which the government may take of his alleged offense. We cannot expect to see him again, for a considerable period at any rate, in the foreign office, and this is much to be regretted, as he was one of the most experienced and ablest of its members, a man of mature, but not advanced years, and one whose career was expected, with much reason, to be an important one.

The evils which led up to the occupation of Kuldja by Russia, and the mission of Chung How, have extended over a considerable period, and are of much interest in various ways. Eastern Turkestan, a district of so-called Central Asia, has been for centuries the theater of disturbances and war. As it reached the frontier of China, and its unsettled condition affected the peace of the neighboring districts of the empire, it was subjugated by the Emperor Kien-lung, something more than a hundred years ago.

If you will take a map of Asia, you will remark two districts lying north-of Thibet. One of these, and the more extensive, is Kashgaria, extending from the Kuen Lun to the Tien-shan Mountains; the other is Kuldja, which lies to the north of the Tien-shan and south of the Altai Mountains, Lake Dzai-sang, and the river Irtish. The general region is known as Ili. Its eastern boundaries touch Kansuh, and its western Khokand and Badashan.

The whole region thus described is arid and cold. No cultivation is possible over a very large proportion of the territory, but near tie rivers and streams the soil is fertile. Kuldja is by far the best part, and is necessary to any power which aspires to control in those regions, for the reason that it is capable of producing large crops of grain, and of yielding sustenance to the armies needed to keep in subjection the warlike races who dwell there.

The population belongs to the several nations or clans which were in possession when they were conquered by China, the Chinese having gone into the country as its rulers and as merchants, but not to any extent as colonists. Those in the west are nearly all Mohammedans, and a large Mohammedan element extends eastward into Kansuh and Shensi.

It was to be expected that the people of this region would not be careless observers of the decay of Chinese power, which became apparent more than fifty years ago, and of the threatened overthrow of the ruling dynasty in 1852–’64, and it was altogether likely that the Mohammedan element, in particular, would seize the first opportunity to assert control in the districts where they were most numerous. Their revolts in Kweichow and Yunnan, in the southwest, and Shensi, Kansuh, and Hi, in the northwest, came late in the history of the great disturbances, of which the Taiping rebellion was the most serious, but they led to the independence, for the time being, of parts of Yunnan, much of Kansuh, and nearly all of Hi.

The insurgents in Ili were not to be allowed, however, the independence which they had conquered. Kashgaria soon fell under the domination of Yakoob Beg, otherwise known as Yakoob Khan and Athalik Ghazi, the most prominent figure in Central Asiatic politics of recent times. Kuldja, on the other hand, was occupied by Russia.

The Russians could not be unmindful of the value of this district. It was adjacent to their own territory and not distant from the scene of their military operations against Bokhara and Khiva. It was on the high road of trade between their territories in this region and those of China, and their merchants were settled in it. It was a necessary base for operations against Kashgaria, if these were projected. It was an open country on their side, but on the side of China defended by mountain barriers. The Russians accordingly occupied it, asserting, what was doubtless true, that its disordered state was intolerable to them. They made haste, however, to declare to China that they would restore the territory to her whenever she should be in a position to reoccupy it.

The suppression of the central or Taiping rebellion, which began in 1852, in the province of Kwangtung in the south, had controlled for more than ten years a large part of the lower valley of the Yangtse River, had taken, in fact, possession of the most fertile and populous portion of the empire, occupied the ancient capital of Nanking, and threatened the northern capital, occurred in 1862–’64. The imperial arms were then carried into the southwest and northwest; Yunnan and Kweichow were first reduced to order, and then Kansuh, and in 1876–’77 the reconquest of Ili was undertaken.

It seemed to many that the Chinese had undertaken, in this last direction, more than they were likely to accomplish. Yakoob Khan was a ruler who had conquered his possessions by the sword, and had consolidated his conquest by an administration so able that it had attracted attention throughout Asia. He had won his title of Ahbat el Ghazi, defender of the faith, by repeated evidences of devotion to his religion. He was the central figure of Mohammedan politics, whose summons might be expected to rally Mohammedan influence throughout the whole northwest.

The operations in China, however, went forward with a celerity begot of the experience of many years of bitter warfare, and a certainty that must have seemed ominous from the outset to the conqueror of Kashgaria. In less than two years the arms of China were victorious from the one end to the other of his dominions, the conquerer had perished, and his children and grandchildren were in flight.

Such was the situation at the beginning of 1879. The ancient territory of the empire, saving the encroachments of Russia of earlier years, and Kuldja, had been reconquered, and the victorious Chinese were on the borders of Kuldja, eager, to all appearances, to reassert by arms the rule of the empire as against that of Russia.

It was under these circumstances that the now degraded minister, Chung How, was sent to St. Petersburg. His duty undoubtedly was to arrange for the reoccupation of Kuldja by China. We cannot know here the details of his negotiation, but it has become certain that Chung How did not find his task an easy one. The occupation of Kuldja had extended over so many years that the obligation of Russia to return it to the Chinese might well have seemed to have lapsed by the efflux of time. Russian conquests had been pushed forward meanwhile, and possession of Kuldja may have become a matter of more importance in consequence. It is believed that the foreign office was steadfast in the determination to fulfill the pledge, but that the military party opposed the retrocession with great energy. It is probably true that certain difficulties in the way of retrocession had grown up in the years of Russian domination. Their merchants would have moved in and established themselves, and many refugees from Kashgaria, under Yakoob, and other surrounding districts during the period of disturbance, and during the period of Chinese reoccupation, would have flowed in upon them. All of these may have had reason to dread the return of the Chinese rule, and appealed to Russia not to destroy their asylum. In the main the more conciliatory councils appear to have prevailed.

It is not easy to define the policy of Russia towards China, but it is evident that it should be friendliness and respect. She has conterminous boundaries with China from Central Asia to the Pacific. She is consolidating conquests over the petty states of the center. She has room for the gratification of her ambition in developing the empire which she has already conquered, and which lies immediately before her. A struggle with China under such circumstances would be unnecessary and unwise.

I am inclined to think that these considerations are accepted as conclusive by the experienced statesmen of St. Petersburg, and that it was in part the general policy of the state, and in part disbelief that China would show vigor enough to reconquer Ili, which led to the promise to return Kuldja.

To the military party, however, such retrocession would have seemed portentous of disaster. It would be attributed in Central Asia to a fear of China, and would break down the prestige of their arms. It would give away territory very valuable for military purposes.

It is not singular that under these circumstances a middle course was adopted by Russia. I am not able to place before you now the text of the treaty agreed upon by Chung How, but it appears that Russia retains under it, a considerable part of the territory of Kuldja, as much as three-tenths, according to native reports. It is significant that the territory retained lies along the Tien-shan range, commands the passes into Kashgaria, and embraces not a small part of the river land of the whole province. It may be that, regarded from the point of view of military men, Russia holds fast to the most valuable portion of the district. Of this, however, I am not well informed.

The treaty, it would appear, stipulates that China shall pay an indemnity of about two and a-half millions of dollars to Russia, in part for the indemnification of merchants, and in part for supplies furnished to China by the Russians, it may be for the expense of the occupation. Certain trading privileges are accorded to Russian frontier merchants.

When word reached here that Chung How had made the treaty it seemed to the members of the diplomatic services that he had gone very far in the direction of conciliation, not, perhaps, if regard should be had for the exigencies of the case, but certainly from the point of view of Chinese statesmen.

* * * * * * *

Upon examination of the spirit in which the members of this government would have received the news of Chung How’s stipulations with Russia, it becomes evident that they are full of danger for him. He had given away, as it would appear to Chinese statesmen, a portion of the national domain, and he has done this during the minority of the Emperor.

It is almost incredible that a Chinese statesman, trained to regard individual responsibility as inseparable from every public act, should have gone so far without positive authority from the government. It is well known that Chung How was in constant communication with the foreign office by telegraph, and the inference is strong from this fact and from the extreme caution which has marked his career, that he believed himself empowered to do what he did.

* * * * * * *

I have said that the Chinese troops on the boundaries of Kuldja have seemed anxious to reoccupy that district, It would appear now that their commander, the viceroy of Kansuh, Tso Chung Tang, one of the very ablest of Chinese statesmen, has not been pleased that his great successes in Hi should be detracted from by a failure to rectify completely the frontier, and that he has assailed Chung How’s treaty with vehemence, going so far as to prefer against him the charge of high treason.

We come now to conditions which no one among the foreign representatives appears to understand. Is it really the foreign office which is on trial, or is it true that Chung How has exceeded his instructions? Is it a movement which has regard to the given question only, or is it a stroke of policy on the part of the conservative and reactionary party, based upon a doubtful act of the Yamên, which may be considered to represent the more progressive element in the state! Or, may it not be, after all, a sagacious movement on the part of the Yamên itself, so directed as to draw the whole government into the discussion, and to demonstrate that Chung How has really done as well as could have been expected?

Without attempting to wade into the depths of the political waters of this capital, I incline to the opinion that the result, however it may affect individuals, will be the rejection of the treaty. I do not regard this as certain, but it does appear probable. If such shall prove to be the case, the further progress of the affair may take either one of two courses, which will not, at least for the moment, threaten an attempt to solve the difficulty by force of arms. It may be that the Chinese will, in such case, send another mission to Russia, or seek further recourse through the Russian legation here, or through negotiations to be conducted by Tso Chung Tang on the frontier. Or it may be that they will content themselves by rejecting the treaty, and by protesting against the failure of Russia to discharge her promise to return the territory in question.

If I am right as to Russian policy, that government will not long allow the question to disturb her relations with China.

There is an obvious way out of the difficulty, that of demanding a larger indemnity and of yielding up the rest of the territory in consideration of the increased sum paid. The Chinese may not like the alternative, but they will not like the alternative of war, and they may either accept such a proposal or content themselves by leaving the question open to be dealt with at some later moment, when the situation may be more favorable for its solution.

It is said that the conclave of high officials created by the decree which I quoted in beginning this dispatch, is now in session; but it is not certain that this is the case, nor easy to predict when their work will be completed. There has been no other such conclave since I have been resident here; but they are a part of the Chinese system of government, although very infrequently called into existence. I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 143. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 143.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, January 15, 1880. (Received March 15.) No. 561.]

Sir: Having great confidence in the good judgment of General Stahel, and knowing that his experience in the management of mixed cases both in China and Japan has given him practical acquaintance with the subject, I sent to him, unofficially, copies of the memoranda on procedure in mixed cases between our people and subjects of China, and asked his views. He has responded under date of December 10, and I have now the honor to place his letter before you.

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure in No. 561.]

Mr. Stahel to Mr. Seward.

Hiogo, December 10, 1879.

My Dear Mr. Seward: I have received your two memoranda, and I congratulate you on the able manner in which yon deal with the subject. You have clearly shown that by the treaties ample provision is made for a kind of “mixed court,” where an official assessor of plaintiff’s nationality shall sit and have a voice, judgment, however, to be finally given by the presiding officer, who must be of defendant’s nationality.

If this arrangement were carried out in practice it would undoubtedly accomplish much toward alleviating the natural apprehensions of a plaintiff when suing in the court not of his nationality, toward a careful, dignified, and impartial trial, and toward a cordial acceptance of the principle of extraterritoriality, and I think it would generally insure right decisions, and go far to mitigate the bitterness of feeling which frequently, and sometimes with apparent good reason, regards decisions against the plaintiff by the court of the opposite nationality as foregone conclusions and denials of justice.

But to carry out this very desirable arrangement effectively, both nations ought to appoint official assessors for this special purpose, whose qualifications and integrity should be unquestionable. It is impossible that consuls, however irreproachable, should fulfill this duty in addition to their ordinary duties.

Any other kind of mixed court than these (I agree with you) is impracticable. For the first thing courts involve is a code of laws, and mixed courts would involve a mixed code, the successful and intelligent construction of which, in our present condition of knowledge as to Chinese and Japanese methods and principles of justice, or in any knowledge we are likely to gain of them during this generation, would be a task which would fail even our ablest men, and is probably impracticable.

Far better than any such attempt would be a suitable provision for carrying out the treaty stipulations now existing, and securing the presence, at every trial, of an official assessor of plaintiff’s nationality with rights and powers to make his presence effective toward securing an equitable decision according to the laws of defendant’s nation; and the importance of this is at least as great in civil as in criminal matters, for it is in the adjudication of civil cases that injustice is now more frequent.

I think the proposals which you make are very appropriate and entirely practicable. But permit me to suggest that No. 3, on page 11 of your memorandum of date the 4th of October, should make it imperative on the consul (at plaintiff’s demand) to sit as assessor.

Any interference of the consul with the magistrate’s procedure (except, of course, in protection of his own national) would probably work only harm, and should not be allowed. In practice, and with the exercise of the tact you urge, repulsive measures for exacting truth would rarely be resorted to in presence of the foreign official.

The general rule that justice should be done according to the law or practice of the court sitting should be scrupulously adhered to, otherwise advantage of the interference will surely be taken to defeat justice. It must not be forgotten that Asiatic ideas on these points radically differ from ours; that we cannot change these ideas during a sitting of court, and that there undoubtedly exists a strong and perfectly natural prejudice on the part of the Chinese and Japanese officials of all classes in favor of their own nationals and against foreigners, which tends against the obtainment of justice, even under favorable circumstances.

Yours &c.,

J. STAHEL.

No. 144. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 144.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, January 16, 1880. (Received March 15.) No. 563.]

Sir:Recurring to my various letters in regard to the Shanghai harbor rules, and more particularly to my dispatch No. 544, with which I sent to you a copy of a code of sixteen rules for that part of the harbor which is above the foreign anchorage, I have now the honor to hand to you a note which Prince Kung has addressed to the several foreign representatives, stating that the rules of 1878 will be put in operation at once for the district opposite the foreign settlements (the foreign anchorage) and the new rules for the district above the settlements (the native anchorage).

This adjustment of the matter appears to me entirely satisfactory, and I have no doubt that it will meet the views of other members of the diplomatic body.

* * * * * * *

In the matter of the control of harbors our troubles arise, not because the authorities endanger our interests by discriminations in favor of their own people, nor by cutting off privileges necessary for the free use of their harbors, but because no adequate measures have been adopted for their conservancy. At Shanghai any one owning a front lot has been able to make a pier or wharf or to fill up the foreshore almost uncontrolled. The serious deterioration of the harbor has resulted as a matter of course.

It has been my object, in view of such facts, to impress upon the administration, both at Shanghai and here, the fact that it is their interests which are mainly involved, and that responsibility for the care of the harbor devolves properly upon them.

* * * * * * *

I shall request the consul general to give the local authorities cordial support in the administration of the harbor rules, new and old, so soon as I learn that my colleagues will take the same course.

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure in No. 563.]

Prince Kung to Mr. Seward.

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication.

In the matter of the rules for the conservation of the harbor at Shanghai, Mr. Holcombe, secretary of the legation of the United States, came to this office December 7, 1879, to inquire of the ministers whether they had anything to propose regarding the enforcement of the rules adopted in January, 1878, or anything to suggest which they might desire to communicate to the diplomatic body, &c.

The ministers handed to Mr. Holcombe a draft of sixteen new rules which provide for the conservancy of the Upper Whangpoo River, above the foreign concessions, and place this part of the river under the jurisdiction of a harbor office and a deputy, requesting Mr. Holcombe to communicate them to the diplomatic body for its information.

I beg leave now to remark that the Whangpoo is a river under the sovereignty of China. Lying beside the foreign concessions, it must still be held to be outside of those concessions. In reference to section II of the rules adopted in January, 1878, which stipulates that “the authority and control of the harbor master, as hereinafter denned, extend to that part of the river opposite to the city, the suburbs, and the foreign settlements, and to that part of Loochow Creek between the settlements, &c.,” it would appear that the provision of the sixteen new rules which places the Whangpoo River above the foreign concessions under the control of a deputy and a harbor office is a modification for the better.

With this exception, the necessary instructions will be given by me to put into operation all the stipulations of the rules of January, 1878.

Although the harbor deputy and the harbor master have separate areas of jurisdiction, they will still consult together and act in concert as occasion may require.

I have reached a decision in this business as indicated above. But as these matters affect the interests of both Chinese and foreign merchants and people, I have thought it my duty to furnish your excellency with a copy of the sixteen rules for your information, and request the favor of a response.

Peking, January 12, 1880.

His Excellency George F. Seward, &c., &c., &c.

No. 145. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 145.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, January 20, 1880. (Received April 2.) No. 564.]

Sir: Referring to my note No. 563, of the 16th instant, I have now the honor to inform you that the several foreign representatives have agreed together to inform the foreign office that they will instruct their several officers at Shanghai to give the local authorities at that port cordial support in their enforcement of the harbor rules recently communicated to us, and to inclose to you a copy of the response which I am sending to the foreign office, and a copy of my note of instructions to Mr. Bailey.

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 564.]

Mr. Seward to Prince Kung.

Peking, January 19, 1880.

Sir: I do myself the honor to acknowledge your imperial highness’s note of the 12th instant, including copy of regulations for the anchorage of native shipping at Shanghai, and acquainting me with a modification of the rules of 1878 regarding the foreign anchorage.

I have considered the matter of the note with my colleagues—the representatives of the treaty powers now in Peking—and I understand it to be agreed that each of us should instruct the consul of his government at Shanghai to co-operate cordially with the Chinese authorities in giving effect to the rules in question.

I avail, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

His Imperial Highness, the Prince of Kung.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 564.]

Mr. Seward to Mr. Bailey.

Peking, January 20, 1880.

Sir: The Chinese Government has decided to put into execution at once the rules for the harbor at your port which were transmitted by me to your predecessor, General Stahel, in February, 1878, dispatch No. 113, excepting from their operation, however, the district south of the Little East Gate Creek, over which another set of rules—a copy of which I inclose—will be enforced.

Please be so good as to extend to the local authorities your cordial co-operation in all appropriate ways in their administration of the two sets of rules, and to report to me from time to time whether the objects in view in providing the rules are being attained.

You may communicate a copy of this note and of the sixteen rules to the chamber of commerce.

I am, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 146. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Seward. No. 146.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Seward.

Department of State,
Washington, January 22, 1880. No. 337.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 505, of the 18th of November last, concerning the judicial system and mixed courts in China, has been received and read with satisfaction.

In reply, I have to state that the main proposition advanced in the memorandum submitted by you at the conference of the foreign representatives at Peking, and accepted by your colleagues, that mixed cases, civil and criminal, in which foreigners and Chinese are concerned, should be heard and determined in the proper court of the defendant and in accordance with the laws of his country, appears to agree with the position which has uniformly been held by the department, and is therefore approved.

You are instructed to proceed, in concert with your colleagues, as suggested in the report of the committee upon the administration of justice.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 147. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 147.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, January 23, 1880. (Received April 2.) No. 567.]

Sir: I had the honor to transmit to you on the 18th of November last, with my dispatch No. 505, the conclusions of the conference of foreign representatives, held in this city in the months of September, October, and November, in regard to certain questions affecting the administration of justice which had attracted their attention. Recurring to that dispatch and its inclosures, and more particularly to the joint note addressed by the representatives to the foreign office in regard to the mixed court at Shanghai, I have now to place before you the response which has been sent to us by the Yamên.

You will see that it is entirely courteous in tone and substance; that it states that the subject has been referred to the southern superintendent of trade for a report, and that a further letter will be addressed to us upon the receipt of his response.

As that officer will undoubtedly refer the matter to the officials at Shanghai, it may be some time before his report will be received.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 567.]

Prince Kung to the foreign representatives.

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication in reply:

Upon the 26th of November I had the honor to receive a note from your excellencies, placing before me certain considerations affecting the administration of justice at the port of Shanghai, which had enlisted your joint attention, &c., &c.

The ministers and myself have carefully considered what your excellencies have placed before us, and fully recognize your earnest desire to place the administration of justice between Chinese and foreigners upon a satisfactory basis.

The port of Shanghai having a mixed population of Chinese and foreigners, and the number of cases being very large, a set of rules was prepared by the superintendent of trade in 1868, considered and approved by this Yamên, and communicated to the several representatives for their action in the premises, with the distinct statement that the given deputy is a Chinese official and must be guided by Chinese law and usage.

Since these rules were put into operation there have been no cases of complaint by foreigners against Chinese which have not been speedily decided. The graver cases have from time to time been determined by the customs intendant, acting in conjunction with the consul concerned.

Having now received your excellency’s statement of the several changes desired in the court in question, I have to remark that, as the former ten rules of procedure were prepared by a former superintendent of trade, it will be necessary to transmit a copy of the statement of modifications proposed to the southern superintendent of trade for his consideration in view of present circumstances, and for a report from him. Thereafter this Yamên will give the subject further attention and address your excellency again.

It is much to be desired that the forms of procedure may conform to Chinese usages, and that the administration of law in mixed cases may be made more perfect. Thus the rules can be permanently enforced.

I am writing to the southern superintendent of trade, and upon receipt of his response shall address your excellency further.

Peking, January 20, 1880.

His Excellency George F. Seward, &c., &c., &c.

No. 148. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 148.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, January 29, 1880. (Received April 2.) No. 575.]

Sir: I have the honor to recur to my dispatch, No. 557, and to hand to you, herewith, translations of two imperial decrees which have relation to it and to the charge against Chung How.

It is not positively known whether the tenor of the discussions which have been going forward are favorable to the ratification of the treaty or the reverse, but it is persistently rumored that the tone of the larger part of the official class in Peking is very hostile to the treaty, and credence is given to this by the fact that Chung How is being dealt with very harshly.

What the fate of this well-known officer is to be, cannot now be told. It is believed, however, that his estates will be confiscated, and that he will be banished to a remote part of the empire.

The very greatest sympathy is felt for him by the foreign representatives, and they would not hesitate to speak in his behalf if they could see the way to do him any good whatever.

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 575.]

an imperial decree.

Their Imperial Highnesses the Empress Dowager and the Empress Mother decree:

Whereas it was ordered that the treaty made by Chung How, and the several papers upon the subject by the foreign office, and the memorials by Wang Ren-kan and Sheng Yu, of the Han Lin, Chang Chihtung, be referred to the grand secretariat, the six boards, the nine lower courts, and the Han Lin for consideration; and whereas the report of the grand secretariat and their associates has been received, together with three memoranda from the vice-president Chang Hui, and memorials from president Wang Ching Li, vice-president Chien Pao Lien, vice-president Chow Le Run, of the astronomical board, Poo Ling, Chang Chai, Kuo Tsung Chu, of the censorate, Yu Shanghua, Wo Chew, Hu Pin Chin, Censor Kung Hsien Chueh, Huang Yuanshan, Lien Han Chih, Leng Chenghsin, all censors, Chang Huakuei, also through the censorate; and also certain memorials hitherto received from Hao Wamping, Leng Ching-ling, of the censorate, Wo Lapu, Wang Hsien Chien, of the Han Lin, Yu Yinlin, of the Han Lin, Censor Yen Yin Fang:

Let the earlier and later memorials and reports be referred to the princes of the first and second grades, the high ministers of the imperial presence, the grand council, the prince and ministers of the foreign office, the grand secretariat, the presidents of the six boards, and the chief censors for careful consideration and a suitable report.

Chun Chin Wang* will, of course, act with them in their deliberations and reports.

Respect this.

January 20, 1880.
C. H.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 575.]

an imperial decree.

January 27, 1880.

The board of civil office memorializes us, in obedience to our command, that they take the matter into grave consideration, and request that Chung How, ex-senior member of the censorate, be removed from office, in accordance with the statutes, for the violation of the regulations.

Chung How, in obedience to our command, went as our envoy abroad, and, without awaiting the Imperial will, ventured of his own motion to return to this capital. The nature of his offense is very grave, and a simple removal from office is not sufficient to cover it.

Let Chung How first be deprived of rank, arrested, examined, and handed over to the board of punishment to be dealt with for his offense.

Respect this!

* Note.—Chun Chin Wang is the seventh prince, being the brother next younger than Prince Kung, and is the father of the present Emperor.

No. 149. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 149.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, January 30, 1880. (Received April 2.) No. 579.]

Sir: I beg leave to hand to you, herewith, the response of the foreign office to the joint note in regard to trade grievances, which was addressed to Prince Kung in November last. The note is not free from a certain assumption of independence, and it is disfigured by one or two extreme expressions. It adheres rigidly to the positions taken up by the foreign office in the circular letter addressed to their ministers abroad in 1878. It ends, however, with a plain declaration of willingness to discuss with the foreign representatives measures for the removal of grievances.

The several foreign representatives will meet to discuss the Yamên’s note in a few days. In the mean time I refrain from further comments upon it.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 579.]

Prince Kung to the foreign representatives.

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, here with makes a communication in reply:

Upon the 22d of November last I had the honor to receive a collective note from your excellencies the several foreign representatives in Peking, upon the question of inland taxation upon foreign goods taken to the interior as well as upon native produce intended for export, and stating that as China had repeatedly declared her willingness to enter upon a joint consideration of the question, your excellencies had drawn up a list of grievances to which you invited my careful consideration.

Upon this subject I beg leave to remark that it was not China that sent her agents to the several governments to negotiate the existing treaties. Assuredly it was these several governments who sent their agents to China requesting the negotiation of the treaties. The various articles contained in them were all made on the motion of the several governments, and their stipulations were all determined at the request of the several powers. Aside from the provision that China may establish rules to protect her revenue, this government has no foothold left for itself.

China refused none of the requests of the several foreign powers, and has not failed to take measures to carry into effect these requests.

All these treaties may be said to have been new creations of the past twenty years, and it could hardly be avoided that some of their stipulations should be either unprofitable or detrimental to China, but since the mutual observance of them in this long period has given reciprocal satisfaction to all parties, a thing difficult to be secured, it cannot be said that their observance has been without advantage.

In reference to the more than twenty grievances inclosed with your excellency’s note, they have received careful attention. It would appear as though throughout these twenty years China has been in daily violation of her treaty obligations. If China should write in detail all her grievances against the officials and merchants of the several governments, it is to be feared that they would not be limited to twenty.

If any two powers, desiring commercial intercourse, should appoint their agents to fix rules of intercourse, these rules naturally being difficult to arrange, it would ordinarily be difficult to provide against future differences of opinion between them.

In regard to the relations of the past twenty years between China and foreign powers, it has happened that a certain government has sent a high official to China to discuss certain business. After a negotiation, extending over a long period, a conclusion was reached. Thereafter the stipulations proposed, and to which China had assented, were transmitted to his government, and, to the surprise of the high functionary, his government refused its consent. It has also happened that a diplomatic agent of a certain government has discussed with the high authorities of China the intent of certain treaty stipulations without coming to agreement. Thereafter his government was of opinion that the representative in question had, in the discussion, made willful misrepresentations.*

Again, a certain consular officer, regardful of the treaties, held that a particular line of action was in accordance with their stipulations and the trade rules. But his superior, at Peking, on the contrary, criticised his action as a violation of the treaties. Again, when the merchants and people of some nation have violated the rules, and China has held that they should be punished, the government of the persons concerned has at times been of the same opinion with China, and at times of a different opinion.

Thus the divergences in the given cases arose, not because the officials and merchants concerned had no thought for the good relations of the governments but because of errors in their action. And hence, of course, in a long period, greater divergences in these directions would result.

The foreign powers were the parties seeking the treaty stipulations, and China was the party assenting to them. Since the parties who sought them have not been without misrepresentation, how could it he assured that there should be no misunderstanding on the side of the assenting party? But if these differences of opinion are to be construed as violations of the treaties, and as a basis for a breach of good relations, then it would seem as if there had not been a day in all these twenty years when such a breach has not occurred. But China is unwilling to consider the mistake of an individual as the failure of his government, but holds, rather, that when a matter arises it should be dealt with by itself, and when a case occurs, that case should be decided.

In regard to the mistakes of Chinese officials in the interpretation of the treaties, or in matters of trade, these certainly cannot be avoided, but will likely be of constant occurrence.

In regard to the twenty grievances mentioned in your excellency’s dispatch, it is probable that at certain places and at certain times there may have been instances of the sort, but not at all places and constantly. How can instances of these sorts be held to prove that China, in all parts and always, acts in this way, and violates her treaty obligations in such manner?

If at any time a question arises, upon representations being made, it can be thereupon adjusted and closed. If at any locality a point of dissatisfaction arises, upon representations being made at the given point, it can there be arranged. If any official commits an error, foreign officials can set forth the error, and China will rectify it, and deal with the offender.

Speaking generally, whatever may be the friendship, it is impossible in a long period to avoid the appearance of suspicions, or the existence of mutual resentments. No matter how perfect the stipulations of the treaties, errors of interpretation cannot be avoided, nor that there will be violators of the regulations. In all matters of intercourse each matter must be dealt with as it occurs, and each party should seek the way to strengthen good relations.

More than half of the twenty grievances mentioned in your excellency’s note refer to the collection of the duties and transit dues. This Yamên has three plans in mind upon this subject: 1st. The present regulations may be carried into effect. The high provincial authorities will, on the one hand, be instructed by this Yamên to direct their officials to act in good faith in obedience to them, and, on the other hand, your several consular officers and merchants will be instructed by your excellency to scrupulously obey them. Or,

2d. The regulations heretofore agreed upon between this Yamên and his excellency, the British minister, Sir Rutherford Alcock, may be put in force. Or,

3d. The stipulation in the several treaties that foreigners shall not be subject to Chinese jurisdiction may be stricken out, and foreigners in China shall be subject to Chinese authority at all places and always, and be dealt with as Chinese subjects.

Their excellencies, the foreign representatives, may indicate which plan they prefer. Or, if the three are all inadmissible, then there will be no difficulty in the way of the consideration of the procedure which, in the minds of their excellencies, seems to be desirable, provided it is practicable for China.

In addition to making answer to each grievance in detail, I have the honor thus to respond to your excellency.

Peking, January 19, 1880.

His Excellency George F. Seward, &c., &c., &c.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 579]

Categorical replies of the Yamên to the several foreign grievances.

1st. Treaties allow foreigners of the various nationalities at the several ports to lease land; the land so leased, however, to such foreigners continues to be Chinese territory. Foreign merchants have heretofore sometimes sold foreign goods within the limits of the port, and before they have passed to the interior, to Chinese. The owner is thus a Chinese, and the goods are upon Chinese soil. China temporarily levies lekin for military purposes, which is a matter within her own control. As it is already agreed that foreign imports shall not pay lekin within the limits of the foreign concessions, this point, since such dues are not collected, need not be discussed.

2d. The regulations of trade at the ports provide that foreign imports taken to the interior, if not protected by a transit certificate from the customs, shall pay charges and lekin at each station and barrier passed. Thus imports taken into the interior, on which the transit duty has not been paid and a certificate taken out, should pay the barrier dues and lekin and no other duties are added to them.

3d. According to the treaties, transit certificates must he issued to merchants taking foreign produce inland upon application and payment of transit dues. As passes are of a sudden being applied for for points for which passes have not heretofore been taken out, the local authorities, with the intention of preventing wrong-doing, have consulted as to regulations with the several foreign officials. This certainly is in accord with treaty stipulations, and is neither a refusal to issue passes, nor an enforcement of unnecessary rules.

4th. Merchants taking foreign merchandise into the interior covered by a certificate of the payment of the transit dues, are to produce this certificate for examination at the barriers as evidence. But it has occurred at certain points that the tax officers have refused to respect this certificate when placed before them. This fact having been brought to the notice of this Yamên it must instruct the high authorities concerned to examine into the matter and take action.

5th. By the treaties merchants taking imports covered by transit passes, shall produce the passes for inspection and counterseal at each barrier en route. Excepting cases of passes concealed or false entries in which all goods covered by them are confiscated, in case, at barriers or other stations, the officials demand other than the legal levies, or make pretexts for seizures, this office upon representation will instruct the high officials concerned to inquire and take action.

6th. The trade regulations appended to the treaties provide that merchants who may take imports inland shall inform the customs as to the point to which the goods are to be taken and pay the transit dues. The customs will issue a transit certificate, which shall be produced for inspection at all stations en route, and no matter whether taken to points near or remote no further dues shall be levied. Thus the transit certificate is limited in its application to the point, whether near or remote, for which the merchant reported. On arrival at the point named the certificate becomes of no value.

7th. By treaty, merchants of any nationality are allowed to lease premises and erect warehouses at the several ports for their convenience in the storage of merchandise. His excellency the British minister notified his people that they would not be allowed to establish warehouses in the interior, thus providing against abuses. By treaty, merchants are allowed to hire boats for the transport of merchandise. The Yangtse regulations also provide that foreign merchants may employ boats in inland waters for the transport of goods. All of which are facilities for the benefit of foreign trade. The transport and storage of merchandise must of course be conducted in accordance with the treaties.

8th. In the several provinces, and excepting the foreign customs, the customs stations have had their fixed points of establishment. But the lekin stations are in each province, under the control of a high official, who takes the circumstances into consideration and from time to time increases or diminishes the levies. For the past few years there have been reductions, but no increase. There certainly has never been an establishment of additional lekin stations without the orders of this high official in any province.

9th. The tariff of the foreign customs is provided for in the treaties. The tariff of the Chinese customs is recorded in the regulations of the board of revenue, printed and published long since. But as the lekin is established for the necessities of the military, it has not been provided for by law, and there has been no necessity for its being decreed uniformly in the several provinces.

10th. Foreign merchants taking imports inland should be provided with a transit certificate, and foreign merchants going inland to purchase native produce should have a transit pass. Merchandise not protected by these papers, since, at each barrier and station it pays the dues and lekin, ought to have a receipt setting forth the amounts of dues and lekin paid, and at what points and to what officers. Should any officer without reason refuse to give such receipts, this Yamên must of course, upon proper representation, instruct the high officer concerned to take the proper action in the premises.

11th. Merchandise covered by transit pass, having paid the proper dues, ought of course not to be subject at the several stations and lekin barriers to further levies in violation of law. Where such cases occur the offense of the deputy concerned should be inquired into and clearly established by the high official of the province, and he should be punished according to the laws of China.

12th. Levies exacted in violation of law upon goods passing the customs and covered by transit certificates ought to be returned to the owners. But it would not be proper to accept the simple statement of the merchant concerned. The case should be investigated by the high officer in the given province, and action taken upon the development of the actual facts. Occasionally a case will be contested and much time be consumed in its adjustment.

13th. See No. III.

14th. In all the producing districts in the several provinces of China there is a tax upon the productions, called the “miscellaneous tax.” This tax is paid by the producers to the officers appointed to collect it for remittance, no matter whether merchants do or do not purchase the produce concerned. This tax has been collected in each province for more than two hundred years, and has no connection with the customs or transit dues, or with lekin. This tax exists in all the producing districts of China and is not, limited to silk.

15th. The trade regulations for the treaty ports provide that in the case of native produce purchased by foreign merchants at the ports, the inland owner having paid the inland taxes, and the Chinese merchant having paid the various customs dues and lekin taxes, the foreign merchant need not pay the transit dues. But it must be fully determined that the produce purchased by the foreign merchant is the identical produce which has paid the customs dues and lekin taxes.

16th. By the treaties, foreign merchants taking out transit passes in order to bring out native produce from the interior should pay the transit dues and export duty. But native goods bought at the ports, putting aside the export duty, the rules allow that, the native owner having paid the inland customs-dues and lekin tax, the foreign merchant need not pay the transit dues. But where the produce in question has been altered in any way, it cannot be held to be the produce originally purchased; cannot be held to have paid the inland dues and lekin; nor exempted from the transit dues.

17th. The trade regulations appended to the treaties stipulate that articles intended for the personal use of foreigners shall be exempt from import and export duty. If duties are wrongly levied at the customs upon this class of merchandise it is because it has not been already stated that the articles concerned were for personal use, or because it is suspected that they are intended for sale. Orders ought to be given to examine into the business clearly, and take proper action.

18th. The rules of trade at the several ports provide that foreign merchants taking native produce into other ports shall pay the export and half import duty. Thereafter, upon transport of the goods into the interior, whether in the hands of Chinese or foreign merchants, they shall pay the inland customs dues and lekin. Thus native produce taken inland from a second port must, according to the rules, in addition to export and transit dues, pay the inland customs dues and lekin, but no other taxes.

19th. The treaties state clearly that a bank shall receive on behalf of the superintendent of customs the customs revenues, whether in bullion or dollars, taking into consideration the market rate of the dollar in sycee, and making suitable allowances. The bullion received by the customs is in the treasury taël of fine silver. But the price of dollars as compared with bullion differs at different times and places. The superintendents of customs should be instructed in the receipt of duties to take the treasury taël of pure silver as the standard.

20th. The treaties provide that, at the several ports, buoys, light-ships, light-houses, and beacons shall be provided from the tonnage dues. Heretofore the expenditures for these works have been provided from the tonnage dues upon foreign bottoms; but now the tonnage dues received from the vessels of the China Merchants’ Steamship Company are also applied to the purposes indicated above.

* This translation is made as the Chinese text appears to require. But the ministers of the foreign office have informed the interpreter of one of the legations that nothing offensive was intended, and the context appears to sustain this explanation.

C. H.

No. 150. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Seward. No. 150.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Seward.

Department of State,
Washington, January 31, 1880. No. 339.]

Sir: I have to inform you that the Department has been advised by the chargé d’affaires ad interim of Brazil in this country of the intention of his majesty the Emperor, to send an embassy to China for the purpose of entering into certain treaties of amity and commerce with the government of that country, and of his desire that the representative of the United States in China may be instructed to extend to the Brazilian embassy to that country the friendly welcome and the moral support which is naturally to be expected from the intimate relations so happily existing between the United States and Brazil. You are consequently requested to comply with the wish of the Emperor as herein expressed.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 151. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 151.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, February 6, 1880. (Received April 26.) No. 586.]

Sir: During the last few days public report has indicated that Chung How, the late ambassador to Russia, is really in serious danger of losing his life, and that the memorials to the throne in regard to his matter and the Russian treaty have indicated a spirit of much hostility to foreigners at large and outside of resentment against the Russians in particular.

My colleagues and I have considered the situation as thus described, and, while very much in the dark as to the actual facts, we have felt that we cannot stand silent when what appears to be a grave wrong is on the eve of being penetrated. We entertain no doubt whatever that the late embassador did his duty to the best of his ability, and that his return to China was nothing more than the natural consequence of the completion of his work. We know positively that a large part of his work was approved in advance of the close of his negotiations, and that his return could have been prevented if there had, at the moment, existed at the Tsung-li Yamên dissatisfaction with his treaty or a belief that the public interest required him to remain at his post.

The circumstances, then, all point to the proposition that the late ambassador is being sacrificed because of the cry raised against him by officials who have no responsibility in foreign affairs, who know the least in the world about them, and who, as a consequence, belong to the reactionary party.

The circumstances and various intimations which reach us point as well to the proposition that, while the discussion as to the Kuldja treaty had reference in the outset to its merits, they have latterly taken a line which must be considered unfavorable to foreign interests at large.

My colleagues and I, the Russian chargé d’affaires of course excepted, in view of the considerations so stated, have decided to address to the foreign office communications intended to indicate that we are not regardless of what is passing, with a view, if possible, to save the life of the late ambassador, and to intimate that foreign powers cannot disregard the question of humanity which is involved and the effect of this or other hostile demonstrations upon our general interests.

I inclose herewith a copy of the letter which I am writing to Prince Kung. My colleagues for England, Germany, and France, are sending in letters not identical with my own, but such as they have thought best suited to the occasion. Copies of their notes will be transmitted to you at a later moment.

I am free to confess that I have been actuated more by a desire to do my duty in a humanitarian point of view than by considerations of danger to our interests:

* * * * * * *

I believe that you and that every man in our land would have the right, if this matter of Chung How’s should bo carried to an extreme point, to ask whether I had done what I could to save an innocent man from death. But of course such interference subjects one to the danger of provoking resentment. It has been my effort, therefore, to speak, as it were, from the standpoint of the effect which the action proposed by the Chinese will have upon our relations. They cannot complain at all when one keeps within this rule and speaks justly, and I believe that I have done so.

I respectfully ask your approval of the course which I have taken in this very difficult and delicate matter.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 586.]

Mr. Seward to Prince Kung.

February 6, 1880. Informal.]

The undersigned is constrained to inform your imperial highness that reports are current and have reached his ears indicating that the disposition of a large part of the high officials of this capital toward the late imperial ambassador, Chung How, is very hostile; it would seem even that fears are entertained for his life.

Under any ordinary circumstances the undersigned, availing of his privilege as a foreign minister, would apply to your imperial highness for information, but it must be supposed that your imperial highness will not be prepared to make any statement whatever, so long as the matter referred to is under the examination of your government.

The undersigned has no alternative, then, but to point out to your imperial highness in this way the fact that the arrest and degradation of a high official for no other offense than that of having returned to his own country after the completion of a special mission abroad, will seem to his government an extraordinary proceeding, the more so when the expectation of the given officer to so return had been announced from the very beginning of his mission, and had been declared to the foreign legations by the Yamên itself at a moment which would indicate that he might have been stopped if it were desired that he should remain at his post.

The undersigned is aware that there may be other charges against the late ambassador, but his government will not think it strange that in speaking of the matter the undersigned should put forward with prominence the allegation made in two imperial decrees and the only one which has been made public.

If it be true that dissatisfaction exists with the late ambassador in respect of the work done or left undone by him during his recent mission, neither will this appear in the eyes of his government an adequate ground for extreme measures. It is not to be presumed that a high functionary has not acted to the best of his judgment and ability, and with the disposition to do his duty.

The case is not without concern to foreign governments when viewed from the one or the other standpoint. They have invited you to establish missions abroad because they have desired to avert the recurrence of difficulties and to draw more closely the bonds of friendship. But what high officer will care hereafter to go abroad when the duty before him is so perilous? What boldness or vigor can be expected of a minister who has to direct his steps to avert not only disaster from his state, but also disaster of the gravest sort from himself? It is the interest of your government and ours that able and experienced men shall fill your missions, and so far as the procedure pursued in the course of the late ambassador appears calculated to discredit such employment, so far it must be regretted by us.

The undersigned is not disposed, either, to pass by the fact that in recent years a better feeling has grown up between foreigners and the people of your empire, and that many of your officers have come to regard foreigners as actuated by generous sentiments and a right regard to justice. What then will be the effect upon the growth of this sentiment of the extreme measures with the late ambassador? Will it point every officer in the empire to the proposition that a special danger attends the conduct of international relations, and that their only safety lies in unreasoning opposition to foreigners? Will it lead the people to believe that the disasters which have befallen the imperial ambassador indicate a revival of the ancient hostility to foreigners? If so, will not the conduct of international affairs become more difficult in every way, and occasions for complaint be multiplied?

The undersigned does not at all magnify the importance of this case. The officer in question has served his government in distinguished ways, and, it must be presumed, acceptably. The matter has importance in this view, but it has a broader importance in view of the fact that his service has been largely in the unfrequented field of foreign intercourse. It is one, then, of unusual significance for your people and for ours, and it will be watched accordingly.

The undersigned has hesitated to address your imperial highness in regard to the matter, but his sense of duty to his own government and his friendliness to yours have left Mm no alternative but to do so. It remains only for him to express the hope that the considerations which he has put forward are receiving attention.

The undersigned seizes the occasion to convey to your imperial highness the expressions of his highest consideration.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 152. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 152.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, February 10, 1880. (Received April 26.) No. 591.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the several representatives of foreign powers now present in this capital have considered Prince Kung’s response to the collective note of November 10, and have agreed upon a second note asking that the request made in their earlier letter for a conference with the ministers of the Yamên be granted at such early moment as may be convenient.

In writing to the Yamên we have indicated that the note of November 10 has been somewhat misunderstood by them, but we have not thought it necessary to speak with particularity upon the subject.

My dispatch No. 510 will have shown you that I anticipated such an answer as we received, and that I pointed out the danger to my colleagues. For one reason or another they thought it inconvenient to move in such manner as to avoid this danger, and I yielded to them.

You will remember that when the conferences of September-November last indicated a considerable divergence of opinion among the several representatives as to whether it is better to adhere to existing treaty stipulations, and, if not, as to the remedies which should be proposed, I suggested that we would do well to agree, first, upon a statement of grievances, and at a later moment return to the question of remedies, and that this view was assented to by the conference.

Our statement of grievances, made in pursuance of the conclusion thus taken, has undoubtedly produced a great effect upon the Chinese. They have seen in it evidence of union among the foreign representatives, and they cannot feel entirely at ease in view of what must seem to them, and in fact is, a formal declaration that they have not executed the treaties in a just way.

The primary object of a further conference with them will be to place before them proof of the facts alleged by us. It is necessary to do this for our own defense and in justice to them.

But right here there arises a certain danger. The Chinese will advance against us at once the declaration that they read the treaties differently from our reading, and, while admitting our facts, urge that they do not prove a breach of treaty in this or that direction.

For this attitude of the Chinese we must be prepared by reaching among ourselves, in advance, a thorough understanding as to the intent of the treaties. The statement of grievances was signed by all of us, and indicates a large measure of accord, but points will arise which may not be covered in this way.

I have, therefore, urged upon my colleagues the wisdom of holding at once a farther conference among ourselves in order to settle our conclusions as to the intent of the treaties, and to prepare our work for the conferences with the Chinese. My colleagues have absented to the justice of my arguments, but as yet we have held no meetings.

It is my intention, when these meetings are called, to bring forward the further proposition, that the time has arrived when we should decide finally whether we will urge our governments to hold fast to existing treaty stipulations, or to seek a common standing ground with the Chinese in such modifications of the treaties as will more or less perfectly satisfy both sides.

My earlier dispatches have shown that I am much indisposed to seek change of existing stipulations. It would appear to me, however, that the present moment is the most favorable one which we are likely to have, in which to enter upon the question, and that having emphasized our differences with the Chinese, we may well devote some time to the inquiry whether there is not some compromise to be found which will avert controversy, and secure a measure of advantage to all concerned.

To be more definite, we claim, for instance, that all imports may be subjected only to an import duty of 5 per cent, about, and to transit duties when carried into the interior, which transit duties may be commuted by the payment of a half duty, or 2½ per cent., in addition to the import duty.

The Chinese claim that when our goods are in native hands, they have the right to tax them as they see fit, and they do so. The advantage of a treaty tariff under such circumstances is very problematical indeed.

But the collection of duties upon our goods from Chinese is a matter of difficulty and expense. A large number of collectors must be sustained. They have to pitch upon the goods where they can find them, and in the midst of their difficulties and the difficulty of supervising them, all kinds of irregularities take place.

The ready means of averting the irregularities so indicated would seem to lie in an agreement with the Chinese, under which our goods would pay all duties on importation. Our merchants, however, say that under such an agreement they would nay an increased duty at once to their certain cost, and that the stipulated freedom of the goods from further taxation would be delusive.

This may be all true, but, nevertheless, the difficulties now met are so grave, and the chance of bringing about a better state of things under existing stipulations is so poor, that I am inclined to urge a trial of the remedy. This could be done by a convention with the Chinese, under which the new system would be put into effect for a period of, say, five years. We should thus yield nothing of our view of the intent of the treaties as they stand, and should be in no worse position than at present in case the new system should fail. If it should succeed, it would be of decided benefit to us and to the Chinese, and the principle could be extended to exports, which are also burdened with irregular taxes.

I shall place these views before my colleagues whenever we meet. If they accept them, I shall, of course, advise you of the fact at once, and request your instructions.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 591.]

Joint note to Prince Kung.

Peking, February 2, 1880.

The undersigned have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the reply of the Prince of Kung, and the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên, to the collective note regarding the taxation of foreign trade, addressed to his imperial highness and your eminent excellencies by the representatives of the treaty powers upon the 10th November last.

In their collective note, the writers expressed a hope that they might be enabled in an early conference to discuss with the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên, the various matters to which they had requested attention.

From the tenor of the reply now received, the undersigned are under the impression that the note of the 10th November has been to a certain extent misunderstood.

In order, therefore, to remove any possible misconstruction of their motives in writing it, as well as to secure the object for which it was originally written, the undersigned venture again to request that a time be named for a conference with the Yamên and they trust that when the New-Year festivities are concluded it may be in the power of the ministers of the Yamên to meet them.

The undersigned, &c., &c.

THOMAS F. WADE.

M. von BRANDT.

GEORGE F. SEWARD

A. KOYANDER.

PATENÔTRE.

No. 153. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 153.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, February 16, 1880. (Received April 26.) No. 596.]

Sir: In September last I transmitted to our several consuls in this empire, through the consul-general, copies of the circular letter addressed in March, 1878, by the Tsung li Yamên to the ministers of China in foreign countries, and requested them to report to me their opinions upon its contents. I did this because I was desirous of bringing to their notice the positions taken up by the Chinese in regard to questions which are of daily interest at the ports, and because I was anxious to place before you evidence from divergent sources of the estimation in which the paper in question may be held.

The responses which I have received have been less full than I expected. It is my intention to gather them together and send them to you when time will permit, but at the moment I can do no more than to forward the fullest and most careful which has come to hand, that of Dr. Lord, consul at Ningpo, the oldest and most experienced of our officers in China.

The report of Dr. Lord has been written from his own standpoint, and with but little opportunity for any comparison of opinions with myself.

It seems to me, however, to sustain perfectly the views upon the various questions involved which were long since embraced by me, and which the foreign representatives here, generally, have come to consider those entitled to support. It is a paper, therefore, to which I invite your especial attention.

It would be tedious as well as unnecessary to review Dr. Lord’s paper, but there are some points in it which need a word of explanation. He refers in sections 3 and 4 to the coast-trade duties, saying that they are not mentioned in the treaties. This is entirely true. The present system was devised after the treaties of 1858 were signed, and was intended to be an equitable arrangement of the matter. Foreign vessels had for a long time shared in the coast trade, paying at the ports of departure and arrival such duties as were demanded of them. Thereafter, however, they were to pay a full duty oh all native goods carried out of a Chinese port, just as if the goods were being exported to a foreign country, and upon importation at the second port a half duty. This arrangement was agreed upon in 1861, by Sir Frederick Bruce, then minister of England, and the Tsung-li Yamên, and has been acquiesced in by all other powers. The details will be found at page 204 of “Mayer’s Treaties” a copy of which is in the Department.

Dr. Lord again refers in the same division of his paper to the option which foreigners exercise to send their imported goods into the interior, and bring native produce from the interior, either under transit passes or without them, and intimates that tariff rule No. VII provides only for the use of transit passes when foreigners desire to move such merchandise.

Tariff rule No. VII will be found on page 30 of “Mayer’s Treaties.” It reads as stated by Dr. Lord, but it is to be construed with reference to the appropriate article of the treaty (XXVIII, page 15), perusal of which will show that the option to use transit passes or not is reserved to British merchants. If there be any doubt on this head, it will be resolved by a reference to a further agreement made by Sir Frederick Bruce and the Tsung-li Yamên, the particulars of which are given at page 203 of “Mayer’s Treaties.”

The articles of our treaties which refer to transit duties are the thirteenth of the treaty of 1844, and the seventh of the supplementary treaty of 1858. Bead by themselves, these articles would indicate that since the latter was signed no transit dues in excess of 2½ per cent, can be levied upon any goods.

In section 5, Dr. Lord refers to the question whether goods not intended for exportation may be brought from the interior under transit passes, and reaches the conclusion that it is equitable to acknowledge the objections made by the Chinese on this score. The merit of their objections is universally recognized, as I believe, and it is generally conceded, also, that the intent of the treaties sustains their view.

With these remarks I again commend Dr. Lord’s paper to your notice.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 596.]

Mr. Lord to Mr. Seward.

Ningpo, November 29, 1879. No. 105.]

Sir: The United States consul-general at Shanghai has sent me a copy of a “circular note addressed by the Chinese Government to its ministers abroad in March of last year,” with the request that I would make and forward to you such comments on it as my experience might suggest.

The paper referred to, I notice, is divided (I speak of its English translation) into paragraphs, which are numbered consecutively from 1 to 10. It may serve both convenience and perspicuity if, in the remarks which I may make, I follow the order and numbering here observed.

1. The note opens with the declaration that, “Since the treaties of Tientsin were ratified China’s relations with foreign powers have invariably been conducted in accordance with their stipulations.” The entire accuracy of this statement may perhaps be questioned. It is too broad and too positive. It overlooks an important element which has existed, and which has influenced this whole matter. It is known, of course, that the Chinese Government did not enter into these stipulations willingly. It assented to them, because it seemed necessary to do so. They were regarded as burdensome, and the observance of them has necessarily been irksome. But reluctant services are usually scant services, for what one does not want to do, one is always finding opportunities and reasons for not doing. And in the matter in question the Chinese Government has probably been no exception to this rule; Had the treaties made with foreign powers been on its part as on theirs, treaties of real friendship, its observance of them would probably have been attended with less friction and less complaint.

The “accidents to individuals which,” it is rightly said, “may occur many country, and which no amount of foresight can effectually guard against,” would probably have been fewer, or, if not fewer, would have given rise to less complaint. Indeed “the accidents to individuals,” here referred to, are not in themselves infractions of treaty stipulations. They become such only when inadequate measures are taken to prevent them, or when, having occurred, they are reluctantly or insufficiently redressed. And the presumption is that the complaints that have been made by foreign governments in connection with these “accidents” have been called forth not so much by the “accidents” themselves as by the existence or supposed existence of these attendant and damning circumstances.

But while the statement with which this paper opens seems liable to the criticisms here made, it is but fair to admit that there is in it much of truth. The Chinese Government has undoubtedly taken pains, and great pains, to observe the stipulations of its treaties. That it has not done all that could be desired must be admitted, but that it has done much cannot be denied. And when all the circumstances of the case are considered, the matter of wonder must be, not that it has failed so much, but that it has failed so little.

Treaties are not always fair, especially when made at the cannon’s mouth. Nor when fair, are they always so intelligible as to be capable of no misapprehension. It would, therefore, be no new or wonderful thing if those in question were in some points capable of different constructions. It happens, however, that the different constructions put upon such instruments do not always arise from any wrong or ambiguity in them, but from the party or selfish interest through which they are viewed. How it may be in this case there will be opportunity to inquire further on.

2. This paragraph states the efforts that had been made to revise the treaties, and the failures that had attended them. It also enumerates the subjects that had been discussed but on which no agreement had been reached. They are four in number, “transit,” “lekin taxation,” “extraterritoriality,” and “the most favored nation” clause. And these are the subjects discussed at length in the succeeding paragraphs.

3. In this paragraph we have a statement of the conditions on which foreigners may carry on their trade both at the ports, and in the interior, in accordance with the treaties of Tientsin. But some of these conditions are hardly found in these treaties. For instance the coast-trade duty mentioned here, I believe is not mentioned there. And the choice which the foreign merchant is said to have of passing his goods into or out of the country either with or without transit certificate does not appear in the rules of trade adopted in the supplementary treaties made at Shanghai. But these are minor points, and need perhaps no particular discussion here.

4. The discussion of the transit difficulty which here begins is divided into two parts, transit inward and transit outward; the former is first considered. The positions taken by the contending parties seem clearly and fairly stated.

Foreigners “have held that foreign goods which have once paid transit dues cannot subsequently be called upon to pay any local charge whatever.” But “to this interpretation the Chinese Government cannot agree.” It maintains that such goods are exempt from local charges only while they are passing from the port to any given place inland; and that on their arrival there their transit certificate is canceled, and they thereafter differ in no respect from ordinary uncertificated goods.” These positions are wide apart, and the matter at issue is a vital one since not only the welfare but the very existence of our trade here must depend upon it.

The Chinese Government claims that its position is sustained by the treaties, yet it cites no article or clause of them in proof, except an incidental statement from the rules of trade to the effect that in transit certificates covering goods to be sent into the interior, the place of destination must be inserted. The statement, however, is not in this form, but in the following: “In the case of imports, notice being given at the port of entry from which the imports are to be forwarded inland of the nature and quantity of the goods, the ship from which they have been landed, and the place inland to which they are bound, with all other necessary particulars, the collector of customs will, on due inspection made and on receipt of the transit duty due, issue a transit duty certificate.” Now, from this incidental clause (which to indicate I have underscored in my citation), which evidently relates to a matter of form, and which, both from the connection and from the nature of the case, could have had no reference to the matter in question, the grave inference is drawn that foreign goods, though they have paid both import and transit duty, are liable, as soon as they reach their destination, to further and unlimited taxation. Such reasoning seems truly wonderful.

Again, it is stated that the foreign merchant, in sending his goods into the interior, “has the option of taking out or not transit documents.” This statement is in conflict with the rules of trade. It is there stated that “any attempt to pass goods inward or outward otherwise than in compliance with the rule here laid down” (Rule VII, which provides for the transit pass system) “will render them liable to confiscation.” This rule complied with, the supposed inconvenience of finding two kinds of goods at the same place in the interior at the same time, one exempt from local charges, and one liable to them, could never happen in regard to goods passed by foreigners. Were it to happen on account of goods passed by natives under other regulations, this might be a reason why all imports sent into the country, whether by foreigners or natives, should be sent under the transit pass system, but it could be no reason why those sent by foreigners should be further taxed. It rests with the Chinese Government to adopt some such regulation as that, or to leave its people to the inconvenience of getting on without it. But whatever course it may elect in this matter, it is bound to observe the regulations which it has carefully and solemnly made.

The reasons then assigned in this note for the Chinese interpretation of the transit system are not in point. And were the interpretation correct, its correctness would need to be shown from other considerations. But these, it is resumed, do not exist. For the other interpretation, that given to it by foreign governments, there are better reasons. I will mention one or two of them.

I. Treaties and regulations relating to duties or the taxes to be levied on the goods of one country when imported into another, always aim to be definite. They state just what is intended by the parties, no more and no less. Thus were there an agreement entered into betwixt England and the United States, to the effect that each country might import its goods into the other on the payment of an ad valorem duty of 5 per cent., it would be understood by everybody that when these goods had paid this duty they would be liable to no other charges. Or if the agreement were to the effect that these goods on landing at the ports must pay this 5 per cent, duty, and then if sent into the interior, they must pay 2½ per cent, transit duty here too, everybody would understand that when these duties were paid, no more could be levied. In other words, to collect the duty or duties named would be lawful, but to levy any not named would be unlawful. And if either government were to attempt to make such levies, on the pretext that this agreement covered the goods of its neighbor only till they reached their destination, after which they might be taxed to any extent that suited its convenience, what would be thought of it but that its faith was badly kept?

II. Again, as this method of making and interpreting treaties is so universally and so thoroughly understood, it is almost certain that if either party to the treaties had, at the time they were made, intended or suspected the interpretation now sought to be put upon this part of them, there would have been left some real evidence of it. The Chinese commissioners, had this been their intention, would have given some definite expression of it; while foreign ministers, had they suspected such an intention, would have taken pains to guard against it. But in the language used there are no such indications. And this fact, together with the entire absence of reference to duties or charges, other than those definitely named, must be regarded as adequate proof that at that time no others were contemplated.

III. Again, the negotiation of treaties, the regulations of trade, and especially such parts as relate to the duties which one party may levy on the goods of the other, commonly require much and careful attention. Every stipulation needs to be fully understood and definitely stated. And this, there is every reason to suppose, was the case in the present instance. Moreover, in the present instance, instead of a single treaty, there were several, all negotiated by able men, and ratified after much and careful scrutiny. These treaties, on the matter in question, all use the same language, and this language, in form simple and definite, has been generally supposed to limit the taxes leviable on foreign goods to the import and transit duties. And no other interpretations seem to have been proposed or even thought of until conjured up by Chinese officials, mostly, no doubt, in the interest of their lekin arrangement, but partially, perhaps, as an effort to assert their rights to regulate their own taxation. Now, simply from these circumstances, the inference is very strong that the interpretation commonly given to this part of the treaties is the only legitimate one.

IV. Again, the supposition that foreign ambassadors would have made or their governments ratified the seventh rule of trade with the meaning now put upon it by the Chinese Government is very improbable. They could hardly have done it without seeing that the result would be the hinderance if not the destruction of the trade which it was their great object to facilitate and conserve.

It was known, of course, when these treaties were made, that the Chinese did not want to make them. China, it was said, wanted neither commerce nor intercourse with foreign nations; but foreign nations, it was replied, wanted both with China. And having the power, they exacted these concessions, and, to secure them, tied them up in treaties. These treaties everywhere insist on the right of trade, and very great pains were taken in order to facilitate and conserve it. In addition to all the guarantees thrown around it in the main treaties, supplementary ones were made with special and exclusive reference to it, containing a set of rules setting forth, very minutely and very definitely the conditions on which it should be conducted. And now, is it reasonable to suppose that after all this care and all these pains the matter would have been left in such a way as to imply the right on the part of the Chinese Government, should it choose to, exercise it not only to hinder, but to render impossible the trade so positively exacted and so carefully guarded? And yet this is the long and short of what is contended for in this diplomatic note. It says in substance, “Yes, we have consented to foreign trade. Foreigners may bring here their goods, and having paid on them the duties prescribed in the treaties, they may sell them to our people. But as soon as they are sold we may tax them further, and to any extent that may suit our object.” “And so,” it could list as well have added, “should it suit our object to stop this trade altogether, we have only to starve it with taxation.”

For the right to tax trade without limit is right to prohibit it. Does the Chinese Government really claim this right under existing treaties? If so, for what purpose were these treaties made?

V. Were it needful to discuss this matter further, it would be in point to refer to the circumstance that these treaties with China are in some respects peculiar. They were made on the presumption that on several important matters she could not be safely left to the exercise of her own discretion. And so in regard to them she has been required to bind herself to a prescribed course of procedure. One of these relates to the rights, of treaty subjects in the matter of residence, travel, business, &c., within her territory; another relates to the government to which they are amenable; and another relates to the kind and extent of the tribute that may be levied on foreign commerce.

These agreements on the part of the Chinese Government are concessions which, under the circumstances, foreign governments thought it needful to require, and which under the circumstances the Chinese Government thought it needful to make; and the presumption is that when they were made both parties understood them, and that their understanding was the same.

VI. Finally, there is in the treaties themselves the clearest possible evidence that they could not have meant and could not have been understood to mean that foreign goods having paid the tariff duty and the one-half tariff duty as transit dues could be further taxed; In Article X of the treaty of Nanking there is a very explicit statement to the effect that no such taxes shall be levied. The language is, “such merchandise,” (merchandise having paid thetariff duty,) “may be conveyed by Chinese merchants to any province or city in the interior of China on paying a further amount of transit dues, which shall not exceed —— per cent, on the tariff value of such goods.” The treaty of Nanking, ratified in 1843, was in force until superseded by that of Tientsin, ratified in 1850. This latter treaty, Article XXVIII, mentions Article X of the former treaty, and states that its observance had not been satisfactory to British merchants. It is not intimated that what they complained of “charges suddenly and arbitrarily imposed by the provincial authorities,” grew out of a different interpretation of the article. On the contrary, it is implied that it grew out of irregular and excessive valuation of goods, the dues to be levied being a percentage on their value.

The evil being stated, the article goes on to prescribe a remedy. But the remedy prescribed seems on further reflection to have been deemed unsatisfactory. So we find it presently modified or substituted by Rule VII of the Rules of Trade, which sets aside the ad valorem arrangement, and adopts the simpler one of the one-half tariff duty, which has ever since been in operation. And now reviewing these various efforts on the subject of transit dues, can anything be clearer than that the aim of each and all was to relieve foreign trade of excessive and troublesome taxation? In a word, to prevent what the Chinese Government now avers is not prevented. To me its position on this point seems novel and extraordinary. Looking at it in Reference to the treaties, it is without foundation; and looking at it as a matter of reason, it is really absurd. The absurdity of course does not lie in the simple fact of the government’s claiming for itself the right to regulate its own taxation, for this is a natural right and belongs to all nations. It lies in the fact of claiming this right after it has ceded it away, and under the treaties in which the cession is made.

In these treaties China has ceded to foreign nations the right to trade at her ports and among her people. She has also ceded or relinquished her right to tax their goods except to a limited and specified extent. Yet in the face of this she here maintains that she may tax them to any extent that may suit her convenience, as soon as they reach their destination or pass into native hands, as if she did not know that the object of the regulation referred to is to protect trade or as if she could not see how little difference it makes to trade itself whether it is taxed in foreign or native hands, since it is not the hands but the taxing that kills it.

Should it be said that the right here claimed by the Chinese Government to tax foreign goods beyond what is specified in the treaties is only a matter of theory, not of practice, and that until such taxation is actually resorted to, it need not be complained of, it may be replied that its being a matter of theory, not of practice, is by no means admitted, as we shall see further on; and if it were, it would still be sufficiently important to need attention, as theory leads to practice, and what we admit in the one we must tolerate in the other. Foreign trade with China will have difficulties enough to encounter even when it is placed under regulations the most equitable in kind and the most simple in form. Hence it is of the greatest importance that when suck regulations are reached they should be mutually understood and mutually observed.

5. This paragraph discusses the matter of transit outwards. But transit outwards and transit inwards are the same in substance. So there is nothing new needing attention here, excepting, perhaps, the question that is raised as to what goods foreigners can bring from the interior under transit certificates. “Foreigners,” it is said, “have held that goods may be brought down under transit certificate, even when not intended for foreign export, but meant for resale in China; and have gone so far as to say that even without certificates no tax ought to be charged in the interior on goods ordinarily exported to foreign countries.” It is perhaps unnecessary to inquire what views or what language may have been held on these matters either by foreigners or Chinese, since we have at hand what is not only better authority, but what in fact is the only authority, the authority of treaty stipulation. Rule VII of the treaties, supplementary to the treaties of Tientsin, stating how foreign merchants may bring native produce from the interior to the ports, says: “Produce purchased by an American citizen in the interior will be inspected and taken account of, at the first barrier it passes on its way to the port of shipment. A memorandum, showing the amount of the produce and the port at which it is to be shipped, will be deposited there by the person in charge of the produce; he will then receive a certificate which must be exhibited and visaed at every barrier on his way to the port of shipment. On the arrival of the produce at the barrier nearest the port, notice must be given to the customs at that port, and, the transit duties thereon being paid, it will be passed. On exportation the produce will pay the tariff duty.”

This language shows:

1. That there is no treaty arrangement for foreigners to bring native produce from the interior except by transit certificate, and the payment of one-half export duty as transit dues.

2. That the produce thus brought to the port is presumed to be for shipment. There is no statement, however, to the effect that it must be shipped; and unless it should appear that some wrong or inconvenience should arise to the Chinese Government from its non-shipment, the language employed would seem inadequate to enforce its shipment.

3. That the presumption is that the produce brought to the port is not only for shipment, but for shipment to foreign countries. As before, however, there is “no statement to the effect that this is necessary. Any shipment—shipment to other ports—would seem to answer all that the language implies; and, as already remarked, no shipment at all would seem to be necessary, except on the ground that this was the condition or a condition on which the right to purchase produce in the interior and bring it to ports under transit certificates was granted, and that the non-observance of this condition would result in harm to the party granting. But the condition of shipment being admitted, it would belong to the Chinese Government to say whether it would or would not be harmed by non-shipment. The question open for discussion, then, is, the existence or non-existence of this condition. Was the right conceded to foreigners to purchase goods in the interior and bring them to ports conditioned on their being shipped therefrom? In answering this question, it may be asked whether their shipment was a matter of desire on the part of the Chinese Government, influencing it towards granting to foreigners the right of this inland trade. On the contrary, is it not well known that the Chinese Government was influenced by no such desire, and that the admission of our merchants to its ports and into its country arose from other considerations? It would seem quite reasonable to suppose that the language here used referring to the shipment of goods arose simply from the presumption that such would be their destination, and that its object is not to state that the goods must be shipped, but to prescribe when and how the duties must be paid. And yet there are grounds, perhaps, on which it might be argued that the intention of the Chinese Government was that all native produce purchased by foreigners should be exported, and exported to foreign countries. Their exportation would serve to increase its levenue; and their exportation to foreign countries, besides subserving this object, would tend to restrict foreigners to foreign trade, and so lessen their influence in local matters. Moreover, the reason here suggested, that of preventing native trade from being subjected to unfair competition, would seem in point as a motive for this arrangement. And if for these or any of these objects, the Chinese Government intended that goods purchased in the interior by foreigners should be exported to foreign countries; and if this intention were understood, and this condition accepted, then the correctness of the position here taken, “that the produce that is entitled to transit privilege can only be such produce as is intended for foreign export.” must be admitted.

6. The lekin question here discussed strikes me as being handled somewhat unfairly. In the first place, it is not true that “lekin is continually objected to by forigners” in the broad sense here stated. Lekin, as a purely Chinese matter, they care nothing about. They object to lekin simply as applied to their own trade. And they object to it here not on the ground which the language of the note would seem to imply, namely, that the Chinese Government has not the same right that other nations have “in raising loans or increasing taxes,” but on the ground that, in doing so, it has agreed, in the matter of foreign goods, to collect prescribed duties and to abstain from all others.

Again, as to this matter of lekin, objected to alike by foreign and Chinese merchants, it is said “that the government regards it only as a temporary expedient.” What may have been or what may now be the intentions of the Chinese Government in this respect we need not discuss. It may, however, be in place to remark that this system of taxation, known as lekin, has been in operation now for many years, and, although the “troublous times” said to have made it a necessity, have long since ceased, the remedial measure has in no respect been laid aside. On the contrary, lekin is more of an institution now than it has been at any time before; and so strongly has it become intrenched in official greed, so closely is it watched, and so carefully is it guarded that the prospect of its being “only a temporary expedient” appears unhopeful. However, so far it is only purely a Chinese matter, a war betwixt the people and their rulers, and we may stand aside and let them fight it out. This should and would have been our attitude had the Chinese Government permitted it. But its action in undertaking to lekin foreign goods as well as native has necessarily drawn us into the conflict. But in this conflict we are not allies, we stand simply in self-defense, and our war is not against lekin, but against lekin applied to us.

The Chinese Government undertakes to show the unreasonableness of foreigners in complaining of its action in this respect. “Independentpowers,” it says, “must be guided by national necessities in fixing their taxation. We maintain,” it adds, “that all such matters should be left to be determined by China herself, and that the foreigner has no more right to interfere with or object to them than China would have to interfere with or criticise the action of a foreign government in raising loans or increasing taxes.”

In reply to these remarks one can hardly help an expression of surprise, that the Chinese Government should seem not to see that in the comparison here made, it calls things the same that are much unlike. If China has no right to criticise a foreign government for increasing its taxation on her goods, it is because that government has, not agreed with China to abstain from doing so. On the other hand, if foreign governments complain of China for increasing her taxation on their goods, it is on the ground that she has agreed with them not to do it. And if the question be raised why foreign nations should ask of China what China does not ask of them, the answer is easy. In the former case there is a need, in the latter there is none. Let us look a little at the two cases.

In the United States, there are no lekin burdens, and no transit duty obstructions. When Chinese or other merchants land their goods at our ports and clear them of the customs duty, they are at liberty to take them to any place they like. No restriction is laid upon them or their goods. In like manner they may go to any part of the country and purchase goods. And when purchased they can take them to the ports and ship them without any government tax or official surveillance. Here, then, in the matter of trade, there is nothing to ask for. Every needed protection and every possible facility are afforded without asking. The state of things is very different in China. Here our merchants are under many restraints. If they go into the country they must go covered with passports. If they take goods with them their goods must be covered with transit certificates. These certificates must state precisely the kind and quantity of the goods, and the place to which they are destined. Then if the goods should stop short of the place specified, or go beyond it, or if any of them should be sold by the way, they are all to be confiscated. To begin with, there is the trouble of procuring transit certificates, and the expense of transit dues, which are supposed to exempt the goods from lekin charges, but which, as we shall yet see, only suspend them while in transit. Then en route both certificates and goods must be submitted for examination at all the barriers (lekin stations) passed. In this way time is lost, expenses are increased, misunderstandings arise, goods are seized, and litigations ensue. The same difficulties burden and obstruct our outward trade. Now, considering how reluctantly China opened to us her trade, and how many burdensome restrictions she has been inclined to force upon it, can it be very difficult to see how much need we had, in our negotiations relating to it, to ask of her what she had no need to ask of us, a prescribed method of taxation?

Having expressed surprise at the disposition of foreigners to complain of lekin charges, the circular note proceeds to add: “If foreign merchants desire to escape the lekin, they can escape it; all they have to do is to supply themselves with transit certificates when taking foreign goods into the interior or bringing native produce out of the interior.” This remark, had it not been differently explained in another part of the paper, would lead us to suppose that goods having paid the prescribed duty and become covered by transit certificates, would thereafter be exempt from lekin charges. But we have been told in paragraph 4, that the exemption lasts only while the goods are passing to their place of destination; that having “arrived there, the certificate becomes waste paper and the goods thereafter differ in no respect from ordinary uncertificated goods.” Now, with this explanation of the language, we are at a loss to know what could have been its object here. It must have been known to the Chinese Government that the complaint of foreigners in the matter of lekin, is not against lekin as levied on their goods during transit, but against lekin as levied on their goods at all. How then, on the Chinese theory, could foreign merchants, by taking out transit certificates, escape lekin? Were the Chinese Government asked to answer this question, it could of course only repeat what we so often hear from its provincial and local officials, that the interest of the foreign merchant in his goods ceases on their arrival at their destination, and that whatever treatment they receive after passing into native hands, is a matter of no concern to him. It is difficult to understand how men of insight can seriously maintain a hypothesis like this. But on the supposition that they can, one is disposed to ask them one or two other questions. And first, suppose the Chinese Government or its provincial authorities were for some reason of their own to undertake to destroy all foreign goods so soon as they pass into native hands, would this be a matter of concern to the foreign merchant or one to be complained of as a breach of treaty stipulations? In this case; no doubt, the answer would: be “Yes, for this would be equivalent to the prohibition of foreign trade, which of course the treaties would not permit.” Well, now, suppose the procedure is not to destroy the goods but to tax them so as to produce the same result, how would the matter stand then? The reply would be, “In the same way, of course, for the destruction of trade is not permitted.” It is admitted, then, that the foreign merchant has an interest in his goods, after passing into native hands, to the end that his trade may not be destroyed. Has he not the same interest in them to the end that his trade may not be injured? The foreign merchant knows, audit would seem that everybody must know, that whatever taxes are laid upon his goods are taxes upon his trade. Moreover, it must be known that when these taxes reach a certain limit his trade becomes unproductive, and that when this limit is passed his trade becomes impossible. The process of taxing goods may be as destructive to trade as the process of burning them, and it makes little difference to the merchant which process is used when the result is the same.

But to pass from principles to facts, what taxes are actually levied on foreign goods? First, of course, there is the import duty. Then, if the goods are sent into the interior, there is the transit duty. And then in all cases there is lekin. If goods are sold at the port, they must pay lekin at the port; if they are sent into the interior, they must, in addition to the transit duty, pay lekin in the interior. Whenever the goods are sold, be it at the port or in the interior, the lekin is rigidly exacted. The treaties presume that the foreign merchant importing goods and clearing them from the customs can take them to his go down and sell them, without their being subjected to further charges, to any one who will buy them. But, under present lekin regulalations, no native will buy them, no native would dare buy them, till they have paid the lekin charges and cleared from the lekin office, for if they should be found off the foreign merchant’s premises and in the possession of natives without lekin receipts, they would be seized and confiscated. Who procures these receipts; and who pays for them? They are procured by the seller or the buyer as may be arranged, by the parties themselves. But in either case it is the owner of the goods who is taxed; To illustrate, let us suppose a foreign merchant imports a lot of goods worth, in the absence of lekin, $10,000; but when he comes to sell them he finds them burdened with lekin claims amounting, we will suppose, to 5 percent., or $500. The buyer says to the merchant, “I will take your goods at $10,000, you paying the lekin, or at $9,500, if I pay it.” The sale is effected on these conditions, it being impossible to effect it on any other. The same thing happens if the merchant takes or sends his goods into the interior; they must pay lekin, and lekin is a tax on his trade. The statement, therefore, that “if foreign merchants desire to escape the lekin, they can escape it, all they have to do is to supply themselves with transit certificates,” is misleading. There is really but one way to escape it, and that is to give up business.

7. The question of jurisdiction, i. e., extraterritoriality, is taken up in this section. The treaties, it is said, exempt foreigners from the jurisdiction of the Chinese authorities and place them under that of their own. “But,” it is added, “foreigners claim much more than this; they interpret this extraterritorial privilege as meaning not only that Chinese officials are not to control them, but that they may disregard and violate Chinese regulations with impunity.” This charge is doubtless inconsiderate. No such claim could have been made by intelligent and respectable foreigners; for amongst them there is no principle better understood or more firmly held than that one is bound to respect and observe the laws of the country, both of which he may be a citizen and in which he may be a sojourner. If there has been any expression on this subject that could have given to the Chinese Government occasion for the complaint here made, it must have had reference not to what are commonly called the laws of the country, but to some national or local usages which afford no benefit to society and so have upon it no claim for observance. And this would seem to be indicated by the example used for illustration—the act of passing through a prohibited passage. An act of this kind might be wrong, but not necessarily so. The right or wrong could be determined only on knowing the circumstances. If, on knocking at a man’s gate, we were told that entrance was prohibited on the ground that the proprietor was absent or ill, or engaged, we should at once respect the prohibition as one of reason and obligation. But if, in passing along the highway, we were stopped in front of an image, a statue, or a temple, and asked to dismount from our horse or to descend from our chair, as it was forbidden to pass these objects except on foot, this would be a prohibition the reason for which many foreigners would not see, and one which it is quite possible they might hesitate to observe.

Again, in entering an official residence, a question might be raised as to the gate or passage by which the entrance should be made. Now, on the one hand, it is clear that the officer in charge of the residence has the right to control its gates and passages, and, if the foreigner enters, he must enter by the way that is open to him. But, on the other hand, the foreigner has rights as well as the officer, and if it should appear to him that the way which he is asked to enter indicates a want of that courtesy which a host should show to his visitor, he may reasonably decline to enter it; and the harm, if any should follow, will lie at the door of him who is really at fault. In this and in all such like cases both parties have rights, and neither is to trample upon those of the other.

With this disavowal of the charge that foreigners claim “that they may disregard and violate Chinese regulations with impunity,” it may be only fair now to admit that there may have been instances, and possibly not a few, where Chinese regulations have been disregarded and where Chinese rights have been trampled upon by foreigners. But these are wrongs to be regretted. No right is or has been claimed to commit them. On the contrary, when committed, if brought to public notice they have been condemned, and if brought into foreign courts they have probably been punished. And if at any time they have been committed with impunity, it must have been owing to circumstances other than a wish or a willingness on the part of foreign governments or their officials to withhold redress.

The interpretation of the treaties here given on the matter discussed, that their meaning is, “not that a foreigner is at liberty to break Chinese laws, but that, if he offends, he shall be punished by his own national officials,” will no doubt be accepted as correct, if the understanding be that these officials are to be the judges both of the offense committed and of the punishment to be awarded. And that such is the understanding seems probable from the remark, “If they commit an offense, their own authorities are to punish them, according to their own national laws.” There would seem then to be little or no ground for misunderstandings on this matter. On the one hand, the Chinese Government maintains that foreigners, while residing in its country, are required to obey its laws; and the obligation to do so foreigners readily admit, understanding of course, by laws, the regulations needful to secure the peace and welfare of society. On the other hand, foreigners maintain that they are answerable for all their real or supposed offenses only to their own officials; and this is readily admitted by the Chinese Government. What is there, then, to contend about? There is really nothing, unless it be supposed that something will be called laws on the one side which will not be regarded as such on the other. This may or may not happen, but, if it does, the Chinese Government must not overlook the fact that, in assenting to this extraterritorial arrangement, it has left the decision of these questions in the hands of the defendant’s judge. If a foreigner offends, or is supposed to offend, against Chinese laws, he can be complained of to his consul: and it will be for his consul to ascertain what, if any, law he has violated, and what, if any, punishment he should suffer. But it is presumed that it would seldom, if ever, happen that the Chinese Government would be inclined to complain of foreigners for acts other than those forbidden and punishable by foreign laws as well as their own.

The matter taken up in the latter part of this section is one of great importance; “Seeing that China has agreed that judicial powers shall be exercised by foreign consuls within Chinese territory, foreign governments should on their side take care that none but good and reliable men are appointed to these posts.” The matter here brought forward is not only important, but in place; and the position taken in regard to it is entirely correct. Indeed, it is a matter of wonder that the position of any foreign governments in reference to it should have been such as to have fairly subjected them to the reproof and the instruction here administered. The practice of making merchants consuls is objectionable, even in countries where they have no judicial functions, but to make them such in countries like this is so obviously unsuitable and so obviously wrong that no government should ever have done it, or even thought of doing it. It may be hoped that when attention is sufficiently drawn to this objectionable practice it will cease. If it should not, the Chinese Government would do well to refuse exequaturs to such consuls.

But the Chinese Government has reason to object not only to merchant consuls but to all consuls who are incompetent to perform their duties. So its remark is well put, that “Foreign governments should on their side take care that none but good and reliable men are appointed to these posts.” It is much to be hoped that this remark will not only meet the eyes but sink deeply into the hearts of those whose duty it is to appoint consuls for this country. The Chinese Government of course cannot be an examining board, to put these officers on trial when they arrive and apply for their exequaturs; but as governments that send them expect them to be received and treated with respect, so both reason and justice would demand that they should send those worthy of such treatment.

8. This section discusses the meaning of the most-favored-nation clause of the treaties. I see nothing unfair in the views here expressed.

9. Our attention is here called to the “missionary question,” and the attitude of the Chinese Government towards it, so far as it is stated here, seems to be in accordance with the treaties. It “has by treaty assented to missionaries coming to teach their doctrines in China, and has also guaranteed protection to them and to their converts.” “But,” it is added, “among the missionaries are some who, exalting the importance of their office, arrogate to themselves an official status, and interfere so far as to transact business that ought properly to be dealt with by the Chinese local authorities; while among their converts are some who look upon their being Christians as protecting them from the consequences of breaking the laws of their own country, and refuse to observe the rules which are binding on their neighbors. This state of things China cannot tolerate or submit to. Chinese subjects, whether Christians or not, to be counted good subjects, must render an exact obedience to the laws of China; if any offend against those laws they must, one and all, Christians and non-Christians alike, submit to be dealt with by their own native authorities, and the foreign missionary cannot be permitted to usurp the right of shielding them from the consequences of their act.” The right here claimed by the Chinese Government, that of governing its own subjects, “Christians and non-Christians alike,” must certainly be admitted, and one can hardly suppose that it has ever been disputed, either by foreign governments or by foreign officials. Why, then, the very strong declaration of this right which we find in the words here quoted? We should be utterly at a loss to know but for the accompanying statement that some missionaries have arrogated to themselves an official status and assumed authority belonging to the local magistrates.

This is a grave charge, and, before accepting it, one has a right to be put in possession of the facts upon which it is based. As for myself, without denying its truth, I must yet say that a somewhat extended acquaintance, both with missionaries and their operations, has furnished me with no facts that would serve to corroborate it. The statement may have special reference, I suppose it has to the Catholic missionaries. But even in regard to them I think it should not pass unchallenged, or be accepted without proof. Quite likely in the interior, where there are no consular officers, these missionaries may in some cases have undertaken to afford protection to their converts against persecution, or against wrongs to which their religion or their connection with foreigners would be likely to subject them. And quite likely in their endeavors to do this, they may have committed some improprieties. More likely it has oftener happened that where no real improprieties have been committed they have been charged with them by unfriendly officials. And in all cases, it must be borne in mind, reports of their conduct, whatever it may have been, would reach the Peking government only through tortuous and distorting channels. The charge, then, is by no means proved because it is stated. It is open also to other objections. In the first place, there was no need of its being made. If wrongs of the kind stated had been committed, the proper course to take was to trace out the wrong doers and report them to their respective authorities, and not to indulge in general complaint against a class.

Again, it is put forward as the occasion for insisting upon a certain right, as if that right had really been or was likely to be endangered. Again, it is a charge of wrong-unaccompanied with proof. And again, it is so made that it subjects to suspicion the innocent with the guilty.

China, of course, must rule her own people, as well those who become Christians as those who do not. No one can deprive her of this natural right; and no one, it is presumed, has or ever has had any intention or wish to do it. On the other hand, China has pledged herself to permit the people to become Christians, if they choose to do so, and to protect them from all persecutions on that account. The Peking government, it is presumed, has acted, and has the intention to act, in good faith in this matter. If, now, it would instruct and require all its officials throughout the provinces to do the same, it would take a long step in the way of preventing those complications known as “missionary difficulties,” and of facilitating the settlement of those that might arise. If a general and hearty disposition were manifested on the part of these officials to afford to missionaries and to Christian converts the toleration which the treaties guarantee, and which both reason and justice demand, there would probably be very little heard about missionary interference; for there can hardly be a doubt that in most if not in all cases where missionaries come in collision with native authorities, it is owing to acts of intolerance on their part. In ordinary disputes, although neither party is likely to be faultless, the aggressor is always held to be the greater sinner. Applying this rule here, one can hardly see with what propriety the Chinese Government comes forward as a complainant in this matter.

If missionaries have interfered in matters belonging to local magistrates, it is pretty certain that there have been occasions for their interference. Let the Chinese Government put an end to these occasions, then it will be in a position to complain should; there be any cause for it.

10. I see no occasion for remarks upon this section, as it is only a recapitulation of the matters previously discussed.

In closing these comments I have, in the first place, to apologize for their great length; and in the second place to express my regret that, through want of time and strength, I am unable to condense and put them in a better shape.

I have the honor to be, &c.,

EDWARD C. LORD.

No. 154. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 154.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, February 23, 1880. (Received April 26.) No. 605.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith a copy of the response made by the foreign office to my letter in regard to the case of Chung How. My colleagues, the English, German and French representatives have received notes of the same tenor.

While the fate of Chung How is not yet known, it seems to me that the determination reached by the government to reopen negotiations with Russia, and the knowledge that extreme measures in his case would cause general dissatisfaction and effect prejudicially their further representations at St. Petersburg, indicate that the moment of gravest danger for him has passed.

I have, &c.,

GEOBGE F. SEWABD.

[Inclosure in No. 605.]

Prince Kung to Mr. Seward.

February 16, 1880.

(Informal.)

I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s note touching certain matters which concern the governments of China and Russia, and the punishment to be dealt to His Excellency Chung How, in which your excellency manifests much interest and anxiety.

The ministers and I beg leave to express our highest appreciation for the faithful friendship and regard for the good or ill fortune of China so fully manifested by your excellency.

The matters mentioned above have been, by an imperial decree, referred to a council, and although a line of action has not yet been determined upon, yet it is certainly to be hoped that the present circumstances may be considered, and reasonable and satisfactory course pursued.

In this the ministers and myself are of one opinion with your excellency.

Being aware that these matters have received the serious attention of your excellency, I beg leave in the first instance to make reply as above.

Cards and compliments.

No. 155. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 155.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, February 23, 1880. (Received April 26.) No. 606.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith three imperial decrees in regard to the Kuldja treaty and Chung How’s case, which were issued on the 15th instant.

You will notice that the Chinese have rejected, practically, the Kuldja treaty, and have directed their minister at London to proceed to St. Petersburg to reopen negotiations.

You will see, also, that Chung How is now said to have exceeded his instructions, and that he is turned over to an extraordinary council for trial.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 606.]

an imperial decree.

Their Imperial Highnesses the Empress Dowager and the Empress Mother decree:

It was ordered in an earlier edict that the report of the council composed, of the grand secretariat, the six boards, the nine lower courts, and the Hanlin academy upon the treaty concluded by Chung How, together with the memorials sent to us by the various officials of higher and lower grades, be referred to the princes of the first and second ranks, the ministers of the imperial presence, the privy council of states, the prince and ministers of the foreign office, and the presidents of the six boards, the nine lower courts, and the censorate, for careful and proper consideration, and that Prince Chung take part in their deliberations.

We have now received their memorial in report, and a memorial of the same tenor from Prince Chung, both of which state that, in the treaty and regulations concluded by Chung How, while abroad as our envoy by our command, there are points in which he violated our instructions and exceeded his powers. Reports have also been received from officials of high and low grade in the capital and provinces, all declaring that the treaty contains much that is objectionable and impracticable.

Let the Marquis Tseng, &c., &c., &c., go at once to Russia and deal with the matters which demand attention.

It is to be hoped that, in view of the serious importance of international affairs, a satisfactory solution may be reached by him.

Respect this.

February 15, 1880.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 606.]

an imperial decree.

Some time since, because Chung How, without awaiting the imperial will, ventured of his own motion to return to this capital, we decree that he be deprived of rank, arrested, examined, and handed over to the board of punishments, to be dealt with for his offense.

The board of punishments now memorialize us, in reply, that the circumstances in the case of the degraded officer named are of the gravest nature, and they pray that the princes and high ministers of state be directed to take cognizance of the business.

At the same moment we received the memorial report conjointly sealed of the high, council of princes and ministers of state to the effect that Chung How, who went abroad by the imperial will to manage certain matters, violated his instructions and exceeded his powers in the most serious manner.

Let the princes of the first and second grades, the ministers of the imperial presence, the privy council of state, the prince and ministers of the foreign office, the grand secretariat, and the presidents of the six boards and the censorate, consider what punishment shall be inflicted upon the degraded official in question, and report to us.

Respect this.

Peking, February 15, 1880.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 606.]

an imperial decree.

Their Imperial Highnesses the Empress Dowager and the Empress Mother, decree:

In the deliberations of the high council as to the punishment to be inflicted upon. Chung How, let Prince Chung take part, and report to us.

Respect this.

February 15, 1880.

No. 156. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 156.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, March 1, 1880. (Received April 26.) No. 614.]

Sir: The foreign press of China has published of late various statements indicating that the emigration of Chinese to the Sandwich Islands is being promoted by the Chinese Steam navigation Company, with the approval and concurrence of this government. Statements have also been made that emigration to Cuba will soon begin again.

In view of these statements I have thought it well to inquire at the foreign office whether the information is correct. Mr. Holcombe waited upon the ministers, accordingly, yesterday, and was told promptly that the government had not assented to the reopening of emigration to Cuba, and has done nothing looking to the promotion of emigration to “the Sandwich Isands.

It is quite certain that this government will prevent the emigration of its people to Cuba until all outstanding questions with the Spanish Government are disposed of, and that it will disfavor, in a more or less positive way, emigration to the Sandwich Islands.

All statements that it is moving to encourage emigration in any direction may be considered unfounded.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 157. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 157.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, March 8, 1880. (Received April 26.) No. 618.]

Sir: I have the honor to advise you that the grand council, to whom the charges against Chung How, the late ambassador to Russia, were referred, have reported, and that a decree has been published approving the finding of the council and sentencing the ambassador to be decapitated after the next autumn assizes, say, in December next. I inclose a copy of the decree. The report of the council has not been made public.

* * * * * * *

Prince Kung and his associates are credited with having defended the unfortunate minister. It would appear rather to be an act of blind fanaticism committed by the reactionary party, and made possible by what they have considered substantial grounds for dissatisfaction with the treaty in question.

* * * * * * *

Under these circumstances the extreme action taken toward Chung How is believed by many to be a blow aimed at Prince Rung and the more moderate persons who stand with him, and to indicate the decided ascendency in the palace councils of a reactionary spirit.

* * * * * * *

That this spirit, which is so strong in China, should exhibit itself in a more positive manner at a moment when, for the first time in more than thirty years, the empire is at peace within and without her borders, is not singular. But there is this matter for satisfaction in the situation. There is undoubtedly, at the moment, a moderate party in the state which is not destitute of influence. Prince Kung may be considered to belong to it, the viceroy at Tientsin is a distinguished member of it, and other officers of standing and experience could be named in the same connection—as, for instance, Ting-Jih-Chang, lately governor at Foochow, Kwoh-Sung Tao, lately minister to England, and Tseng Chi Che, now minister to England and Russia. Beyond these must be ranged upon the same side all persons who are interested in commerce and those who, by reason of their studies and observations at home or abroad, have come to favor measures for the development of the material interests of their country. Whatever incidents of an unfavorable sort may occur, therefore, it is possible to believe that other incidents will occur which will be of an encouraging sort.

In point of fact, simultaneously with the appearance of the decree condemning Chung How to death, a memorial bearing the imperial approval has also appeared, by which high officers of state throughout the Empire are called upon to search out persons of ability, especially those who are acquainted with foreign languages and sciences, and to send up their names for employment. This also may be dictated by the reactionary spirit, but it implies a certain advance of opinion regarding foreigners which will tell hardly less strongly in their favor than if it had been dictated by a friendly spirit.

I see nothing in the situation which requires any change in our attitude. Our policy has been to deal justly with this government, and to do what we can to hold it to the observance of treaty stipulations. I think we could have no better policy. It is possible, in view of it, to feel sympathy for China without descending into the region of sentimentality. It is possible, also, to regard the unfavorable incidents of intercourse with moderation, instead of taking from them lessons of inconsiderate condemnation. There are persons, if not parties, in the East who go upon the one side or the other, and who are eager to impress their views upon the world at large. I cannot sympathize perfectly with either, but while asserting that a policy of justice must be tempered by charity in the one direction, and by vigilance in the other, I am prepared to expect many surprises, some of which will be gratifying, and others, perhaps, disappointing.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 618.]

an imperial decree.

Their imperial highnesses the Empress Dowager and the Empress Mother decree:

Prince Li* and others having memorialized us in a report of the grand council as to the punishment to he inflicted upon the degraded Chief Censor Chung How, proposing that, in accordance with law, he be beheaded after the assizes, let it be as proposed.

The proper board will take notice.

Respect this.

March 4, 1880.

* The fifth prince, who takes precedence by virtue of his seniority.—S.

No. 158. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 158.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, March 16, 1880. (Received May 11.) No. 623.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith a dispatch (No. 135, of 27th ultimo) which I have received from Mr. De Lano, reporting that the customs authorities at his port have notified by circular to the merchants there their intention to levy a tonnage due, or in lieu thereof, at the merchants’ option, a registration fee upon boats used in the lighterage of cargo in process of shipment or landing.

My colleague, Sir Thomas Wade, has received the same information from his consul at Foochow, and also from his consul at Chefoo.

My colleagues generally, before whom the subject has been placed by Sir T. Wade and myself, agree with us in the opinion that all such levies would be in contravention of the treaties. They agree with us also in the opinion that customs regulations generally should be promulgated by the direction of the central government and in a formal manner. One, at least, goes so far as to declare that he cannot consider any rules binding upon his countrymen which have not been communicated to him by the government and received his assent; while another declares that the practice of the Chinese in putting out at the ports rules affecting trade, regardless of a right construction of the treaties and with a view to hampering trade, is becoming inveterate, and should be met by opposition at the ports, and by claims for indemnity vigorously urged, in case they are put into operation notwithstanding such opposition.

My own view is that we cannot deny the right of the Chinese Government to make rules and regulations affecting all matters within their sovereignty, but that we may scrutinize all rules and regulations made or proposed by them which affect our nationals, and object to them if we find them in contravention of treaty stipulations, or suggest their withdrawal or modification if they appear burdensome and unnecessary.

Holding to this view, I think also that we may, without offense, endeavor to lead the Chinese to communicate to us in advance all such rules and regulations, in order that we may examine them and state in advance of their publication whether we should be likely to complain of them as in contravention of our treaties.

The question of principle involved is an important one, and has occasioned a great deal of discussion and unpleasant feeling both in this Empire and in Japan. I cannot doubt, however, the correctness of my own view. I have acted upon it ever since my arrival in this capital, and shall continue to do so unless instructed to the contrary by yourself.

In the present instance, after much controversy, it was agreed by the diplomatic body, as a preliminary step, to send an interpreter to the foreign office to inquire whether instructions sustaining the action of the Foochow and Chefoo customs had received the approval of the foreign office, and, if so, to ask about the occasion for the adoption of the system. The Chinese secretary of the British legation was deputed for the purpose, and has reported that the ministers appeared to know nothing of the matter, but said that they would inquire into it and communicate the result to the foreign legations.

* * * * * * *

In view of the facts set forth above, I am addressing a circular letter to the several consuls, a copy of which I inclose.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 623.]

Mr. De Lano to Mr. Seward.

Foochow, February 27, 1880. No. 153.]

Sir: I have the honor to call your attention to a customs notification issued at this port on the 21st instant, by the commissioner of customs, a copy of which I inclose herewith, calling upon the owners of cargo-boats to apply for the re-registration and renumbering of such boats, and intimating that from the 1st proximo they will be required to pay tonnage dues, “in accordance with the rate fixed by treaty,” or a registration fee of $20 upon each boat.

All foreign-owned lighters (or so-called cargo boats) employed in carrying cargo between ship and shore, within the limits of the harbor at this port, are numbered by the customs, and each number is, I am informed, entered in a register kept for that purpose at the custom-house, but no registration fee or tonnage dues have hitherto been demanded. The foreign owners of such boats object now to complying with the demand.

Upon being addressed officially by the American firms owning such boats, making known their objection, I addressed a letter to the commissioner of customs to the effect that it did not seem clear to me that the customs authorities were authorized to exact such dues, and inasmuch as I was not advised that the new regulation had been made with the assent or concurrence of the ministers at Peking. I suggested that the matter be kept in abeyance until the resident consuls should be instructed by their superiors.

In the commissioner’s reply, received yesterday, he says, “My instructions from the office of the inspectorate at Peking are very clear in regard to the claim for tonnage dues, and the authority given this office to offer the alternative of a registration fee. Still, as the date from which the enforcement of the terms of the treaty in regard to this particular class of dues is not mentioned, I am prepared to meet your views to the extent of altering the date on which the terms of the notification should be complied with from the 1st to the 31st proximo.”

I am clearly of the opinion that the exaction of tonnage dues or registration fees for lighters is not authorized by the treaties; also, that if this sudden departure from a long-established precedent had been arranged with the sanction of the representation of the treaty powers at Peking the consuls at the various ports would have been advised of the fact.

It is understood that the claim is based upon Article XXXI of the British treaty of Tientsin, and that the right to offer the alternative of a registration fee is authorized by Article XXII of the French treaty.

The phraseology of Article VII of the American treaty of 1845 is much the same, but it appears clearly to me that, in each case, the contest points to a class of boats—lorchas, papieos, &c.—which have been employed in carrying passengers, luggage, letters, and dutiable goods between certain ports, say between Canton and Hong-Kong, or Canton and Macao, or between any of the treaty ports, but not to lighters plying between ship and shore.

Force is given to this view by the following literal translation from the Chinese text of Article XXXI of the British treaty of Tientsin:

“English merchants at the several ports, themselves using covered boats for the conveyance of passengers, luggage, letters, provisions, and duty-free articles, need not pay ‘tonnage dues.’ If they bring with them or carry with them dutiable articles, then once every four months they shall pay tonnage dues, one mace per ton.”

The fact that for so many years lighters have been in use at the various ports and tonnage dues have not been demanded, points to the conclusion that it has never hitherto been understood that payment of them was provided for by treaties.

Whether it is contemplated by the customs authorities that a registration fee (if the boat-owner should choose the alternative of paying such a fee) shall be collected annually or only once, the “notification” does not state; but it is fair to conclude that if they are authorized to cancel the certificates or licenses now in effect, they cart do the same next year and claim the “fee” on each occasion. In such case it would entail on one American firm at this port an annual tax of about seven hundred dollars.

It is not likely that I shall be in possession of your response to this on the date fixed for the enforcement of the terms of the notification; in which case, if payments must be made, I shall advise that they be made under protest pending the receipt of advices from you.

I have the honor, &c.,

M. M. DE LANO.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 623.]

customs notification.

Owners of cargo-boats should apply to the custom-house to have their cargo-boats inspected, reregistered, renumbered, and fresh certificates issued to them at as early a date as possible before the 15th March.

2. Those reported by the consul will have the option of paying a registration fee of $20 or tonnage dues (in accordance with the rate fixed by treaty).

3. No boat unprovided with a certificate from the customs will be allowed to carry cargo; nor will any such certificate be issued to any but boats of a bona-fide cargo type, which shall have passed the customs inspection and satisfied its requirements.

4. Cargo-boats which, from neglect on the part of the owner, shall not have been registered as above by the 1st of March will be struck off the customs register, and disqualified from carrying cargo.

C. HANNEN,
Commissioner of Customs.
Custom-House, February 21, 1880.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 623.]

circular to consuls.

Peking, March 15, 1880.

Sir: Information has reached this legation that the customs authorities at certain ports have notified their intention to levy a tonnage due, or, in lieu thereof, a registration fee, upon cargo-boats used for the shipment and discharge of cargo.

Inquiry having been made at the Tsung-li Yamên in regard to the matter, the ministers stated that they were not aware that any new rules had been put out.

In case an effort to collect such levies shall be advanced at your port, you will inform the authorities of this dispatch, and state that you expect them to take no further action under these circumstances.

I am, sir, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 159. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 159.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, March 27, 1880. (Received June 8.) No. 643.]

Sir: Recurring to my dispatch of the 16th instant, No. 623, in regard to a proposed tax on cargo boats (lighters), I have now the honor to hand to you a letter which has been addressed to the British minister, as doyen of, the diplomatic body, by the Tsung-li Yamên, in reference to the inquiries made by the Chinese secretary of his legation. You will see that the ministers, while upholding their right to tax cargo-boats, are willing to waive such taxation, and indicate that rules for the registration of such craft are needed in order to prevent smuggling, and will be framed and communicated to the foreign representatives.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWABD.

[Inclosure in No. 643.]

tonnage dues on cargo-boats.

March 20, 1880. [Semi-official.]

The Ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên to the British Minister:

Referring to the British minister’s note of the 14th instant, regarding the imposition of tonnage dues on cargo-boats by the customs, and also to the conversation had with Mr. Brenan, the writers now beg to inform the British minister that they called upon the inspector-general of customs for a report on the subject. This report is to the effect that at the ports, there are, in addition to sea-going vessels, two kinds of craft; one being the boats used for the conveyance of passengers, letters, and baggage; and with reference to these, Article XXXI of the Tientsin treaty states that “no tonnage dues shall be payable on boats employed by British subjects in the conveyance of articles not subject to duty at any of the open ports “; and, in accordance with the stipulations of this article, no tonnage dues have been levied on boats of this description.

The other kind is the Craft used within the port in attendance on sea-going vessels for the purpose of transshipping cargo. With regard to these, Article XXXI of the British treaty states “that all cargo-boats conveying merchandise subject to duty shall pay tonnage dues once in four months, at the rate of one mace per registered ton.” These craft, them if the property of a national of a treaty power, are under the treaty liable to tonnage dues; and if they are the property of Chinese subjects or of the nationals of non-treaty powers, it is open to the Chinese Government to make special regulations applicable to them, or to direct the customs to treat them in the same way as other craft.

Regulations, moreover, which have been agreed upon between the superintendent of customs and the consuls at the several ports, are in existence, under which cargo-boats require to be numbered and registered at the custom-house, and to have their number painted on the hull.

It having come to the knowledge of the commissioner of customs at Foochow last year that the cargo-boats plying between Nantai and Pagoda Island were engaged in smuggling, the inspector-general again issued circular instructions to the commissioners at the several ports, but these instructions did not authorize them to frame new regulations on the subject; it merely directed them to publish anew the rules in force at the respective ports respecting the registration of cargo-boats. The fact is, so the inspector-general continues, that the tonnage dues on cargo-boats, although sanctioned by treaty, are of such slight importance to the revenue that they may as well not be enforced.

But the registration of cargo-boats is a measure which it is imperative on the customs to enforce, and this must now be insisted upon. When proper regulations on the subject have been proposed, their adoption can be discussed conjointly; meanwhile this acknowledgment is sent to the British minister’s note.

Kwang Hsu, 6th year, 2d moon, 10th day (March 20, 1880.)

No. 160. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 160.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, April 1, 1880. (Received June 8.) No. 650.]

Sir: Recurring to my several dispatches regarding the administration of justice in mixed cases in China, and more particularly to my letters regarding the mixed court, so called, at Shanghai, I have now the honor to hand to you a note which I have received from Prince Kung, in rejoinder to the note addressed to him by the several foreign representatives in November last.

You will remember that the Prince wrote to us soon after our letter was sent to him, saying that he had referred it to the southern superintendent of trade (Viceroy at Nanking) for a report. The note now in ‘ hand shows that the Viceroy in turn referred the business to the intendant of circuit (Taotai) at Shanghai and that the Taotai’s views form the substance of the answer now made to us.

In commenting upon the answer I shall follow the divisions of the subject made in the Viceroy’s report.

1st. “The Chinese deputy (magistrate of the mixed court) should have an official seal.”

Our proposal, more clearly stated, was that the magistrate should be granted an Imperial commission and seal. It was based upon the simple proposition that it is usual in China to commission all officers from Peking, and that officers deputed by the provincial authorities could not be supposed to command the same respect as those appointed in due course of administration.

I see nothing in the response which invalidates our view. The report sets forth simply that “the deputy appointed to the mixed court has a letter of authority from the Viceroy and Governor, which is the same as a commission, and he is provided with a seal which is the same as a seal from the board (at Peking). In the administration of public business his powers differ in no respect from those of a regularly commissioned officer.”

Perhaps in one sense they do not. The letter of authority granted by the Viceroy and Governor may empower the deputy to do all that he could do if he bore a commission from Peking.

But that is not all of the case. The question is really whether the magistrate feels himself secure in his position, and able as a consequence to act with that degree of confidence, independence, and vigor which is desirable, and this question has been answered in the negative by the several consular officers who have acted as associates at the mixed courts, and who have had the opportunity to observe the temper and disposition of the magistrate. It is not reasonable to suppose that as a mere delegate he would be independent, and the facts sustain the theory.

It will be noticed, that the report gives no reason why an Imperial commission may not be bestowed on the magistrate.

There is no good reason existing, as I believe. I gave this part of the subject some study several years ago at Shanghai, and I was assured by competent Chinese that such action is not unknown to the Chinese system.

The effect of the proposed action would be to erect the foreign settlement at Shanghai into a separate judicial district. It would not otherwise disturb the existing order of things. This certainly is not a serious matter to bring about under any governmental system, much less under one which is so elastic as that of China. It has been done practically by the authority already granted to the mixed court. It is only the perfect confirmation of this action which is now called for. The mixed court magistrate himself is authority for the statement that his position as a deputed officer of the provincial authorities places him at a great disadvantage, not only before the people, who understand that his tenure is not that of an officer duly commissioned, but also before his colleagues, the other officers of the district, who are duly commissioned.

In point of fact the matter is too clear to need argument. The court, as at present constituted, bears the semblance of a temporary expedient outside of the regular administration. It can only be given the dignity which it should have as the court of first resort in all the affairs at Shanghai, in which foreigners are the complaining parties and natives are the defendants, by being recognized from the capital as a part of the Imperial system. Its dignity and efficiency are both at stake, and the great commercial interests of the port cannot be satisfied as matters stand.

While the provincial officers have reported against the proposals of the legations in this respect, and while the Tsung-li-Yamên has indorsed their conclusion, the question cannot be allowed thus to drop. In point of fact, the foreign representatives were very modest in what they proposed, and might be blamed rather for not going far enough than for asking too much, or what was unnecessary.

The response made to our representations will illustrate this. It shows, for instance, that all the labor attending the administration of justice at Shanghai, in cases where Chinese who are resident within the foreign settlements are concerned as defendants, whether as against natives or foreigners, must be heard and determined, in the first instance, in the so called mixed court. Now the population thus affected is not less than 160,000. It is evident that a magistrate who presides over such a district, and who has to hear all matters of disputes arising within it, from a police case up to an action in admiralty, will have more on his hands than he can be expected, in reason, to attend to. It is only because the judicial procedure of China is summary to a degree, that the present magistrate, who has presided over the court since its foundation seventeen years ago, has been able to keep abreast of his work. Such a mass of duties would give employment to several magistrates, each having his own department, and each sustained by a competent staff of clerks and bailiffs. I mention this one point only, at the moment, to illustrate my remark that the foreign ministers were modest in their representations. What I have to say further in comment upon the dispatch of the Yamên will afford other evidence to the same effect.

What is said further by the Yamên under this head is more or less perfectly true. It is a fact that, under the statutes of the empire, the writs of a given magistrate run only within his own district, and that it is difficult to punish a literary graduate for any delinquency until he has been stripped of the rank which belongs to him in virtue of his literary success.

No complaint whatever can be made upon the first point, but, clearly, the system which puts a large part of the population in a position of independence from prosecution in the courts is faulty in the extreme. It is this fact, imperfectly understood, which has given rise in great measure to the dissatisfaction of foreigners with the court, which they cannot respect when they find that it is not respected by the Chinese themselves. It is an evil, however, which we cannot do away with. An improved status of the magistrate would enable him to exercise more perfectly those arts of persuasion which must be resorted to in such cases, and this is about all which can be predicated in the matter.

It is not accurate, however, to put down all the failures of the court to enforce process against debtors to these two causes, and to the fact that many debtors are poor and must be allowed time. Our processes of attachments of property pending the trial of a cause and of the execution of judgments by seizure and sale do not seem to find analogies in the Chinese system, or, if they exist, do not appear to be used so freely as we use them. Their courts proceed, apparently, upon the plan of attaching the person of the debtor whenever practicable, and of forcing him in this way to find the means to discharge his debts, and it favors compositions, and the extension of time upon the security given by friends and clients to a degree not familiar with us. The consequence is a large measure of uncertainty in the processes of the law, and many opportunities on the part of magistrates to aid debtors in the avoidance of their obligations, the motives being those of a friendly, prudential, or other sort.

2d. That the pay and allowances of the magistrate are inadequate.

The complaint made was not so much that the magistrate is not adequately paid, as that the allowances for the support of the court generally are inadequate, and that the prison is too small and otherwise defective.

It would not be appropriate to raise any question with the Yamên in regard to the pay of the magistrate and of his subordinates. It was not intended by the foreign representatives to do this when they addressed themselves to the Tsung-li Yamên on the general subject of the allowances made to the court. It is by no means likely that the magistrate is adequately paid, for Chinese officials seldom, if ever, are. Neither is it likely that his clerks and bailiffs are paid enough to make them independent of the fees which are not the less demanded by such officers because they are not recognized as a part of the judicial system. It would be difficult, however, if not impossible to dwell upon this part of the subject without giving offense, and the facts are not so familiar to us that we could give evidence in support of our representations.

As respects the prison, the report from Shanghai acknowledges the merit of the complaints which we made. It says: “The accommodations for persons under confinement are not large, and crowding cannot be avoided.” This is exactly what we called attention to. The merit of our representation will be very evident to a person familiar with Chinese prisons and Chinese ideas of prisons in face of this frank acknowledgment. There is no such thing in China as a prison which has been erected with a reasonable regard to the comfort and health of the prisoners. Speaking of those at Canton, Dr. Williams says:

“The prisons are arranged somewhat on the plan of a large stable, having an open central court, occupying nearly one-fourth of the area, and small cribs or stalls, covered by a roof, extending nearly around it, so contrived that each company of prisoners shall be separated from each other night and day, though more by night than by day. The prisoners cook for themselves in the court, and are secured by manacles and gives, and a chain joining the hands to the neck; one hand is liberated in the daytime, in order to allow them to take care of themselves. Heinous criminals are more heavily ironed, and those in the prison attached to the judge’s office are worse treated than the others. Each criminal should receive a daily ration of two pounds of rice and about two cents to buy fuel, but the jailer starves them on half this allowance if they are unable to pay him; clothing is also scantily provided, but those who have money can procure almost every convenience. Each cribful of criminals is under the control of a turnkey, who, with a few old offenders, spends much time in torturing newly arrived persons to force money from them, by which many lose their lives, and all suffer far more than they do from the officers of government. Well may the people call their prisons hells, and say, when a man falls into the clutches of the jailer or police, ‘The flesh is under the cleaver.’”

I should not be willing to say that all Chinese prisons would answer to the foregoing description, and certainly I should not say that the prison of the mixed court at Shanghai has exhibited the abominations which are set forth in it. But there is no denying the fact that Chinese prisons at large are such as to reflect the greatest discredit upon this government, and that, bad as they are represented to be in the given instance, reports of Chinese officers could be quoted which would make out a worse case, even.

An effort, which deserves commendation, has been made by the mixed-court magistrate, some of the particulars of which are recited in the report before us. The drafting off of prisoners, who are, in fact, mainly vagrants and beggars, and the relief so afforded to the mixed-court prison, are steps worthy of commendation. But this does not alter the fact that the cells of the given prison are mere pens in which the prisoners cannot be adequately cared for or segregated.

Part 3 of the Chinese report deals in continuation with the condition of the prison and of the efforts made to relieve it, as above stated.

Part 4. Grave criminal cases should be tried by the district magistrate, conjointly with, the mixed-court magistrate,

Our proposal was not that this procedure should be decided upon, but rather that all references to the district magistrate should be done away with, the mixed-court magistrate sitting in all criminal cases as the magistrate of first instance. We did propose, however, that if this could not be granted, the district magistrate, in all cases when his interference might be necessary, should go to the mixed court and sit upon the trial with the mixed-court magistrate, and in accordance with the rules for the mixed court.

The Shanghai report seems to advise that the alternative request so presented should be complied with. It will be as well, in my opinion, to raise no further question upon the subject and to proceed with the Yamên to frame a rule which will be clear in terms, setting forth the conclusion which has been reached.

It will be noticed that the Shanghai report, after dealing with the matters submitted by the foreign representatives, proceeds to propose additional rules, which are in effect as follows: 1st. That in cases in which foreigners are defendants and natives prosecutors, the trial shall be held at the mixed court, the foreign officer going there to conduct the trial, and the native magistrate sitting to watch proceedings; more serious cases to be heard by the chief judicial officer of the defendant, and those of less importance by an assistant.

2d. In mixed cases no attorneys shall be employed.

It is to be remarked regarding these proposals that the first is inadmissible and the second of doubtful propriety. So long as the rule holds that all cases are to be heard in the defendant’s court, it is right and appropriate that the trials should be held at the office of the defendant’s magistrate, Chinese cases at the native Yamên, and foreign cases at the foreign consulate or court. Any other rule would be inconvenient and in derogation of the dignity of the given court. It is not likely that any stress will be laid by the foreign office on this proposal, but it is likely that they will be urgent in regard to the admission of lawyers. No lawyers are admitted into ordinary Chinese courts, and it can be understood that the presence of foreign attorneys in mixed cases, particularly those against Chinese, which are heard by the native magistrate, must be considered out of order by him and irksome to a marked degree. Yet it would be difficult to deny to our people the privilege of presenting their matters by men skilled in law, in the examination of witnesses, and the presentation of cases to courts. The position of a foreign assessor is certainly a more dignified one when he sits with the native judge, not as an active assistant of his national who is before the court, but to consult with the magistrate as to the pertinency of the evidence offered, its admissibility, &c. The prospect of a case being made fit to go before appellate judges must be considered far greater, too, when lawyers are employed. Yet undoubtedly the presence of lawyers under the circumstances must be subject to regulation. It may be that they should be allowed only to prepare pleadings, to suggest questions to the magistrates in the examination of witnesses, and to prepare arguments, the pleadings and arguments to be submited in English and Chinese.

Altogether I do not consider the response of the foreign office to our representation as very unsatisfactory. It assents to, or, rather, asserts broadly, the doctrine that all cases are to be tried in the defendant’s court, an officer of the complainant sitting in the court to watch proceedings. I attach great importance to this principle and to its recognition by the Chinese. It grants one of the proposals of the foreign representatives, that asking that references to the district magistrate shall be done away with, and that the district magistrate shall sit in the mixed court when his intervention becomes necessary. It deals with all our representations in a courteous way, and leaves the whole subject open for further discussion. I do not at all despair of our being able to work out the main purpose which we set before us last fall, under these circumstances.

I presume that a meeting of the diplomatic body will be held at an early day to take the letter into consideration.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure in No. 650.]

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication:

In the matter of the mixed court at Shanghai, I had some time since the honor to receive a dispatch from the diplomatic body setting forth certain considerations affecting the administration of justice by it, to which my attention was invited. Thereupon I transmitted a copy of the changes proposed to the southern superintendent of foreign trade, asking him to take cognizance of the circumstances of the case and make report, and I so informed the diplomatic body at that time.

I am now in receipt of a response from the southern superintendent of trade, covering a report submitted by the customs intendant at Shanghai, upon the four changes proposed in the mixed-court rules and an additional article suggested by him.

This report appears to the prince and ministers to be fair, and meets with their approval. I have the honor to append a copy of it hereto, for which I beg your excellency’s consideration and the favor of a reply.

Peking, March 22, 1880.

His Excellency George F. Seward, &c., &c., &c.

[Appendix to the foregoing.]

1. The Chinese deputy should have a commissson and an official seal.

The deputy appointed to the mixed court has a letter of authority from the viceroy and governor, which is the same as a commission, and he is provided with a seal for his use, which is the same as a seal from the board.

In the administration of public business his powers differ in no respect from those of a regularly commissioned officer.

In the matter of arrests and summoning witnesses, if the parties be within the foreign concessions, he has the power to secure their attendance. If the parties are without the concessions, he can only secure them by representation to the official of the locality in which the parties reside, and with the concurrence of that official.

In regard to debts due by Chinese to foreign firms, the debtors in a majority of the cases are poor, and although the court may have given judgment against them, still time must be given them in which to secure funds and make payment. In the case of a literary graduate, who is a debtor, it would be difficult to punish him for failure to make payment until he has been stripped of his degree. The only course is to give him time and press him for payment.

The foregoing difficulties all result from the statutes of the empire and the rights of the parties, and not from lack of authority. The mixed court rules now in force are just and satisfactory. There would seem to be no way to add to the authority of the Chinese deputy.

It is submitted that the rules be continued in force as heretofore, and that there need be no further consideration given to the subject.

2. That the pay and allowances of the court are inadequate, and that additional sums should be granted.

In 1858, after the establishment of the mixed court, all of the expenditures were provided for by the intendant of circuit, who paid the sums needed upon a detailed statement made each month by the deputy of the amount actually required. The allowances made to the deputy are more in amount than the salary of a regularly commissioned officer, and fully adequate to his needs. There would appear to be no occasion for increasing them.

In regard to accommodations for the persons under sentence to the cangue, and the lack of a prison, the amount of food required for each person is reported. As to the court fees, Western powers have statutes which require these to be paid by the plaintiff or defendant, as the case may be. China has no such rule, and hence such fees cannot be received. Further, at the establishment of the mixed court in 1868, this subject of the expenses was discussed and a procedure adopted. It would not be convenient to increase them at this time.

3. The lack of proper room in the prison, and the consequent sickness and suffering among prisoners.

The accommodations for persons under confinement are not large, and crowding cannot be avoided. The deputy has been repeatedly directed to take more care and pains, and in case a prisoner was ill to report the facts and take steps for his cure. But in the case of persons in the cangue, as their crime is below that for which the penalty of banishment is awarded, they can, in cases of illness, by giving security for their return, be released and themselves seek medical treatment.

In the cases of persons in confinement because of disputes as to the ownership of goods, the intervention of middlemen is invited to arrange matters, and hence much going and coming of friends cannot be avoided. The deputy being well aware of this fact, does not interfere simply with the desire to facilitate the settlement of cases by arbitration, and with the hope that they may be disposed of without delay. In a mixed population of Chinese and foreigners, as is found in the concessions, there are constantly Chinese who, oppressed by hunger, pick up articles belonging to others and make use of them to satisfy their appetite. When brought into court they must, of course, be cangued. But upon examination it appears that they are without means of support or homes, and, the prisons being full, some suffer as a result of overcrowding.

A means of relief ought to be devised, lest this class fall still lower and become criminals. It has been thought wise to erect a refuge for such persons. A spot at Hsin Cha has been selected and buildings capable of holding 100 persons. They will be furnished with food daily, clothing and medicine for those who may be ill. It is to be called the “Yang-ho Tang.”

The regulations for its management have been fixed, and it is to be hoped that it will be a permanent establishment. The expenses connected with it are to be met by subscription. Thus the suffering and sickness occasioned by overcrowding the prison of the mixed court will hereafter not occur.

4. Graver cases tried by the district magistrate conjointly with the deputy of the mixed court.

Inasmuch as the mixed court has no prison and no power to inflict the heavier class of punishments in offenses of a sort calling for banishment, or severer penalties, the laws of China require that the cases of this class should be tried before the district magistrate. In grave cases in which foreign matters are concerned, the district magistrate may sit as co-judge at the mixed court, but after the trial at the mixed court the Chinese prisoner must still be taken by the district magistrate to his Yamên and there be dealt with. It is suggested that to the phrase “the local officer may not judge,” of section 4 of the mixed court rules, the following be added:

“In cases where the criminal and witnesses are all at the mixed court, the district magistrate shall sit there as co-judge to hear and decide the case, and shall take the Chinese criminal to his own Yamên to be dealt with.”

proposed additional rule.

In suits brought by Chinese subjects against foreigners, the plaintiff may bring his complaint to the mixed court, and the British judge or the consul-general of the defendant shall be requested by the deputy to summon the defendant and to depute the assistant judge, or the vice-consul and an interpreter, to appear at the mixed court and try the case, the Chinese deputy being present to watch the proceedings.

In cases of a serious character, which cannot be decided by the deputed foreign official, the British judge, or the consul-general of the defendant, shall be requested to preside at the trial.

In suits brought by foreigners against Chinese subjects, the plaintiff may bring his complaint to his consul-general, requesting him to notify the deputy of the mixed court to summon the defendant, and requesting him to depute a vice-consul or an interpreter to investigate the case with the deputy at the mixed court. Thereafter the Cheefoo convention rules shall be followed, the Chinese subject being tried by the Chinese deputy, the foreign official watching the proceedings. In order to avoid court and other expenses, out of consideration to the parties and in the interest of justice and fairness, neither party shall employ Western attorneys.

No. 161. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 161.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, April 7, 1880. (Received June 8.) No. 654.]

Sir: Recurring to my dispatch No. 643, in regard to the proposed tax on cargo-boats, I have now the honor to inform you that the subject was considered at a meeting of the diplomatic body held yesterday, and that the several officers present agreed to write to the Yamên, in terms of the note which I inclose herewith.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 654.]

Mr. Seward to Prince Kung.

Peking, April 8, 1880. Unofficial.]

Your Imperial Highness:

Sir Thomas Wade has communicated to me the note which their excellencies the ministers of the Yamên did him the honor to address to him upon the subject of imposing tonnage dues upon cargo-boats.

In the note referred to, their excellencies appear to imply that boats attending on sea-going foreign vessels for the purpose of landing and shipping cargo within the port are liable to tonnage dues.

The writer has consulted his colleagues, and it has been agreed between them that they should at once inform the Yamên of their inability to admit the claim of the Chinese Government to levy tonnage dues upon boats engaged simply in shipping, landing, or transshipping cargo.

The writer and his colleagues will, of course, be most willing to consider any rule regarding the registration of cargo-boats that the ministers of the Yamên may communicate to them.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 162. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 162.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, April 19, 1880. (Received June 8.) No. 661.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch, No. 650, of the 1st instant, transmitting to you the response of the Tsung-li Yamên to the joint note of the foreign representatives of November last, in regard to the mixed court at Shanghai, and to my No. 653, stating that I had been requested by my colleagues to place the subject before the Yamên personally, with a view to secure the further and more favorable consideration of the matter, I have now the honor to inform you that I visited the Yamên on the 14th instant, and to hand to you a memorandum of my remarks to the ministers, and a minute prepared by me for my colleagues, stating the views put forward by the Chinese, and the general results of the interview.

You will see from these papers that, in speaking with the ministers, I traversed the whole matter with much care, and that they promised to write again to the provincial authorities, forwarding my memorandum and asking for a further report. It is by no means impossible that this report will be more favorable than the one which has been sent to us.

My colleagues have approved my course at the Yamên, but they have not yet agreed upon instructions to be sent to the consuls at Shanghai. I am not sure that they will not think it better to leave the matter to be passed upon in view of my memorandum, as there are some divergencies of views and interests among the consuls at Shanghai, and it may be desirable to avoid rousing their susceptibilities unnecessarily. I allude more particularly to the fact that the French have a kind of special mixed court at Shanghai, and that different opinions prevail there as to whether foreign lawyers should be admitted into the mixed court, and whether the rule that the court of the defendant shall try given cases as the right one.

I shall refrain from writing to Mr. Denny on the subject until the matter has been considered further.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 661.]

Memorandum of Mr. Seward’s statements to the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên, regarding the mixed court at Shanghai, on Wednesday, April 14, 1880.

The ministers present were Shen, Tung, Wang, and Chung-lin.

Mr. Seward said that he appeared on behalf of the diplomatic body to speak about the mixed court at Shanghai, and thanked the ministers for having accorded him an early interview.

He then proceeded to say that the subject is one in which the diplomatic body take much interest. Shanghai is the center of foreign commercial interests in China, and as many mixed cases arise there, perhaps, as at all the open ports taken together.

It is of much concern that the procedure in mixed cases at Shanghai, under the circumstances, shall be such as to give confidence to suitors.

The establishment of the mixed court by the local authorities, acting in consultation with the consuls, in 1834, was a step of importance. The imperial approval of the action thus taken in 1833, and the provision of a code of rules for the court, was in particular the occasion of much satisfaction to foreign merchants and officials.

Since its establishment the court has served an excellent purpose. Very many eases, civil and criminal, some of which have been of great importance, have been heard and determined in it, and while the action of the court has not always commanded approval, its decisions have been in the main such as to give no reasonable ground for complaint. While this is the fact, there have been repeated complaints that the court has not always acted with independence and vigor, and in particular that it has frequently failed to enforce its judgments.

This part of the matter, as the ministers will remember, was the subject of consideration between the English Minister and Li-Chung-Tang, at Chefoo, in 1876, and it was mentioned in the agreement concluded between them, as follows:

“The Chinese Government has established at Shanghai a mixed court, but the officer presiding over it, either from lack of power or dread of unpopularity, constantly fails to enforce his judgments. It is now understood that the Tsung-li Yamên will write a circular letter to the legations, inviting the foreign representatives at once to consider with the Tsung-li Yamên thei measures needed for the more effective administration of justice at the ports open to trade.”

The matter has seemed to the foreign representatives for a long time one which demands attention, but owing to the pressure of other matters and to other reasons no communication on the subject was made to the Yamên until the month of November last.

The statement then submitted to the Yamên was very carefully considered by the whole number of representatives in China, eleven in all. It was put forward with perfect consideration for the sovereign rights of the Chinese Government in the most courteous manner and with the one object and end, to remove, so far as possible, all grounds of complaint and distrust.

The judicial question is, undoubtedly, one of some embarrassment. The ministers are well aware that in western countries all persons who reside upon the soil are subject in all matters, civil and criminal, to the jurisdiction of the national sovereignty. But in China the laws and the procedure of the courts and the punishments inflicted by them are radically different from those of western countries. As a consequence, western states and China have agreed together that foreigners shall he subject to the jurisdiction of their own authorities, and dealt with in accordance with their own laws.

In cases where the subjects of foreign powers are the only ones concerned, no occasions for disputes have arisen. China has not found it necessary to take any notice of the procedure in such cases, just as foreign powers do not find it necessary or desirable to interfere where the parties concerned are Chinese only.

But there are many difficulties arising when the parties complaining are foreigners and the defendants are Chinese, or vice versa. How are such cases to be heard? To whom is the complaint to be presented? Who is to preside at the trial! What rules of procedure shall be followed? What law shall be enforced, that of the complainant or that of the defendant? If it is not the law of the plaintiff or of the defendant which is to be applied, and decisions are to follow broad lines of justice and equity, whose ideas of justice and equity shall they be? For there may be as great differences in these as in the laws.

So far as the mixed court at Shanghai is concerned, these questions have been resolved by the rules which were decided upon in 1868. Under these, all cases brought forward at Shanghai by foreigners against natives are to be heard and determined, in the first instance, by the magistrate of the court, according to the laws of China. A foreign officer sits with him, however, to assist him, and to watch the proceedings on behalf of the complainant.

The foreign representatives do not raise any questions as to the merit of this procedure. If necessary, they will discuss that part of the subject hereafter. They desire at the moment to do no more than they did in their letter of November, to point out that the mixed court is defective in some respects, and to call your attention to those defects in detail.

The first point to which they allude in that letter was the status of the magistrate as a Chinese official. They desired to say, in this connection, that, in their opinion, he should hold an imperial seal and be recognized as a member of the regular administration of your government. To this you have rejoined that he bears a letter of authority from the viceroy and governor, and that his powers are the same as if he were appointed from the capital.

The foreign representatives do not dispute the proposition that his powers may be the same under provincial commission as they would be under an imperial commission. But, in their opinion, the independence and vigor of the magistrate are seriously affected by the fact that he is a deputed officer only.

This opinion has been expressed by all of the gentlemen who have acted as assistants in the court, and it appears reasonable on its face.

This magistrate, as a deputed officer, may be removed by the provincial authorities; if he bore an imperial commission, he could be displaced only with the concurrence of the government here. The provincial authorities know this, the magistrate knows it, the people know it, and foreigners know it. The fact cannot fail to affect the magistrate in a variety of ways, adversely to his independence and influence.

It may be pointed out that the scope of the authority of the magistrate is very broad. He is the sole judge of first instance in all cases, grave criminal cases only excepted, in which natives who live in the foreign settlements at Shanghai are concerned. This embraces a population of about 160,000 souls. He is the sole judge of first instance, with the same exception, in all cases in which foreigners residing at the port are complainants, and Chinese, whether in or out of the port, are defendants. He is the officer who sits in the foreign courts to watch cases in which natives are complainants and foreigners are defendants.

The foreign representatives do not think that they are going far under such circumstances when they ask that the magistrate of the mixed court be recognized as a regular officer of the government. They think this is due to a man who discharges functions of such gravity, and also to the great foreign interests which are affected. The foreign representatives would remind you in this connection that the consuls general and consuls at Shanghai feel obliged often to sit with The magistrate upon the trial of more important cases, and that his position as a deputy renders it irksome for them to meet him in this way.

Consuls rank with intendants of circuit, and it might reasonably be asked that an officer of the grade of intendant should preside over the court.

The foreign representatives, while urging these views upon you in this way, have no desire to interfere with the course of your administration. The magistrate is now charged with judicial duties only. They do not ask or wish that he be given general administrative duties. They understand that an officer may have judicial authority only for a certain district. The given magistrate has already judicial authority for the district in question. It is the more perfect confirmation of this authority for which they ask. It is conceded that the administrative measures needed to carry out this proposal cannot be difficult.

Having gone so far, the government can certainly go a step further and make the court in fact, what it is in name, an imperial establishment.

It is to be said in this connection that the authority of the court over natives is primarily and mainly over those resident in the foreign settlements. The peace of those settlements is a matter of concern to foreigners, and in this way they came to have an interest in the administration of justice in a class of cases which seem at first to concern your people only.

What precedes has relation to the status of the magistrate. The next matter to speak of is the authority of district magistrate.

Under the rules of the court graver criminal cases are to be heard by the district magistrate. The foreign representatives have thought that it would be better to have all criminal cases to be heard and determined by the mixed court magistrate, but they are prepared to agree to the assent accorded to their alternative proposal that the district magistrate shall sit at the mixed court when foreigners are concerned and his intervention is necessary, and that in such case his procedure should be conformed to the mixed court rules. It will be necessary for the Yamên to frame a rule accordingly and to communicate it to the legations.

The pay and allowances of the magistrate.

The complaint made was not so much that the magistrate is not adequately paid as that the allowances for the support of the court generally, and for the prison in particular, are inadequate, and that the prison is too small and otherwise defective.

The foreign representatives do not wish to dwell upon the question of the amount paid to the magistrate and his subordinates. That is properly a matter of your concern, and of which you are the best judges. In their opinion officers who are well paid are more to be relied upon than those who are underpaid, and distrust of those who are underpaid is only a natural thing. They believe, also, that you know that the given magistrate is a very hard worked man, and that his duties are particularly responsible. The hearing of the ordinary police cases which come before him would tax his strength, but beyond these he has to hear and decide many very difficult international cases. Individual cases of this kind sometimes occupy the court for a half dozen sittings. A foreigner engaged in such duties would expect to be paid very liberally indeed, and it appears only just to compensate the magistrate in proportion to the responsibility of the duties which devolve upon him.

In this connection the foreign representatives pointed out to you in particular the defects of the prison, and in its management.

They are aware that different ideas of the conduct of penal institutions prevail in western countries from those entertained in China. In our idea a prison should be a perfectly secure place. In certain cases the absolute segregation of prisoners is thought to be necessary. Beyond this, in our view, a prison should be as well ventilated and as perfect in a sanitary point of view as any establishment of the sort can be. We find, however, that the prison of the mixed court is such that the inmates cannot be perfectly segregated, and that they are very liable to fall ill. The response of the viceroy, shows that it is small and overcrowded. An effort has been made to relieve the pressure upon it, but we doubt whether the result will be sufficient. The foreign representatives think that this part of the subject should not be lost sight of. It may be mentioned in this connection that the court-room of the Yamên is small, and that all matters, police and other, are heard in it. It is very warm in summer and very cold in winter. As foreign merchants and officials have to attend at the court, and as they suffer much more from extremes of heat and cold than your people, it becomes desirable to consider whether a larger room cannot be provided, with thick walls and suitable arrangements for ventilation and heating.

The viceroy has proposed two additional rules: 1st. That all mixed cases shall be heard at the mixed court, the foreign magistrate going there when the defendant is a foreigner.

2d. That no lawyers shall be admitted in mixed cases.

The foreign representatives are not prepared to assent to the first proposal. Foreign officers go to the mixed court when Chinese are defendants, and there appears to be no reason why native officers should not go to the foreign courts when foreigners are defendants. It is dignified and right that the magistrate who presides, shall sit in his own Yamên. It is more convenient, too, for the records of the case must be kept there, the secretaries and bailiffs are all there, and prisoners are confined there. This has been the rule in the past, and no good reason is alleged for making a change.

It is very true that it must often be inconvenient for the mixed court magistrate to attend at the foreign court. His duties are such as to occupy his time very fully. In this connection it may be said that the magistrate is engaged for a quarter or less time every day at his Yamên in the hearing of police cases, and that many inconveniences are met with when civil or criminal cases of importance are on trial in his court, or in the foreign court, and his presence is needed. There should be at least two persons connected with the Yamên having official authority. In such case the less important and the more important cases could be moving forward simultaneously.

Regarding the admission of attorneys, it should he said that foreigners of most countries have found their assistance in their own courts indispensable, and that it would be a hardship for them to frego the benefit of their assistance when matters are to be presented to native courts. Your own people would find it a hardship to be denied their services in our courts, and the result would be unfavorable to them, for no one is competent to present cases in our courts who is not acquainted with our laws and procedure. But it is not to be denied that lawyers in all courts must be subject to regulation and control. It may be well to ask the Taotai at Shanghai, and the magistrate of the mixed court to frame rules regulating the admission and conduct of lawyers, acting for this purpose in concert with the consuls, and to submit such rules for approval.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 661.]

Mr. Seward to Sir Thomas Wade.

Peking, April 15, 1880.

His Excellency Sir Thomas Wade, K. C. B., &c., &c., &c.:

Dear Sir and Colleague: I have already informed you, as doyen of the diplomatic body, that I visited the Tsung-li Yamên yesterday, and spoke with the ministers present, as requested by you and my colleagues generally, in regard to the mixed court at Shanghai, and I have now to hand to you a minute of my remarks.

I was asked by the ministers to submit such a minute to them, in order that they may send it to the viceroy at Nanking, with instructions to report further upon the business.

If you, and my colleagues generally, approve the minute I shall have it translated and transmitted to the Yamên at once.

I have already informed you that while the ministers listened to me with attention, and in an appreciative way, our proposal that an imperial commission and seal be “conferred upon the magistrate of the mixed court was stoutly contested by them. The burden of their argument was that it would be difficult to give him a seal, and that it would be useless. When I pressed them to state the difficulties, they appeared to me to be unable to define with any exactness the conditions which render the action desired by us embarrassing to them. They answered in a very general way, that the district within which the magistrate would act is very small, and that it would occasion jealousy on the part of the regular officers of the locality. Their most significant statement, perhaps, was, that an officer of the regular administration might feel bound to manage the court in more perfect accordance with Chinese ideas than the present deputy does.

As the proposal to give the magistrate imperial authority was the most important one of those which we put forward, and as I learned nothing from the ministers which seemed to me to invalidate the merit of our position, I urged our proposal as strongly as I could with courtesy, and took all possible pains to indicate that we are not disposed to accept a refusal as a satisfactory conclusion of the business.

At the last the ministers said that we must be aware of the evils which result frequently from attempting to change established institutions, and I was led to infer that the opposition exhibited had its origin in this conservative feeling rather than in any practical administrative difficulties. I shall not be surprised if the viceroy yields the point graciously.

You will see from the minute the line of argument which I followed in dealing with the question of the seal and otherwise. You will see in particular that I presented to them some details in regard to the court which were not advanced in our letter of November last.

I may say in this connection that I found it desirable to do this in order to impress upon the ministers more perfectly the merit of the proposals which we did advance in our letter of November, and because the matters so advanced do seem worthy of attention. It appeared tome moreover that a further reference to Nanking would be unavoidable, and that it would be a mistake to lose the opportunity to impress upon the ministers the fact that their court falls far short of being perfect in its constitution and details, and the chance of securing all possible ameliorations. The ministers were especially appreciative of the statements which I made in this connection, and said that if the magistrate is really overworked, or his duties are such that he cannot deal promptly with all matters demanding his attention, and if the Yamên is defective, measures may be taken to give him assistance and to provide suitable accommodations.

I am sure that reforms in these directions would be much appreciated at Shanghai, where the difficulties of bringing cases to trial, owing to the pressure of work upon the magistrate, and the almost intolerable discomfort of the court-room in the winter more especially, have been evils to which attention would have been called in urgent manner, if it had not appeared hopeless to attempt to improve matters.

It was not possible to avoid speaking of the proposals sent up by the viceroy. The ministers fully assented to my statement of the reasons why our officers cannot go to the mixed court to hear cases in which our nationals are concerned as defendants, and they did not seem to have any settled opinion in regard to the admission of lawyers in mixed cases. My statement that it would be a hardship to their countrymen to refuse to allow them to employ lawyers when they appear as complainants in our courts seemed to be appreciated by them, and to give force to my intimation that to some at least of the foreign representatives, their refusal to allow our countrymen to use lawyers would seem almost a denial of justice. I thought I could not do better in this connection than to say that the subject is one which may be so regulated as to do away with undoubted evils, and to preserve the benefits to be derived from the assistance of a class whose efforts have done much to make the course of law in western countries better than it is in China, and that the best plan is to ask the authorities at Shanghai to consult with the consuls on the subject. This will leave each representative here free to give his officer at Shanghai such instructions as may seem appropriate. I hope, however, that we may be able to agree upon an instruction to be sent to them which will avert the consequences of what appears to me a movement of a retrograde sort.

While thanking you and my colleagues for allowing me the opportunity to urge upon the Yamên the importance of the matters in hand, I beg leave to express the hope that my course will meet with general approval.

I am handing to each of my colleagues a copy of this note and of the minute prepared for the Yamên, and I beg leave to ask you to consider whether a meeting of our body should be held in order to consider the minute, and whether any instructions, and if so, what instructions, should be sent to our officers at Shanghai.

I am, my dear colleague, yours very truly.

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

No. 163. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 163.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, April 23, 1880. (Received June 14.) No. 665.]

Sir: I had the honor to advise you on the 7th instant, by my dispatch No. 655, that the foreign representatives at this capital had again addressed themselves to the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên, calling their attention to the request made in November last, and repeated afterwards, that an opportunity be accorded them to place their views regarding trade grievances before the ministers in conference.

This note was answered by the ministers of the Yamên on the 15th instant. They expressed willingness to meet us, whenever convenient for us.

To this we responded at once, naming Tuesday, the 20th instant, for such conference.

On Monday the 19th, in anticipation of the conference, the several foreign representatives met and decided upon the line of action to be followed at the meeting. Our determination was, substantially, that we should refer, first, to the statement of grievances presented in November, as indicating the matters of which we have a right, as we believe, to complain, and then to say that the dispatch sent to us by the ministers, answering in detail our letter of November, contained three proposals: 1st. That we should abandon our extraterritorial privileges, and that all persons within the jurisdiction of China should become equally responsible to the government, and equally entitled to share in its benefits.

2d. That we should stand by the existing treaties, each side exercising its best efforts to give effect to their stipulations.

3d. That the convention concluded between Sir Rutherford Alcock, Her Majesty’s minister, and the Yamên, in 1869, but not ratified by his government, should be adopted by all the powers.

Referring to these proposals, we should answer that the first one cannot be taken into consideration, for reasons which it would be unnecessary to recite; that the second one would be more or less perfectly satisfactory to us, but that there is reason to fear that foreign governments and the Government of China would differ in the future, as they have in the past, regarding the meaning of some of the most important stipulations of the treaties; and that the third appears to offer a basis for discussion, inasmuch as the Alcock convention contains provisions which would prove beneficial, if adopted, to foreign interests and to those of China.

While adhering, then, to the reading of existing treaties, as indicated in the statement of grievances, the foreign representatives desired to propose conferences with the Yamên, intended, not so much to define the intent of existing stipulations, as to reach a basis for further stipulations which will be satisfactory to both sides.

This line was followed at our interview of Tuesday with the ministers of the Yamên, who responded that they are entirely willing to enter upon such conferences.

It was then arranged that discussions of given parts of the business in band should be left, in the first instance, to persons delegated by the diplomatic body, either chiefs of missions or secretaries, and to such members of the Yamên or secretaries, on the Chinese side, as may be named by the Yamên.

On the same day the several foreign representatives met in conference and agreed to refer the leading questions at issue with the Chinese to persons of their number, for the definition of the objects in view, and of remedies, as follows:

To Sir Thomas Wade, the reforms needed in order to place the import trade upon a more satisfactory basis.

To Mr. von Brandt, the reforms needed for the export trade.

To Mr. Seward, the reforms needed in the currency in order to regularize the collection of customs duties and dues.

The several representatives met again yesterday, Thursday, the 22d instant, in order to submit their reports.

My own was called for first and I read a memorandum which I shall transmit to you in a separate dispatch. The conclusions expressed in it were accepted by my colleagues, and I was requested to place the subject before the ministers of the Yamên, reserving one point to which I shall allude in my separate letter.

The report of Mr. von Brandt was then given, partly from manuscript and in part orally. His proposal was to take the Chinkiang rules of 1877 as a basis and to prepare an improved set of rules for the issue of transit passes outwards, and to put these on trial for a given period further negotiations with the Chinese to be delayed until experience has been gained of the practical working of the rules.

Sir Thomas Wade was not prepared with a written statement or with proposals, but submitted for consideration the question whether we find it more prudent and desirable to move toward our object, the prevention of the irregular and unlawful taxation of trade, by an attempt to throw safeguards around the execution of our treaties, or by proposing an entirely different system, substantially such, for instance, as that proposed in the British convention of 1869, and which met great favor at the general conferences of last year.

I have already informed you, in my dispatch No. 591, of the 10th of February, that, while very anxious to avoid action which will disturb existing treaty stipulations, the circumstances affecting the import trade are such that it appears desirable “to seek a common standing ground with the Chinese in such modifications of the treaties as will more or less perfectly satisfy both sides.” The same dispatch contained a statement of the measures which, in my opinion, should be instituted to this end, and which do not differ in principle from the plans proposed in the convention of 1869.

The propriety of pursuing this course was assented to at once by the several representatives, and Sir Thomas Wade was requested to reduce the proposal to writing for the more particular discussion of details.

I understand that the object of the several ministers is to carry discussions with the Yamên far enough to ascertain exactly what can be accomplished in the several directions named, and then to refer the whole matter to our respective governments with a request for instructions. This, at any rate, is my own proposal.

I respectfully ask your approval of the action reported in this dispatch.

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure in No. 665.]

Prince Kung to Mr. Seward.

Prince Kung, chief secretary of state for foreign affairs, herewith makes a communication in reply:

Upon the 9th instant I had the honor to receive a collective note from your excellencies the foreign representatives in the matter of commercial grievances, stating that upon the 3d of February last they addressed to me a note requesting that a day for a conference be named, but had received no response, &c., &c.

I have the honor to observe in response that the note of February 3, from your excellencies, was received, but inasmuch as this office had upon the 19th of January suggested three different propositions in the business, and asked them to indicate which they preferred, I supposed that an answer should be awaited before holding a conference.

Being now in receipt of your excellencies’ note, I beg that the foreign representatives will suggest the time for the conference.

Peking, April 15, 1880.

His Excellency George F. Seward, &c., &c., &c.

No. 164. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 164.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, April 24, 1880. (Received June 14.) No. 666.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 665, of the 22d instant, in which I informed you that the foreign representatives had agreed with the Tsung-li Yamên to proceed to the discussion of trading grievances, and that I had been requested by my colleagues to present to the ministers of the Yamên a statement of the reforms needed in the collection of customs dues and duties on foreign trade, having reference to the irregularities in the currency system of China, such statement to be based upon the facts and considerations set forth in a memorandum which I had prepared for their examination, I have now the honor to hand to you a copy of my memorandum.

The papers referred to therein as bearing upon the subject under consideration were transmitted to the department with my No. 413, of March 6, 1878, and Mr. Holcombe’s dispatch No. 11, of June 24, 1878.

You will remark upon an examination of the several papers named, that no gold or silver coins are issued by the Chinese government; that bullion, chiefly silver, is passed as money; that the scales by which bullion is weighed and the fineness of the silver vary in different parts of the empire, and even in the ports open to foreign trade; that there is a standard scale and a standard of purity known as the treasury tael; that the exact weight and fineness of this tael have not been determined by foreign processes; and that the customs authorities have setup an arbitrary scale which is somewhat more favorable to the customs than the treasury scale. You will remark, also, that the values of foreign coins relatively to the standard tael have not been, indeed could not have been, determined.

You will remark, further, that it is our opinion that the standard or treasury tael should be declared the standard for customs dues and duties; that its weight and fineness should be ascertained; that the weight and fineness of local taels should be ascertained; and the relative values of foreign coins declared.

I am of opinion that since the customs tael is somewhat more favorable to the customs than the treasury tael, and since payments to the customs have long been made by the customs tael standard it will not be easy to secure the adoption of the treasury tael standard. For this reason I suggested in my memorandum that a percentage to cover expenses for the examination of bullion, meltage, &c., should be allowed to the customs on all duties and dues collected in treasury taels. These expenses have heretofore been defrayed out of the premia on customs taels, the imperial and provincial authorities receiving from the customs treasury taels only, tael for tael, of the collections made in customs taels.

My colleagues are disposed not to yield this point to the Chinese, but I believe that it will be difficult, if not impossible, to carry our proposals unless we do so.

I shall report, of course, each step of my procedure in this business.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 666.]

memorandum.

Mr. Seward, the minister of the United States, having been requested by his colleagues in conference to prepare a statement of the reforms needed in the collection of customs duties and dues on foreign trade, having reference to irregularities in the currency system of China, submits the following: 1st. The subject has already been studied and certain, conclusions stated by Mr. von Brandt, the minister for Germany, and by Mr. Seward. The conclusions of Mr. von Brandt and the data upon which they are founded are contained in a printed paper prepared by the former in February, 1878, and entitled “Memorandum on the Chinese Currency.” The conclusions of Mr. Seward and the data upon which they are founded are contained in a printed paper prepared by him in February, 1878,* and entitled “Memorandum on the Currency of China.” Copies of these papers are appended hereto.

Examination of these will show that the results declared by each of the persons named are in substantial accord.

2d. The facts elicited by them are as follows: a. That the standard of value in China, and of the receipts and expenditures of the government, is the Kuping or treasury tael of silver.

b. That the weight of this tael and the fineness of the silver have not been determined accurately.

c. That customs duties and dues should be paid according to this standard.

d. That an arbitrary standard has been set up, called the Haikwan (customs) tael, and that duties are collected, nominally, upon this assumed basis.

e. That the weight and fineness of the Haikwan tael have not been determined accurately.

f. That customs duties and dues are collected, generally, in the local taels of the ports.

g. That the weight and fineness of such local taels, and their values relative to the Kuping and Haiknan taels have not been determined accurately.

h. That foreign coins are sometimes paid into the customs, and that the values of these, relatively, to the Kuping and Haikwan taels have not been determined accurately.

i. That the values of local taels and foreign coins, relatively to the Haikwan standard, are not constant even at the same port.

j. That at one port at least the relative value of local and Haikwan taels have been assessed differently at the foreign customs, respect being shown to the nationality of the merchant.

3d. It is evident from what has been thus stated that it is desirable to take steps intended to give uniform results in assessing the sums due for customs duties and dues on foreign trade, and in collecting such duties and dues. Mr. Seward suggests the following measures to this end, to effect which negotiations with the Chinese Government would be necessary. k. The Kuping tael should be declared the standard for customs collections.

l. The weight of the Kuping tael in grains, troy, and grammes should be ascertained and declared.

m. The fineness of silver of the Kuping standard should be ascertained and declared.

n. The values of local taels and the fineness of the silver of such taels should be ascertained and declared.

o. The values of foreign coins should be ascertained and declared.

p. The regularization of customs collections should apply to foreign trade at large, under the treaties, whether conducted by foreigners or natives.

Mr Seward suggests further: q. That, in order to make the foreign proposals less difficult for the Chinese Government, a percentage should be allowed upon all customs duties and dues collectable under the treaties, to cover the necessary expenses attending the examination, weighing, &c., of the moneys tendered in payment. Such percentage might be one-half of one per cent, upon collections, or even one per cent., and still leave the foreign merchant less to pay than at present under the Haikwan assumed standard. The sums received from the customs by the imperial and provincial governments would, in such case, not be less than at present, for it is believed that the native bankers who actually receive customs payments do not account for the premia on moneys received, but make their returns in Kuping taels, tael for tael, thus receiving the benefit of the irregularities of which foreigners complain.

Mr. Seward believes that the reforms indicated can be demanded of the government, under the treaties, and that they are so far reasonable and in the interest of good government that they may not meet with strenuous opposition anywhere, excepting on the part of those who derive advantage from existing irregularities.

Mr. Seward has not spoken of the establishment of a mint, for the reason that foreign representatives have no right to demand such a step; that they have already met with a rebuff in proposing it for the consideration of the government, and because the reforms now sought would go far to prepare the way for it.

Mr. Seward believes, however, that so many inconveniences and so much uncertainty attend the passing of bullion for purposes of money, and that Chinese methods of assaying, in particular, are so defective, that no opportunity should be lost to urge upon the government the fact that no currency system which they can devise will meet public wants so perfectly as that which provides for the coinage of the precious metals under governmental supervision.

Peking, April 22, 1880.

* See Foreign Relations, 1878, p. 133 et seq.

No. 165. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Seward. No. 165.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Seward.

Department of State,
Washington, May 1, 1880. No. 369.]

Sir: I have received and read with interest your Nos. 586 and 589 of the 6th and 9th of February.

The action taken by you, in conjunction with your colleagues, in addressing a communication to Prince Kung on the subject of the apprehended sacrifice of the life of Chung How, late imperial ambassador to Russia, is approved. It is hoped that the efforts of yourself and colleagues will serve to avert this threatened punishment. The expressions contained in your letter to Prince Kung are commended for their discreetness and dignity.

I am, &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 166. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 166.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, May 1, 1880. (Received June 14.) No. 673.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 665, in which I stated that Mr. von Brandt had been charged by the diplomatic body with the duty of preparing a scheme for the control of transit trade outwards, I have now the honor to hand you herewith a copy of his memorandum and of the transit-pass (outward) rules proposed by him and revised by the foreign representatives in conference.

Mr. von Brandt is to place this scheme before the Tsung-li Yamên on the part of the diplomatic body.

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

Inclosure 1 in No. 673.]

Mr. von Brandt’s memorandum.

transit trade outwards.

The Chinese Government has respectfully proposed measures to obviate the abuses which, according to their statements, were occurring in the transport of foreign-owned native produce from the interior to an open port for exportation.

These proposals not having been entertained by the treaty powers, the Chinese Government has of late proceeded to introduce restrictive measures altering the treaty stipulations, without seeking or obtaining the consent of the treaty powers, by refusing, in the first instance, to issue transit-passes for produce under the treaty regulations, and thereby attempting to force, and in some of the open ports forcing, the foreign merchant to submit to rules contrary to treaty and devoid of the approval of his own authorities.

Such rules were introduced at Chinkiang in 1877, and since then at Wunu, another set in 1878 at Pakhoi and Hoikow, and an attempt was made in 1879 to introduce the Chinkiang rules at Shanghai.

All these rules, taken as a whole, are highly objectionable, not only on account of the way in which they were put in force, ignoring the rights of the treaty powers, but especially because, not satisfied with remedying such abuses as the Chinese Government may perhaps rightly complain of, they are evidently aimed at removing the cognizance of and division in cases of fines and confiscations from the authorities in which they are vested by treaty and placing them under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Chinese authorities.

A comparison between the different sets of rules will further prove the existence, of a desire on the part of those who framed them of placing unnecessary restrictions on the transport of produce from the interior, even leaving the question of treaty rights aside.

rules in force at wuhu and chinkiang since 1877. rules in force at pakhoi and hoikow since 1878.

In both sets of rules the principal condition under which alone transit-passes are issued is the signing of a bond by the merchant, in which he declares his adherence to the regulations at Chinkiang; this bond is to be signed by the merchant alone, at Pakhoi, with or without securities, at the option of the customs authorities. At the same time a lien is to be given upon the produce.

Penalty for non-fulfillment of the clauses.

chinkiang. pakhoi.

Six times the export duty payable. Ten to twenty times the export duty payable.

Time within which the transit-pass is to be used.

chinkiang. pakhoi.

First draft, one year. Second draft, six months. Kiung Chow, three months. Pakhoi, six months.

Time within which produce purchased under transit-pass must reach the last barrier.

chinkiang. pakhoi.

Six months. Kiung Chow, three months. Pakhoi, six months.

Time within which produce has to be exported.

chinkiang. pakhoi.

Six months. Three months.

Time within which produce has to be exported when transshipped to another port.

chinkiang. pakhoi.

Twelve months. Not mentioned.

Payment to he made in case of non-exportation of produce damaged in port.

chinkiang. pakhoi.

Twice and a half the diminished export duty. Payment of duty and like leviable at the barrier stations it has passed.

Transit-passes available for.

chinkiang. pakhoi.

All produce. At Kiung Chow, for sugars only. At Pakhoi, for sugars and cassia only.

Enforcement of penalties.

chinkiang. pakhoi.

While payment is being enforced by the consul according to law, no new transit-passes to be issued, and all passes already taken to be canceled. So long as such penalties remain unpaid no new transit-passes to be issued, and all passes already taken to be canceled.

The last rule is especially significant. While in the rules issued in 1877 the consu is at least to be applied to to enforce the payment of the bond, he is quietly but completely set aside in those of 1878; the Chinese authorities trusting to their refusal of granting new transit-passes to enforce obedience to their regulations.

It will be seen from the above how very desirable it is to put an end to the arbitrary proceedings of the Chinese authorities, and to have the rules now in force at some ports so remodeled as to suit the convenience of trade and the stipulations of the treaties, while at the same time protecting the fiscal interests of the Chinese Government.

The necessity of doing this without delay suggests the idea of proposing to the Chinese Government the adoption of a temporary set of rules to be in force on trial while the negotiations on the question of inland taxation continue, such rules being based as much as possible on the rules in force at Chinkiang and comprising those questions of coast trade duty to be levied on produce, duty free, carried coastwise, and of goods brought or manufactured in the open ports.

His colleagues having in principle agreed to such a proposal, Mr. von Brandt has the honor to submit to them inclosed a set of rules drawn up in accordance with the above-mentioned views.

Peking, April 22, 1880.

[Inclosure No. 2 in No. 673.]

provisional rules.

I.

For the issue and surrender of transit-passes (outwards).

Rule I. All outward transit-passes which have been issued before the________, 1880, and which shall not have been availed of for the purchase of produce and exchanged for a transit certificate before the 31st day of December, 1880, will be forthwith canceled by the superintendent of customs, and the corresponding transit certificates recalled, and all goods which the holders of such canceled passes may attempt to bring down under them will be confiscated.

Similarly, all transit-passes issued subsequently to the ____, 1880, and not used within one year from the date of issue, will be canceled at the expiration of such year.

Rule II. Henceforward all transit-passes which may not have been availed of for the purchase of produce as above within one year from the above time will be forthwith canceled by the superintendent of customs, and the corresponding transit certificate recalled, and all goods which the holders of such canceled passes may attempt to bring down under them will be confiscated.

In any cases of loss of a transit-pass by theft or otherwise, the merchant to whom it was issued must report the loss at once to the customs of the port, that the pass may be canceled and the corresponding transit certificate recalled.

In case of unlawful use of such cancelled transit-pass after its loss has been reported, the original holder shall not be held responsible.

Rule III. Produce purchased under transit-pass must arrive at the barrier nearest the port within six months (one year for Tientsin) from the date of the exchange of the transit-pass for a transit certificate; in default of so doing the goods will be liable to confiscation.

Should, however, produce be detained en route, either by the action of barrier or other officials, by force majeure, or by unforeseen accident, such as floods, rebels, or the like, and be unable in consequence to arrive within the time allowed, the circumstance of such detention must be reported at once to the authorities on the spot, and to the superintendent of customs at the port, who will grant such an extension of time as the circumstances of the case may require. The goods meanwhile will not be liable to confiscation, unless they fail to arrive at the port within the extended time allowed.

Rule IV. On the arrival of the produce at the barrier nearest the port, an application giving the full particulars of the packages and their contents must he sent in to the commissioner of customs, who will issue a permit to allow the goods declared to pass the next harrier. The produce on arriving at the port must he brought direct to the customs officer for examination and payment of transit dues, which being done, the goods may be stored in the merchants’godown.

Any merchant failing to comply with this rule the goods will be liable-to confiscation.

Rule V. Produce brought from the interior under transit-pass must be exported to a foreign port or to another treaty port for reshipment to a foreign port within six months from the date of its arrival at the port, except goods for the northern ports, for which the customs authorities will grant the necessary extension of time. If the produce be not exported within the said period, the merchant shall pay to the customs a sum equal to two and a half times the export duty, and be released from the obligation to export.

When the produce is shipped to another treaty port for subsequent reshipment to a foreign country, the merchant must produce a certificate from the customs at the other port to the effect that the goods have been shipped to a foreign country within twelve months of their arrival in that port, or in default, in addition to forfeiting the half duty deposited, he shall pay to the customs a sum equal to an additional export duty, and be released from the obligation to export.

Rule VI. A merchant desiring to repack prior to shipment the native produce which he has brought down under transit-pass, must first make application to the customs, who, having verified the identity of the goods, will issue a “permit to repack,” and will depute an officer to repair to the godown and superintend the repacking.

Any unauthorized repacking of goods, or willful alteration of their contents by the substitution or addition of other goods, will render them liable to confiscation.

Rule VII. In cases of alleged damage and deterioration in intrinsic value sustained, by goods while at the port, the customs, on the application of the merchant, will depute an officer to examine the goods and appraise the actual amount of damage sustained. A deduction in the amount of export duty payable will be made in proportion to the ascertained damage: and should the merchant desire to be released from his obligations to export such damaged goods, his obligation will be canceled on his paying to the customs a sum equal to two and a half times the diminished export duty.

Rule VIII. Should a merchant be about to give up his business and leave the port, he may return through his consul for immediate cancellation all transit-passes which have been taken out by him and not yet used. Should there be at the time of his closing business any goods which have been already bought in the interior under transit-pass or passes taken out by him, but which have not yet arrived at the port, or which are awaiting shipment to a foreign country, at this or another treaty port, the person to whom such goods or the disposition thereof may be transferred will be held responsible for the observance of these rules.

Rule IX. In the event of its becoming necessary under these passes to recover from a merchant a fine, the Chinese customs authorities shall be at liberty either to seize the goods or to exact a bond for the amount claimed. In case the goods are of a perishable nature a bond shall always be taken.

In all cases of fine or confiscation arising under these rules the same procedure will be followed which is laid down in the rules for joint investigation in cases of confiscation and fine by the customs authorities of 1888.

If a fine awarded remains unpaid, no new transit-passes will be issued to the merchant, and all passes already taken out by him may be canceled by the superintendent, and the corresponding transit certificates recalled.

II.

For the shipment coastwise of duty-free native produce.

Rule. Duty-free native produce carried coastwise pays no export duty at the port of shipment; and at the port of entry, coast-trade duty, the mount of which is declared to be 2½ per cent, ad valorem.

III.

For the exportation of goods bought or manufactured in the port.

Rule I. Produce bought at the port pays on exportation no other duty than the export duty.

As bought at the port, all produce is to be considered not brought by a foreigner under transit pass from the interior.

Rule II. Goods manufactured at the port from native produce brought from the interior under transit-passes, or otherwise, shall pay no other duty on exportation than the export duty. To be amended, if necessary, by the following addition, plus the difference, if any, between the transit duty paid on the raw material and the transit duty which would have had to be paid had the produce been brought from the interior in its manufactured form.

All the rules under heads I-III to be provisional ones, and to remain in force until the 31st of December, 1831. Should, however, no objections be raised against them, they may remain in force from year to year unless having been denounced by one of the contracting parties before the 1st of July of the preceding year.

No. 167 Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 167
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, May 6, 1880. (Received June 30.) No. 681.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith a letter which I am addressing to the doyen of the diplomatic body, transmitting a memorandum of my remarks in presenting to the ministers of the foreign office the questions regarding the currency raised by my colleagues and myself, and showing the responses made by them. I have also to hand to you a copy of my letter to the prince.

I have, &c.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 681.]

Mr. Seward to Sir T. Wade.

April 30, 1880.

Dear Sir and Colleague: I beg leave to hand to you herewith a memorandum showing my procedure in placing before the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên, at your request and that of my colleagues, the facts and considerations in regard to the condition of the Chinese currency affecting the payment of customs dues and duties to which we have felt ourselves warranted in calling their attention.

This memorandum will be translated into Chinese and forwarded to the Yamên, with Mr. von Brandt’s printed paper and my own, in case you and our colleagues generally find it to be in accordance with our views and agreement.

I am, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 681.]

Mr. Seward to Prince Kung.

Peking, May 11, 1880.

Your Imperial Highness:

I had the honor to wait on the ministers of the Yamên, on the 29th instant, as a delegate of the diplomatic body, to lay before them certain facts and considerations in regard to the Chinese currency, which my colleagues and myself agree in believing have a prejudicial effect on trade, in order to secure such a reform as will secure to our country people reasonable certainty and accuracy in their payments of customs dues and duties, and I have now to hand to your Imperial Highness a memorandum which I have prepared, setting forth in brief my remarks and the responses of the ministers.

This memorandum has been submitted to my colleagues, and meets their approval.

I beg leave to hand to your Imperial Highness also two memoranda in English, regarding the Chinese currency, prepared respectively by His Excellency Mr. von Brandt, the minister of Germany, and myself. My colleagues and I believe that they may assist the ministers to reach an understanding of our views upon this important subject. I should remark, however, that they were not prepared for the Yamên, but for our own use and the elucidation of the questions involved.

I seize this opportunity, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

Memorandum of an interview on Thursday, the 29th of April, 1880, between Mr. Seward, United States Minister, and the Tsung-li Yamên, in regard to the currency matter.

Present, the Ministers Tung, Hwang, and Chung-lin.

Mr. Seward said that he had come to the Yamên in pursuance of an arrangement made by Sir Thomas Wade, doyen of the diplomatic body, and the ministers to place before them, on behalf of the diplomatic body, certain facts and considerations regarding the payment of customs duties and dues consequent upon the peculiar nature of the Chinese currency, and that he esteemed himself fortunate in meeting for the purpose the ministers who were present, because undoubtedly they are specially acquainted with the subject, one of them being the president of the board of revenue, and the others having been officially connected with the customs at the ports of Hankow and Canton.

Mr. Seward then said in substance:

1st. That their excellencies are aware that the governments of all western nations have established mints and put out coins which are used as money and form the standard of values.

2d. That China has not seen fit to coin the precious metals and that they are passed by weight.

3d. That a great deal of difficulty is met by foreigners in consequence of a state of things so unfamiliar to them and by reason of the fact that each locality appears to have a special scale, and that the fineness of the silver in circulation varies with the locality and even at the given locality.

4th. That the subject has been found one of so much importance that it has been made a matter of negotiation between China and foreign powers. The leading stipulations are as follows: American treaty of 1844, Article XII; American treaty of 1858, Article XXII; French treaty of 1844, Article XIX; French treaty of 1858, Article XXXI; British treaty of 1858, Article XXXIX; German treaty of 1861, Article XXII; Danish treaty of 1863, Suppl. Rule 9.

5th. That it appears from these stipulations. (a) That the standard scale provided for is that issued by the board of revenue to the Canton customs. (British treaty.)

(b) That the values of foreign coins may be arranged with the customs at the several ports. (German treaty.)

(c) That the rate of the day may be claimed. (American treaty.)

(d) That one system may be claimed for all the ports. (Danish treaty.)

6th. That the foreign representatives are of opinion that it is desirable to make one system for all the ports.

7th. That to this end they propose that the Yamên shall name the standard tael of China and take steps to have its exact equivalent by foreign scales, and the purity of the silver used in passing it, determined by persons competent to do such work.

8th. That the values of the taels used at the several ports and of foreign coins relatively to the standards be ascertained in the same way.

9th. That all customs dues and duties be received according to the results so arrived at.

10th. That it appears not only from the thirty-ninth article of the British treaty of 1858, that the board of treasury scale (Kuping) is the one which should be considered the standard for the payment of customs dues and duties, but also from the Yamên’s letters of April 9, 1877, and January 19, 1880. It is stated in the former, “All-payments to and from the provinces are made in Kuping taels of pure silver,” and in the latter, “The superintendent of customs should be instructed in the receipt of duties to take the treasury tael of pure silver as the standard.”

11th. That the foreign representatives while accepting these declarations as satisfactory so far as they go, desire to say that their object is not to raise questions as to the value of this or that tael or the merit of this or that tael with a view to lessen the burden of duty payments. They are entirely desirous that the customs shall receive all that is justly due. And their object is to so regularize payments, that certainty and accuracy may be reached.

12th. That what precedes may be illustrated and the importance of the subject demonstrated by an examination of the following facts:

(a) That while the Yamên has declared that customs dues should be paid in Kuping taels, collections are in fact made or assumed to be made after what is called the Haikwan scale.

(b) That this scale is assumed to be about l½ per cent, higher than the Kuping scale.

(c) That it is not consistent with the Kuping scale, as will be seen from the following table: Kuping taels.

Tientsin, 100 Haikwan taels are equal to 103.40

Hankow, 100 do. do. 101.01

Shanghai, 100 do. do. 101.65

Foo-Chow, 100 do. do. 101.14

(d) That, in comparing local taels and foreign coins with Haikwan taels, it is assumed that the Haikwan standard calls for pure silver, just as the Kuping standard does, while as a matter of fact there is no perfectly pure silver in circulation. It is; believed that the best is alloyed from 1 to 2 per cent.

(e) That the assays of foreign coin do not give the actual purity. The native assay-ists at Canton have declared that the American trade dollar is 881.1 fine, the Hang Ping dollar 894.1, the Japanese dollar 895.7, while as a matter of fact each is 900 fine.

(f) That the best information available indicates that the Haikwan tael is worth 103.40 taels of the Tientsin Hang Ping (local) tael, and that duties were paid at that rate until lately by the Russians. Foreigners now pay at the rate of 105. Chinese importing at the foreign customs pay at the rate of 108, and when at the native customs, 118.

(g) That at Newchwang foreigners pay at the rate of 108½, and natives at the native customs 112.

(h) That at Chefoo foreigners pay at the rate of 104.40, and natives at the foreign customs 106.40. The Taotai of Chefoo stated on the 10th of July, 1877, that the Chefoo tael is 2 per cent, less only than the Kuping tael. According to this, it should be about 3½ per cent, less than the Haikwan.

(i) That without going further the facts stated indicate the need of a reform in the passing of bullion and coins in the payment of customs dues and duties.

13th. It is not the business of the foreign representatives to meddle with the internal administraton of China. They have reason to believe, however, that the excess paid by them over and above the Kuping standard does not accrue to the benefit of the government, but to the customs banker, and that an unreasonable charge for the examination of bullion, including remelting, would amount to a moiety only of the excess now paid.

14th. That this statement is submitted in the earnest hope that it will receive due attention. An immediate answer is not required. Mr. Seward will wait on the ministers again after a few weeks in order to discuss the subject further.

The ministers having heard the foregoing statement, amplified as appeared necessary in the course of his remarks, responded that they would take the business into consideration, and would be pleased to see Mr. Seward again, at a later date.

15th. Mr. Seward then asked the origin of the Haikwan tael, and was answered that it had been in use a long time, but why it was introduced was not made clear.

16th. Mr. Seward then asked whether the Kuping scale has been constant for a long period, and whether the weights of this scale are sent out by the board of revenue to the provinces, and are known in the provinces. He understood the ministers to answer that the scale has been constant for a long period—several hundred years—and that weights prepared by the board of works are sent by the board of revenue to each provincial treasurer’s office.

17th. Mr. Seward then asked whether the ministers consider the so-called pure silver of the Kuping standard absolutely without alloy, and understood them to say that it is not absolutely pure, but of a degree of fineness which justifies them in calling it pure.

18th. Mr. Seward then asked what the expense of remelting silver amounted to, and understood the ministers to say about 20 tael cents on 100 taels.

19th. Mr. Seward then remarked that the multiplication of standards is of itself confusing, and that he hoped that the ruling standard, which is properly the scale of the Imperial Government, would be adhered to in place of the Haikwan scale.

Mr. Seward then thanked the ministers for their courtesy and attention, and withdrew.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.
Peking, April 30, 1880.

No. 168. Mr. Denny to Mr. Payson. No. 168.
Mr. Denny to Mr. Payson.

United States Consulate-General,
Shanghai, May 15, 1880. (Received June 14.) No. 32.]

Sir: I have the honor to forward to yon the text of the original treaty recently negotiated by Chung How, between Russia and China, which has been the cause of so much excitement in China, and which has also been the alleged cause of sentence of death being pronounced against the unfortunate minister by the Tsung-li Yamên at Peking. Until now no one has ever been able to get the text of this treaty.

I am, &c.,

O. N. DENNY.

[Inclosure 1 with No. 32.]

the russo-chinese treaty, negotiated by chung-how.

The following is the substance of the treaty entered into by Chung-How with Russia, and which has not been before published. The part referring to the right of each Russian to carry a gun, noticed in the memorial, appears to be omitted from the copy sent to us, and we have not been able to supply the Omission.

Article 1. Russia consents to restore Ili.

Article 2. China consents to grant an amnesty to the inhabitants of Ili.

Article 3. The inhabitants of Ili who remove to Russian territory shall be treated equally and enjoy the same rights as Russians.

Article 4. The property hitherto acquired by Russians in Ili shall be retained by them in future.

Article 5. The negotiations for the rendition of Ili shall be conducted on behalf of China by Tso-Tsung-t’ang and others, appointed for this purpose by a special imperial decree, and on behalf of Russia by (General) Kauffmann, specially delegated for it.

Article 6. For the restoration of Ili, China agrees to pay to Russia the sum of 5,000,000 rubles, payment thereof to begin from the day of the exchange of the treaty, and to be completed within a year.

Article 7. Ili being restored, the land west of E-Ko-si River and south of the Li-shan (mouDtains) down to Tekes River is ceded to Russia.

Article 8. It is agreed that the frontier at Ta-ch’eng (Tashkend?) shall be modified.

Article 9. After the boundaries have been fixed by the special delegates, boundary posts shall be erected.

Article 10. In addition to the consulates already established, in accordance with previous treaties at Kashgar and Urg, new consulates shall be established at Kia-yü-kuan, Wuko, Hami, Turfan, Lumutsi, and Kuché.

Article 11. In dealing with official affairs, the consuls and the local authorities shall use in their correspondence to each other the form of a “letter,” and the consuls shall be treated according to customs as guests.

Article 12. Russian merchants in Mongolia and in the provinces of T’ien-shan, Nan-lu, and T’ien-shan Peh-lu shall not pay duties for their merchandise.

Article 13. Mercantile depots shall be established in all those places where consulates are, and also in Kaligan.

Article 14. Russian merchants may transport their goods from and to Kaligan, Kia-yu-kuan, Tientsin, and Hankow, by passing Tung-chau, Ti-an-fu, and Han-chung, and when transporting native produce for Russia they shall use the same route.

Article 15. Not until five years after the imperial sanction shall this treaty be revised or altered.

Article 16. As regards the desire of the Russian merchants for a special duty for inferior tea, this question shall be settled by the Tsung-li Yamên.

Article 17. As in the previous treaties the local authorities shall endeavor to find out the cattle which run away beyond the frontier, but they shall not pay for any such actual loss.

Article 18. One year after the conclusion and imperial signature of the treaty, the ratifications of the same shall be exchanged in the Russian capital.

[Inclosure 2 with. No. 32.—Translation.]

russia and china.—important memorial to the throne.—the marquis tseng’s instructions.—the nature of the russo-chinese treaty explained.

Chang Chih-t’ung, a sub-reader, (1) begs, prostrated, to make the following most humble memorial to the throne, in relation to the repudiation of a treaty concluded and in order to devise means for guarding oneself against insults. The petitioner will therefore most humbly take the liberty to point out the injuries caused (by the treaty to China), and to make his most urgent representations, most respectfully hereby begging His Majesty to deign to give this most humble petition his sacred glance.

The petitioner, perusing the Peking Gazette of the last days in reference to the treaty with Russia and to the shameful behavior of our ambassador, thereby exposing the honor of our country, found therein an imperial decree convoking the high statesmen for consulting thereupon. What the petitioner knows about the treaty itself is by hearsay and only a general outline, but even that suffices to rouse his deepest indignation.

The evil consequences and injuries caused by consenting to or refusing the execution of the treaty in question, the petitioner now begs, most humbly, to lay before their majesties the Empresses and His Majesty the Emperor. Nothing shall be mentioned of the eighteen articles of the new treaty in general, but the worst point, namely, the question of the overland trade route, from Kia-yü-kuan, (2) over Si-an-fu (3) and Han-chung, (4) to Hankow, by which the (for China) most important provinces of Tsin and Lung, (5) as well King and Ts’u, (6) and Shang-yen (7) are delivered up, deserves particular attention. The number of trading places there will grow up with daily-increasing abundance, like weeds, nothing more will be kept secret, everything will be known, and while the passes of the frontier are well guarded, the interior of the country is already lost. To refuse the consent to that is the first and most essential point.

Concerning the three eastern provinces (8), forming the cradle of the Imperial family, and Patuna (9), the most important and beautiful place of Kirin (10), should it be allowed (to the Russians) to approach with their ships the last-mentioned place, for then also all the places of the three eastern provinces will be approachable at their pleasure; the capital will thus be made nearer to them, and China will become more and more divested of its present character. But there is not the slightest reason why she should push herself back from Sui-fen (11) towards the west, a tract of land of 2,000 li. Moreover, as far as the inland navigation on rivers is concerned, all the governments have already asked for this privilege, without, however, succeeding in getting it. If this privilege should now be conceded to the Russians, all other nations will follow their example successively. To refuse consent to that is the second point.

That the government gives up the levying of duties is for the benefit of the trading classes; should this benefit be now extended to all the tribes and leagues (12) of the Inner and Outer Mongolia, the Russians will profit by this advantage for their trade and feel themselves also exempted from the payment of duties. That the trade in hands of the Chinese will thereby get more and more beggared, is a trifle in comparison to the further consequence, considering that already the Mongolians are poor and weak, that the Russians will thereby coil around and fleece them, and that all the enormous expenses of the campaign in Sinking (13) have been made only for the benefit of Russians. Concerning the places in the interior, as Chang-kia-Kow (14) and others, where (Russian) firms have established themselves, their number gradually increases and their business becomes more and more extended. If hostilities should now begin, the head and tail, or a space of over 10,000 li, is hereby connected. Not to agree to such a state of things is the third point.

All the dependencies of China are situated in Inner and Outer Mongolia; the desert Shamo (15), several thousand li distant, separates them from the Russians. Should these desire to trespass on the frontier, they will find on the northern side a great many obstructions and difficulties. The mail service in Mongolia is performed by the Mongolians on behalf of Russia; should she increase to the Mongolians the money they receive for it, then on a day of important events the dispatch of the hews will be accelerated, the transport of provisions for her army will find no obstruction, and it will be inevitable that our dependencies will be incited and make for them the leaders on the road. To stop this state of affairs is the fourth point.

By the treaty, permission is given to the Russians to pass thirty-six frontier barriers, a line far too long in peaceful times for the merchants. Is that not ridiculous, showing that the Russians are fooling us? At a time of great events, soldiers will enter thereby, and how shall we then guard ourselves? To refuse them this stipulation is the fifth point.

To no merchant whatever is permitted the right of carrying arms. Now, with no reason whatever, the right is conceded to every individual to carry with him a gun. What is the meaning of that? When a multitude, numbering a hundred or thousand of them, quite suddenly enters our territory, how can the distinction he made as to who are soldiers and who are merchants? To refuse this right is the sixth point.

As in everything, so also in the question of duties, the Russians think to cunningly evade payment thereof. Should the other nations expect the same concession, the income of the customs of Hankow will gradually, and year by year, diminish to the extent of several millions. To refuse this concession is the seventh point.

Although in the third year of Tungchih (1864–’65) the frontiers of Sin-Kiang were already defined, again they desire to occupy more of our country and cut us off from the southern portion of the road of the eight cities (16). The actual situation of Sin-Kiang is thus, that the northern road is hare and depopulated, while the southern places are prosperous and populous; (China) has now to receive a stony and arid soil, and for it give up the fertile and rich soil, and all this for a visionary fame, hut in reality to cause misery. This is a reason for refusing the eighth point.

At Ili (17), Tarhagatai (18), Khobdo (19), Uliasutai (20), Kashgar, Urumtsi (21), Kuché (22), Turfan (23), Hami (24), and all the other places beyond the Kin-zü-Kuan, consular establishments are to be allowed; thus the whole frontier region of the western cities will be entirely under their control. The presence of foreign officials will bring also foreign customs establishments. These, when established, will receive (for protection) foreign soldiers. Thus the power heretofore wielded by us will be at once usurped, so that we shall be the guests and they the hosts; they will have at those places their authorities, while we shall be without any of them; they will have a garrison, while we shall have no garrison.

The law prevailing with all the other nations is to allow the establishment of consulates of other nations in the remotest spots on the sea-shore. If nowadays Russia, in this respect, takes the start with Uliasutai, Khobdo, Urumtsi, Kuche, Hami, and Kia-yü-kuan, which places are all within our boundaries, then all the other nations will also like to profit by this article; then all the places in the interior of the eighteen provinces will be filled with foreign officials. To disallow this is the ninth point.

Russia returns three-fourths of Ili. From the ridges of the mountains and heft yond the passes the (Russian) settlements there remain as heretofore, thus giving them the dominating position and checking us by their strongholds. The division being made so that the western part of Ko-ho-erh-ko-si River and the north of Ko-erh-man-tou is restored to us, we get thereby no new land to cultivate, no pastures, and no benefit whatever in this country. In Kin-ting-szi the Russians ever since had their trading establishments. According to the treaty now concluded, this territory has been ceded to Russia, and will not be restored to China. It is true only a strip of land (remains with Russia), but the eastern part of the road (25) will go through Russian territory, and we shall be cut off from the outlet; the few people remaining with us will thus remove there, and we shall be hereafter without people. We threw away 1,800,000 (taels) of most useful money in return for a useless tract of land, the ground of which is of no benefit without people and without the outlet of the road of Hi. What is the use of it? Not to allow this is the tenth point.

The Russian demands show covetousness and truculency in the highest degree, and Chung How, in his extreme stupidity and madness, agreed to them, but Their Majesties the Empresses and His Majesty the Emperor being incensed by this outrage, the ambassador was changed accordingly, and, fully aware of the clearness and justice of the case, the grand council was convoked. The high dignitaries of the privy council, his imperial highness the prince and the ministers of the Tsungli-Yamên, the hundreds of officials of the various parts of the empire—in one word, all the people—are fully aware that this state of affairs should not be allowed, and although not daring to express the public sentiment for an alteration of the stipulations, fully apprehending, considering that as the treaty is an accomplished work, serious complications between the two nations may arise, still the petitioner himself thinks that such apprehensions are groundless. The treaty must be altered in spite of all future troubles. If we do not alter the treaty, we are not worthy to be called a nation.

Earnestly begging that my entreaties for an alteration of the treaty may be heard, there are four most important reasons for it: For the first, the absolute necessity; for the second, a strong voice; for the third, the right; and for the fourth, the scheme (to be carried out).

What is the absolute necessity? A treaty was concluded with every disregard of right and agreed upon by the ambassador, but refused by the government, whereby Chung How brought evil on the empire and joy to the enemy. Returning home by his own will and on his own responsibility, all our countrymen demanded his decapitation, asking that he should be delivered to the board of punishments, and that the crimes of an ambassador should be dealt with according to law, and thus also to shut the mouth of the Russians. According to international law, any disobedience shown to the orders of the Emperor is regarded as exceeding the powers conferred by his Majesty, and all the powers of such a minister are, point by point, made out by the government. Chung How’s crime is the disregard he had for the secret instructions and for the imperial will. His case is similar to the one which brought Ki-ying to prison. The final decision is clear, and I therefore say, let Chung How he executed. This is the absolute necessity.

What is a strong voice? The Russians insulted our helpless and sluggish ambassador and extorted his signature. For one penny the Russians spend, they want the return of hundreds of pounds; and even then they are dissatisfied. Although Russia is a great empire, she ought to feel ashamed of her dealings. Though she outrageously incites China, yet all the kingdoms of the globe are on our side. The Russian minister at Peking, not waiting for the final issue of the treaty, threatens to withdraw to Russia, but even in foreign countries such custom does not exist. Moreover, Mr. Koyander is only a chargé d’affaires. How can he return by his own will and responsibility? It is clearly nothing else but a threat. Let him go or remain, as he pleases; it is not necessary to consult him about it. The best course now to be adopted is to issue an imperial decree clearly stating therein that the Russians are unjust, and also giving the reasons why the people and officials object to the stipulations. Let (this decree) be promulgated in Inner and Outer China; let all the other powers decide for themselves which of us two is in the wrong; order also the assembly (?) to publish in the newspapers how reasonable we were towards Russia, and how all our yielding is now exhausted. Let orders be issued to the high officials along the frontier to prepare quietly for war, according to the people’s wrath, for they are wearied with the continual yielding, and accordingly China is resolved not to yield further.

Although Russia is very great, yet since the last wars with Turkey she has weary soldiers and is without funds, her statesmen have parted, the people are exasperated, and during the last years many attempts were made against the life of her ruler. Should he now again reject our friendship and attack us as enemies, the people there, considering the distance, will get wearied, and outbreaks in his own household will be inevitable, to which finally he will succumb. How can he then look after other people’s affairs? To proclaim this near and afar, this is what I call a strong voice.

What is the right? A great many gifts originated on account of Ili. According to the treaty in question, what China receives is only the two empty characters, I and li; what she in lieu thereof throws away is 20,000 li of real ground at Sin-kiang, besides to pay every year from 40,000 to 50,000 (?) taels for the maintenance of the army garrisoned at those remote parts of our frontier for cultivating land and building cities. The possession of Sin-kiang for us amounts to about the same as if we were not to possess it. For the desire to have Hi, we have to sign a treaty, the blame for which rests entirely with us. The recovery of Ili is also a fault, which, however, is shared by them. Although the ambassador has signed the treaty, still he did not receive the imperial assent to it, and the treaty cannot therefore be considered as ratified. The case is precisely the same as described in old books, where no treaty concluded could come into force unless the blood of a sacrifice was sipped by the contracting parties. How can the Russians, without any right whatever, and bare of any argument, consider it as a wrong done to them? For this reason all our subsequent claims on Hi will only increase our right to it.

What is the scheme? Should the Russians declare their good faith in us, the movements of their armies may stop. But if Russia disregards justice and law, and rejects our friendship, then preparations (for a war) have to be made in three directions; one at Sin-kiang, one at Kirin, and one at Tientsin. Tso-Tsung-t’ang, with his so many times victorious army, has an always vigorous military strength in hand. (His seconds in command) Kin-shun (26,), Lieu-kin-t’ang (27), Hso-lun (28), and Chang-yao-lu (29), are very able generals; besides, we can quietly await the movements of the Russians, who, worn out by fatigue, must be defeated. Combined with the Lamas and Djassaks (30), plans can be devised for cutting off their retreat, and then horses and steamers cannot bring them home again. Should they break out at Kirin, the frontiers there are very distant, and the forests are very thick. From that region to the Russian capital is a distance of over 20,000 li. The solitary army has to enter very deep, but the supply and transport of the provisions will be very difficult. The army used there cannot be very strong. A general skillful in civil and military matters should be specially selected; he should be invested with great and extraordinary powers, and be provided with sufficient funds for his army. Half of the armies of the southern and northern sea are to be brought under the command of clever leaders to the three eastern provinces. Tso-Tsung-t’ang and Kin-shun should be ordered to detach from Chihli (31) generals of military abilities for the three eastern provinces, and arrived there they should be ready for orders. The butchers of So-lun (32) and Ha-t’sin shall be called together and taught military drill, as these men are in general of a martial disposition and brave, and already accustomed to fight with the Russians. The victory will be thus sure. Should, however, a small defeat occur, let the force keep together for a few months, as the Russians will disperse by themselves and retreat.

Although Tientsin is close to the capital, still the Russian men-of-war will not be allowed by the English and French to proceed thither, and, according to law, they cannot pass the Suez Canal; thus they will be constrained to carry their troops in merchant vessels, but these again are not to be compared with the European iron-clads.

Li Hung-chang declared that China shall do her duty; in a forthcoming struggle with Russia she need not fear of remaining isolated. With the greatest possible speed let our selected soldiers be drilled; arm the fortifications according to the newest German improvements. If we should be victorious in this war, bestow on the victors the titles of dukes and earls; if not victorious, punish the warriors with additional severity. Instead of paying 2,800,000 taels as indemnity for Hi, this sum should be used for engaging strong European soldiers, who will fight for us. The Russians-encroach steadily on Huei-kiang (33) and swallow How-han; their object thereby is to have the line at the back of India connected with these distressing designs. England is also harassed.

Should Li Hung-chang explain to the English minister in this way, that if the lips-are lost the teeth will feel cold (viz, if the outlying states are taken by Russia, England will be in danger), he will perceive and also hate the common enemy. Let the generals who distinguished themselves during the latter years, such as P’eng-Yü-lin (34), Yang-Yo-pin (35), Pao-Ch’ao (36), Lieu-Min-chuang (37), Shan-Kuei, Tseng-Yü-ying (38), Kuo-Sung-ling (39), Sung-K’ing (40), Shou-C’hang, Peng-Tsu-hang (41), Kuo-Pao ch’ang, Tsao-Keh-shang, Li-Yung-lin, Chen-Kwo-jin (42), who are either still in office or retired, after due consideration, be called by Imperial mandate to the capital, and be ordered to arrange an excellent plan; then place them either in Peking, or Tung-chau, or Tientsin, or Taku, or in the three eastern provinces, so that they shall be ready there in case of the outbreak of the war. Placed there, they will be like ferocious tigers in the mountains, of which people are terrified. This is the scheme.

Although inexperienced, the petitioner nevertheless dares to express his opinion. He does so only from the deep interest he feels in his isolated native country, fully aware of the changes of the time, and how troubles and difficulties daily accumulate, by the Europeans usurping our power, by the Japanese earnestly endeavoring to annex parts of our territory, and by the Russians, who are stirring up mischief. If we again suffer and yield, then from that moment all the other nations will also press upon us. What will happen if we suffer that, or if we do not suffer it? If we yield to that, or if we do not yield to it? No matter, if we only do resist the Russians; for although victory was hitherto with us, in the event of war victory and defeat are uncertain. The petitioner thinks that if the Russians should tight they would not be able to cross the Kia-yü-kuan, and, even if they win, they will not be able to approach Ning-kü-tah (43), and therefore they cannot hurt us much. As their advance will last a considerable time, they will not find food at the resting places, and their strength will thereby get weakened. What is then to be dreaded? Now is the time to ascertain if China is weak or strong, and if she possesses clever men, and accordingly whether she will rise or sink. Now, with valorous generals and scheming statesmen, is the time to fight. If, again, several years elapse, Tso-Tsung-t’ang, although then perhaps still alive, will be too old; Li-Hung-chang, although not weakened, will be too old; and so with the skilled and ardent ones gradually dying out, even if the desire for war should still prevail it would be impossible to go to war. The Russians have already built up cities in the east; their troops are garrisoned in the west; their trading establishments are situated in the north, and so, up and down and across their abodes are to be found this side and beyond the great wall, on every highroad; even Core a is intimidated by them. As we are now distant and separated from them we can guard ourselves, but later, when they have reached our outposts to fight with us, it will be too late. The most important thing is now, while negotiations for a revision of the treaty are going on, to prepare for a war. But, even if the treaty should not be altered, the warlike preparations should nevertheless not be discontinued. As far as the negotiations in regard to Hi are concerned they might be delayed, in order that our preparations might be more effective. Chung How, however, has to lose his life. Even in the case that the treaty has been altered, his life should be forfeited; also in the case that the treaty will not be altered. This is the general opinion, and not simply the petitioner’s own.

To assist His Majesty in the government is the duty of all the high provincial officers, and also the duty of all the officials; the negotiations with Russia have, accord-ding to the rule, to be conducted by the Tsung-li Yamên, but the final decision rests with Your Majesties the Empresses, and Your Majesty the Emperor.

As this question concerns the deepest interests of the country, the most humble petitioner cannot keep silent, and does not dare to remain idle; he begs therefore that Sublime Grace may lay the petition before the high statesmen, that they may deliberate upon a petition made in grief and wrath. May Your Majesties deign to bestow upon this most humble petition your sacred glance.

Explanatory notes to Chang-Chih-t’ung’s memorial.

(1). She Tuh, a subreader of the Han-lin Academy. Two are Manchu and three Chinese. Secondary fifth degree.

(2). Kia-yü-kuan, the most westerly gate in the Great Wall, at the end of it, in Kansuh.

(3). Si-an-fu, capital of the province of Shen-si, latitude 34° 17ʹ, longitude 108° 58ʹ.

(4). Han-chung, prefectural city in Shen-si, latitude 3.2° 53ʹ, longitude 107° 12ʹ.

(5). Ts-in and Lung, old historical names for Shen-si and Kansuh.

(6). Kiang and Tsu, old historical names for Hu-kuang, viz, Hu-peh and Hunan.

(7). Shang-yeu, above the elbow of the Yellow River, in Shansi, near Tung-kuan.

(8). The three eastern (Manchurian) provinces are Heh-lung Kiang, Kirin, and Feng-tien.

(9). Pa-tu-na, Petuné, lies in the northwestern part of Kirin, latitude 45° 10ʹ north, and longitude 124° 40ʹ east.

(10). Kirin or Ghirin, a large country to the northeast of Shing-king, bordering on the Sea of Japan and the Gulf of Tartary.

(11). Sui-fen, a little river discharging in the bay of Peter the Great, opposite and to the west of Wladiwostok.

(12). The banners of the Inner Mongolia are divided into six leagues (meng), which embrace the whole of the 24 tribes (pu) under which they are distributed.

(13). The territories of Sungaria on the north, and of the Mohammedan cities (Kashgaria) on the south, are designated generically as Sin-kiang, or the New Dominion.

(14). Chang kia-k’au, or Kalgan, a large town on the line of the caravan road, latitude 40° 51ʹ north, and longitude 114° 15ʹ east. Other places where Russian firms are established are: Urga, Ili, Tarbagatai, and Kurun.

(15). Shamo, the desert of Gobi.

(16). The eight cities are Kashgar, Kharashar, Kuchd, Aksu, Khoten, Hami, Ush, and Yarkand.

(17). Ili for Kuldja.

(18). Tarbagatai or Tashtava, an important garrison and town on the frontier of Ili, in latitude 47° north.

(19). Khobdo or Cobdo lies in the northwest of Mongolia, latitude 47° 30ʹ north, and longitude 85° 30ʹ east.

(20). Uliasutai, lying northwest of the Selenga River.

(21). Urumtsi, a town in Songaria, now included in Kansuhlatitude 43° 45ʹ north, and longitude 89° east.

(22). Kuché, a large garrisoned town, in latitude 41° 37ʹ north, and longitude 82° 55ʹ.

(23). Turfan, now included in Kansuh, on the confines of the Great Desert, in latitude 42° 40ʹ north, and longitude 90° 48ʹ east.

(24). Hami or Hamil, a town included in Kansuh, west of the Great Wall, in latitude 42°, 1600 li beyond Kia-yü-kwan. This note comprises a map of the places, but we are compelled to hold it over for the present.

(25). The road from Kuldja to Ak-su and Kashgar.

(26). Kin-shun, the conqueror and butcher of Hami and Manas, in Mandchu, banner general of Ili.

(27). Lieu-kin-t’ang, from Hunan, commissioner of the office of transmission, a nobleman of the fifth degree.

(28). Hsi lun, a Manchu, formerly a general in Tso’s army, now retired.

(29). Chang-yao, camp and garrison intendant of the province of Kuang-tung.

(30). The characters in the Chinese original must be wrong. They cannot be anything else but meaning Djassak, chieftain of a Mongolian banner.

(31). One would scarcely believe it, but such is the case. In the event of war Peking shall order Tso in Kansuh, who occupies also the highest military command, to order Li in Chihli to detach generals for the three eastern provinces which border in the east and northeast of Chihli.

(32). So-lun Manchus, from the region of the Amur, also partly settled in the Ili region.

(33). Huei-kiang, a name for Chinese or Eastern Turkestan.

(34). Peng-yu-ling, formerly vice-president of the board of war, now commanding admiral on the Yangtse, native of Hunan.

(35). Yang-yo-pin, formerly viceroy of Szi-chuen, now retired.

(36). Pao-ch’ao, native of Szi-chuen, formerly lieutenant-general of Peh-kiang, retired, and now called by the emperor to Peking.

(37). Lieu-min-chuang, native of Anhuei, formerly lieutenant-general in Chihli, now retired.

(38). Tseng-yu-ying, native of Yun-nan, now governor of Kui-chan.

(39). Kuo-Sung-ling, now lieutenant-general in Chihli.

(40). Sung-k’ing, now lieutenant-general in Szi-chuan.

(41). Peng-Tsu-Hong, a native of Hunan, now commanding admiral in Fuh-kien.

(42). Chen-Kwo-Jin, known by foreigners as the instigator of the massacre of Tientsin.

(43). Ning-Ku-Ta or Ningunta, the largest town in the province of Kirin, the residence of the officers commanding the southeastern part of Kirin, lying on the sea of Japan; it lies on the Hurba, a branch of the Soagar River, in latitude 44° 55ʹ north, and longitude 128° east.

No. 169. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 169.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, May 27, 1880. (Received July 13.) No. 692.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatches Nos. 512 and 590, regarding the forms of official intercourse between consular officers and the Chinese provincial authorities, I have now the honor to hand to you a minute from the Tsung-li Yamên in response to that submitted by the diplomatic body. The minute is not entirely satisfactory, and the subject will be considered soon by the several foreign representatives, with a view to determine what further steps shall be taken.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 692.]

official intercourse—minute in response.

A minute has been received upon the intercourse between foreign consular officers and Chinese provincial officers, whether personal or by correspondence, submitting several points in which a modification of the present system is desirable, and asking that they receive attention, &c.

The subject was mentioned in a conference had with the foreign representatives upon the 20th of April, and hereinafter will be found the response of the foreign office upon the several points raised.

Point 1st.—A consular officer having occasion to speak to the governor-general or governor of a province on business, whether at a port or in the interior, should be assured access; and he should not be treated as the subordinate of the high authority, no matter what the inferiority of his official rank, but according to the etiquette established between host and guest.

Upon this proposition the Yamên remarks: “The treaties state that consuls and acting consuls rank with intendant of circuit; vice-consuls, acting vice-consuls, and interpreters rank with prefects. Since viceroys and governors, although not to be compared in their official rank with intendants and prefects, and notwithstanding the difference in rank, at the “present time do receive consular officers without other etiquette than than of host and guest, they will certainly continue to receive them whenever occasion arises.”

Point 2d.—Consular officers having occasion to correspond with the high provincial authorities upon official business, such correspondence should not take the form of a report from a deputy to his superior, nor of an instruction, from the higher officer to the lower. But, no matter what the difference of rank, the phrase “wen i” should be used, thus implying no assumption of authority of the one party over the other.

Upon this the Yamên remarks: “The treaties declare that consuls and acting consuls rank with intendants; vice-consuls, acting vice-consuls and interpreters with prefects. They shall have access to the official residences of these officers, and communicate with them, either personally or in writing, on a footing of equality. This refers to an actual equality of rank between the parties concerned. But if, regardless of inequalities in rank, the phrase ‘wen i’ were to be used, there would appear to be an inconsistency with the stipulations of the treaties.”

Point 3d.—In Chinese dispatches, when addressing a consular officer, the word “Kai” is not to be used, and it is suggested that whenever provincial authorities address a consular officer they should prefix the word “Kuei” to his title, and whenever speaking of a consular officer they should mention his name as “Mr. Consul so and so.”

Unon this the Yamên observes: “This point involves in no way the dignity of China, and instructions will be sent by the foreign office to the several provincial authorities to conform to these instructions.”

Point 4th.—Chinese provincial authorities, in their instructions to subordinate officials, have been in the habit of using a vermilion pencil to bracket or point out certain parts of the dispatch. This, looked at in the light of an instruction, in its employment in dispatches addressed to consular officers is not called for, and it is suggested that the practice be discontinued.

“There is no difficulty in complying with this suggestion. But in all Chinese official communications, it is customary to use the vermilion pencil at the moment of affixing the seal, both to punctuate the document and to indicate any erasures or alterations in the text. For example, the six boards use it int heir correspondence with this Yamên and certainly there can be no assumption of authority in their communications to us.”

The foregoing remarks are made in careful view of all the circumstances, and in a spirit of fairness, and submitted for the consideration of their excellencies the foreign representatives.

No. 170. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 170.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, May 31, 1880. (Received July 13.) No. 698.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatches, Nos. 650, 653, and 661, in which I informed you that the diplomatic body had requested me to speak with the ministers of the foreign office in regard to the mixed court at Shanghai, and more particularly to the dispatch last named, in which a minute of the interview was forwarded, I have now the honor to hand you herewith a copy of a letter which I have received from Sir Thomas Wade, doyen of the diplomatic body, in reference to the action taken by me.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 698.]

Sir Thomas Wade to Mr. Seward.

Peking, April 22, 1880.

Dear Sir and Colleague: I do myself the pleasure to acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 15th instant. I have since received also copy of the memorandum to which it refers of your conference with the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên regarding the mixed court at Shanghai.

Both papers having already been brought to the knowledge of our colleagues by yourself, there remains for me, as doyen, the acceptable duty of repeating to you, on behalf of my colleagues and myself, the assurance of our appreciation of the care and industry you have bestowed upon the execution of the task which at our joint request you undertook.

Believe me, &c.,

T. WADE.

The Hon. G. F. Seward, &c., &c., &c., United States Legation.

No. 171. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 171.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, June 10, 1880. (Received August 2.) No. 704.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No 555, with which I transmitted to you a copy of a circular addressed by me to our consular officers in China, asking for information upon the war power of China as indicated in their respective districts, I have now the honor to hand to you copies of the responses which have been received. These include reports from all our officers, except Mr. Shepard, at Hankow, and embody much interesting information upon the subject.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 704.]

Mr. Goldshorough to Mr. Seward.

Amoy, March 25, 1880. No. 103.]

Sir: In reply to your No. 83, requesting me to report to you upon the war power of China, including the condition of the army and navy, and of the forts, arsenals, and training establishments of this district, I beg to state that I have endeavored to procure the desired information and herewith submit the result of my investigations.

At the entrance of Amoy, on the eastern side, there is a battery some 1,500 feet long, commonly called the “200–gun battery,” and is guarded by a few hundred soldiers. There are several other smaller forts and batteries on the southwestern side of the harbor, but they are not of much consequence.

There is no training establishment nor arsenal here, and with regard to the land forces I have not been able to procure any information which would be reliable, but from my own observations I should fancy that they are very limited and of trivial consequence.

I may here state that we have now and then a number of Chinese gunboats, but these I am informed belong properly to Foochow. As to their efficiency, I am unable to speak. I have addressed no dispatches to the authorities here relative to the subject, but would have done so had I not been informed that little information could be derived from them.

I have, &c.,

W. ELWELL GOLDSBOROUGH.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 704.]

Mr. Cheshire to Mr. Seward.

United States Consulate,
Canton, March 15, 1880. No. 53.]

Sir: Pursuant to the request contained in your dispatch No. 74, I now have the honor to submit to you such facts as I have been able to obtain bearing upon the war power of this province, army of Kwang-tung. The number of regular troops allotted to the whole of Canton province is stated to be from 60,000 to 70,000. These are divided into the active forces and the garrison forces, the first category drawing higher pay than the second.

The pay of a soldier is 9 mace, 7 candareens, or equivalent to about $1.25 per month. To this is added a certain quantity of rice a month. When on active service I understand that an additional allowance is frequently made by the provincial administrative office, which amounts in some cases, to about $13 per month. Most of the fighting on land is done by “braves” or irregulars (see Mayer’s Chinese Government, page 59), who are paid from $6 to $7 per month for each man.

The real centers of military strength in the Canton province are Wei Chow, Canton, Shin Kuan, Swatow, Chin-chow, Lungwen, Hainan, and Kao Yao. The number of forces stationed at these places is put down at from 10,000 to 12,000 in all, and are mostly equipped with foreign rifles. Most of the forces stationed inland are armed with gingals.

The Chu-fang or Manchu garrison stationed at Canton is estimated to number about 3,500 men, including infantry and cavalry, 2,000 of which are drilled after the European fashion. This garrison is under the command of a Tartar general and two Tartar lieutenant generals, The majority of this force is assigned to guard duty, while some are employed at the various Tartar Yamêns in the capacity of clerks or assistants.

The pay of the Manchu soldier varies from $3 to $6 per month; petty officers, such as corporate and warrant officers, receive from $7 to $10 per month.

navy.

The Chinese navy of Canton consists principally of native craft. I am informed by a captain in command of one of the viceroy’s gunboats that there is a very large fleet of junks of war plying in the Canton waters. They are armed with from two to five guns, ranging from 12 to 18 pounders.

The principal naval station is at “The Bogue,” where the Chinese admiral-in-chief has his headquarter. There are also, in addition to these junks of war, about twelve foreign gunboats under the control of the viceroy, five of which are commanded by English and French officers. Of those commanded by foreign officers there are two carrying each seven guns of Armstrong and Krupp manufacture, viz: one 70-pounder Armstrong, two 20-pounders Krupp, two 18-pounders Krupp, two 12-pounders Krupp. The other three carry each four guns, and twelve 18-pounders (Krupp.)

The seven vessels commanded by Chinese officers are armed with three to four guns 18 to 24-pounders (Krupp.)

It is impossible to ascertain the exact number of men in the Canton navy, but I understand that there are not more than 3,000 regular marines.

forts.

During the past three years the provincial government has built five new forts, all of concrete, and said to be formidable defenses. There are three at or near “The Bogue,” commonly called “The Bogue Forts,” one between this and Whampoa, and another about three miles from Canton city, on the southern branch of the Pearl River. These forts have not as yet been supplied with guns.

arsenals.

There are three arsenals (so-called by the Chinese) within this consular district, one at a place called Tsing Pu, about four miles north of Canton, one at the south gate of Canton, and one at Whampoa.

The Tsing Pu arsenal was established about four years ago. It is the largest establishment of the kind in the Canton province, and it is fitted with very heavy machinery of English manufacture. There is a powder factory attached to the arsenal where the Chinese have been manufacturing powder for the past year and a half. Several small vessels (steamers) have been built at this place, ranging from 100 to 200 tons burden, but owing to the small depth of water in front of the ship-building yards, I do not think that any other but small vessels can be built there.

south gate arsenal.

This is a small establishment and the principal work done there is the manufacture of machinery, jingalls, and cartridges.

whampoa arsenal.

This was formerly the Hong-Kong and Whampoa Dock Company, which was purchased by the provincial government some three years ago. The only use the Chinese have made of this place, thus far, has been docking and repairing the foreign built steamers belonging to this province. There are no training schools at any of these establishments such as at the Foo Chow arsenal, where navigation, mechanics, &c., are taught. Most of the workmen employed at the above arsenals are Chinese who served an apprenticeship in foreign machine shops, boiler factories, and ship-building establishments.

Mr. Williams, at Swatow, writes as follows:

war power of china.

From personal inspection in this part of the Chinese Empire, I am satisfied that no serious opposition could be made by the Chinese local officials to the invasion of this part of the empire by any nation having the inclination to do so. It is true there are some seven different forts within a radius of 40 miles, only one of these being good for anything, having one gun mounted in it at present, with embrasures for about a dozen others; that is the new fortification built some two years since at Kialut, about two miles below the town; the remaining six are in a state of ruin and decay with a few old rusted cannon half buried in the mud, in and around the ruins.

On the occasional visits of some military officials a display of banners is made from the walls of these old ruins, and a few coolies are employed and dressed up as soldiers for the occasion. From continued inquiries in various quarters and information received, I am quite satisfied that a large proportion of the troops in this part of the province of Kwang-tung exists on paper only, and in numbers makes a good show on the pay-roll. I have no doubt, however, but the military mandarins could procure a number Of recruits in case of an emergency; troops of this kind would naturally be deficient in drill, poorly armed, and lacking the knowledge of modern warfare, and would make but a poor resistance against drilled troops, equipped with the modern implements of war.

I may safely say that not more than five thousand troops armed with foreign weapons exist in this part of Kwang-tung province, who understand anything about foreign drill—the majority being armed with flint-locks, spears, and pikes, and knowing nothing about foreign drill; the total of all arms at present do not amount to over nine thousand, and those are scattered through the different districts.

vessels of war.

The Chinese have no modern war vessels stationed here, but the port is occasionally visited by one of the Foo-Chow gunboats, which remains but a short time. One small Chinese lorcha, with four rifle cannons, 9-pounders, remains in and around this port, looking after smugglers, and some eight or ten war junks are stationed at the island of Namao some thirty miles distant, which is the head station of the Chinese admiral.

Serious damage could be inflicted on the Chinese by an enemy having the control of this port, as several rich and important cities are conveniently located to Swatow, the centers of an extensive import and export trade all of these places can be reached by the boats or fleets of an enemy, and but a very few troops would be required, if assisted by vessels of war, to completely destroy innumerable towns and villages in addition to the walled cities of Chow-Chow-fu, Kit-Yang, and Chow-Chow-Yang, the latter with a population of 155,000, the next about 130,000 and the former with a population of about 300,000.

arsenals.

The Chinese have no places of this kind here, I have been lately informed that at the city of Kit-Yang, some forty miles above Swatow on the main river, which is the home of Ting Fu-tai, the ex-governor of Fuh-Chien. There also a considerable supply of gunpowder stowed, and a few hundred stand of rifles of foreign manufacture.

It is also known here, that the Chinese General Fang, locally named Peng Tye-Gin, has been for some few months past employed in the manufacture of gunpowder, in the vicinity of Chow-Chow-fu. He has in his employ a Chinaman educated in France, who is a chemist, and who, I understand, is managing the powder factory.

I have, &c.,

F. D. CHESHIRE,
Vice-Consul in Charge.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 704.]

Mr. Scruggs to Mr. Seward.

Chin Kiang, February 9, 1880. No. 19.]

Sir: In compliance with the request contained in your No. 59 of the 10th ultimo, I have the honor to submit a brief memorandum of the war fooling of this empire within this consular district.

At Kiang Ying on the opposite shores of the Yangtse River, about half way between here and Shanghai, are substantial fortifications, armed with Crook guns, so arranged as completely to enfilade the river passage. The number and calibre of these guns, as also the number of the garrison, are not known. These fortifications are of recent completion, though begun some years ago.

The next fortifications above, are those at Silver Island, about a mile below Chin Kiang. The navigable channel at this point is the narrow, rapid current between the bluffs of the island and those on the opposite south bank of the river. The north current is wider and less rapid, but too shallow for heavy draught vessels. Both shores opposite the island, as also the island itself, are strongly fortified. Those on the south bank and on the island, and which completely enfilade the pass, are particularly strong. Indeed, engineers have pronounced them impregnable. They are armed with Crook guns of large calibre, and manned by a strong and well disciplined garrison.

On the opposite shores at Nanking, are similar fortifications, with Crook guns.

Chin Kiang is a garrisoned city. Its present available force is about 2,000 infantry and cavalry; nearly all Manchus, most of them natives of the place. The Manchus are arranged and drilled under different banners according to their tribal traditions and usage, and armed with match-locks. The commander (a Manchu of course) has the rank of brevet lieutenant general, and is under the immediate command of the general at Nanking.

On one of the high hills outside the city walls, and commanding its approaches from inland southwest, is a large stockade of recent construction, garrisoned by some 600 men, armed with match-locks, together with some 15 field pieces of 6 and 9 pounds calibre.

The mode of drilling (except for the Manchus) is that in use by the British Government. The words of command are given in English; the reason assigned for this is, that raw recruits will learn them quite as readily as those given in Chinese, since both sets of terms and methods are equally new to them, and that it will prevent confusion should a foreign commander be called to the service.

The only soldiers in the district that are armed with breech-loading rifles are those of the viceroy’s guard, some 6,000 strong, now stationed at Nanking.

Foreign powder, imported and sold only by special permission, (and then only for the use of the regular troops,) is principally used. The native powder is coarser grained, and thought to be more liable to accidental explosion. The high provincial authorities take good care to have as little of this (or any other) powder in the hands of the people as possible. Indeed, they seem to be constantly on the watch for possible insurrections. The lead used is imported (in pig form) from England, or through English agents.

Military preparations continue quite active, and seem to be directed mainly to the defenses of the country, and have, for months past, received more attention from the provincial authorities than any other branch of the public service.

I am, &c.,

WILLIAM M. SCRUGGS.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 704.]

Mr. De Lano to Mr. Seward.

Foow Chow, March 12, 1880. No. 155.]

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your dispatch No. 97, in which you request me to report to you such facts as I may be able to obtain, bearing upon the war power of China, including the condition of the army and navy, and of the forts, arsenals, and training establishments of my consular district.

I regret to have to say in reply that at the moment I cannot give you any reliable information on the subject. Such information, if obtained at all, must be gathered from the Chinese, and to be at all reliable must come from official sources, and the extreme reticence and suspiciousness of the officials when information on such subjects is openly sought for by foreigners render it very difficult to obtain from them any reliable data for such a report as you desire.

If later on I should obtain such information on the subject as would enable me to give you an intelligent and reliable report I shall have much pleasure in submitting one.

I have, &c.,

M. M. DE LANO.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 704.]

Mr. Bandinel to Mr. Seward.

New Chwang, March 30, 1880. No. 43.]

Sir: I have the honor to own receipt of your communication of 10th January, No. 63, wherein you desire me to report on such facts as I may be able to obtain bearing upon the war power of China, including the condition of the army and navy, and of the forts, arsenals, and training establishments in my district.

After careful inquiry I am able to lay before your excellency the following information upon the subject named.

There are in the three Manchurian provinces 100,000 Tartar soldiers—i. e., in Shin-King 30,000, in Kirin 40,000, and Hai-Lung-Chiang 30,000. These soldiers are not at present in active service, but are distributed about the provinces, tilling the ground allotted them by the Imperial Government, which, in addition, pays them a monthly allowance of 2 taels. They are not permitted to engage in any other business, and are liable to be called out at the requisition of the government, when they would be formed into infantry and cavalry, as the nature of the circumstances demanded, the tactics of which would be the ancient drill of China. According to established rules these soldiers should be drilled once a month, but this seems to be almost a dead letter, as they are really only manoeuvered once or twice in a twelvemonth.

At Moukhen, capital of this province, there are stationed 600 foreign-drilled troops from Tientsin, at Fing-Huang-Ching (Corean gate) there are 500 more under the Taotai of that place, and a like number stationed here, styled “The Taotai Guard.” There are no foreign-drilled troops in the other two provinces, although in each there are from 2,000 to 3,000 Manchu soldiers being instructed in foreign drill.

There is no naval establishment of importance in my district. The only one of which I can learn is at Kirin, described by the late Mr. Consul T. T. Meadows in the following words:

“Chun-Chang, or Navy-Yard, officially called Kuh-lin, and known to foreigners as Kirin, is the capital of the northeasterly Manchurian province, Kirin. * * * It owes its existence as a provincial capital, and its subsequent growth, to hostile parties of Cossack adventurers who, about two hundred years ago, ascended the Amoor, and came up the river Sungari in river craft. In his measures to repel them, the then Huang-li-Tanghe moved the military governor from Ning-Ku-ta to Kirin, at which he at the same time established a chun-chang, or navy-yard, where river war-craft were constructed to aid in the defensive operations.* * * The navy-yard still exists, and a number of vessels in good condition, some quite new, were laid up in it when I was there (1867 or ’68). They are one-masted craft of about the size of small lorchas.”

I may remark that during the greater part of the open season there is in this port one or more of the Foochow arsenal foreign-type gunboats, under the command of and manned by Chinese, but partially foreign disciplined.

At present there is no fort in my district, but it is stated, on good authority, that the Taotai has been instructed to erect one at the west of the native town of Yangtse, on the left bank of the river Liao, and the location has already been decided upon by him, and the work is to begin at once.

It is rumored here that Sung-Ching, the szchuen-ti-tu (commander-in-chief), at present in Houan, has been ordered to transport to this place 100,000 troops. Taking, the standard of one soldier representing four, this means that 25,000 soldiers are to be quartered here, the first detachment of which, 10,000 (2,500), is expected to arrive within three or four days.

For the truth of these statements I cannot vouch, but the active construction of barracks is going on, and four encampments are already laid out near the site of the projected fort.

I may have occasion to address your excellency a further communication on the subject of this dispatch.

I have, &c.,

J. J. F. BANDINEL.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 704.]

Mr. Lord to Mr. Seward.

United States Consulate,
Ningpo, February 28, 1880. No. 112.]

Sir: In reply to the request made in your dispatch, No. 51, dated the 10th ultimo, that I should report to you such facts as I might be able to obtain bearing upon the war power of China, including the condition of the army and navy, and of the forts, arsenals, and training establishments of this district, I beg to submit the following notes:

1. In speaking of the army and navy of China, it is needful at the outset to observe that these institutions are very unlike those to which these names are given in the West) The armies and the navies of England, France, Germany, and the United States, though differing as to size, make-up, and equipment, are yet all organizations. Each is a body, made up indeed of many parts, but of parts in which there is a mutual relation and a mutual dependence. And this body, however complicated, however vast, is governed by one law, animated by one spirit, and moved by one mind. An arm of the nation to which it belongs, the life of that nation lives in it, and the will of that nation controls it. The case is different here. Here there are men called soldiers, but there is no army; there are vessels called men-of-war, but there is no navy. Materials there may be adequate for both, but they are only materials, they are not yet constructed. In other words, the war power of China is essentially wanting in organization. Bearing this in mind, there will perhaps be no objection to the use of these terms, army and navy, in our notes on this subject.

2. There is in this province, as I suppose there is in each of the others, what in theory resembles a standing army. That is to say, there is a certain number of men enlisted and employed as soldiers. They are commanded by officers of various ranks, under the control of the te-tuh, or provincial general. The te-tuh of this province has naval, as well as army, jurisdiction. And for this reason he resides at Ningpo, the provincial port, rather than at Hangchow, the provincial capital. This officer is not, in our sense of the terms, either a naval or a military commander. He seems to be a sort of provincial secretary of war and of the navy. His jurisdiction and his powers are certainly large, but his knowledge of the matters over which he is placed must be very limited. He is supposed to know the number and location of his soldiers; the kind of arm—jingall, matchlock, or musket—which they bear; the names and commands of his subordinates; the amount of pay which soldiers and officers receive; and such like matters. He is supposed to know also when, where, and how many soldiers are needed, either to man forts, hold positions, or to put down disturbances. And, to a similar extent, his knowledge and authority extend to the vessels of war belonging to or serving within his district. But in matters of practical warfare, such as army organization and discipline, navigation, naval architecture, gunnery, army and naval tactics, as they are understood in the West, he has probably very little theoretical and no practical knowledge. What, then, one might ask, is he good for? Well, in war, as it is carried on among western nations, he would be good for nothing. But he has his place here.

The war power of this province, such as it is, needs a head. And the head that he makes has at least this to recommend it, that it is suited to the body. And, it may be added, both are in keeping with the ideas and institutions of the country.

3. The number of soldiers enrolled in this province is not always the same. A few years ago it is said to have been some 39,000. The present number is said to be about 20,000. And it seems to be regulated in this way: The te-tuh, the officer of whom I have spoken, is presumed to know the number, kind, and equipment of the soldiers needed to defend and keep in order his district. He reports on these matters to the lieutenant-governor or to the governor, or to both, and through them, or with their concurrence, to the head government at Peking. And the order received in reply settles, in theory, the matter. I say “in theory,” for in this, as in many other things here, theory and practice are not always the same.

If the general government assents to the enrollment of 20,000 soldiers in this province, it must of course allow the expense for the pay and equipment of this number, to be deducted from the provincial revenue. This being understood, it is easy to see that those in charge of the matter might, if so inclined, actually employ a number considerably less than that reported as needed, and appropriate the amount thus saved to objects nearer home; common report says that this is done, and done to a very considerable extent. And common report in this matter is very likely correct. There is no way to ascertain the actual number of soldiers in this province. But I should be inclined to place it below rather than above 10,000. This number, or the number whatever it may be, is distributed in larger or smaller detachments throughout the province. The nominal number assigned to Ningpo and its surroundings is betwixt two and three thousand. This includes also those who serve on board the gunboats.

4. The land forces of this province are infantry. The country, owing to the want of roads, and to the numerous canals and watercourses, is adapted to the use of neither cavalry nor artillery. They are armed mainly with jingalls, matchlocks, and muskets. These jingalls and matchlocks are very rude and unwieldy weapons of war, and they could be of very little use in conflict with arms now used in the West. The muskets are foreign made, but only a small number are in use; and those in use are most likely of inferior kind.

5. Chinese soldiers are poorly paid. Each man is allowed a pound or two of rice per diem, and, in addition, a little money. The monthly pay of a soldier, including his rice, would probably not exceed $4. No clothing, I believe, is found him, except his uniform. This consists of a coarse blue cotton jacket, with some red trimming, and with some letters stitched on the front and back. The whole cost of this garment would probably be less than a dollar. And it is of very little use, except to indicate that the person wearing it is a soldier.

6. These soldiers are not only poorly equipped and poorly paid, but they are poorly disciplined. Indeed, they can hardly be said to have any discipline. A large number of them are engaged in other pursuits, and are seldom or never called upon to render any military service. And even those supposed to be in the service are only to a very limited extent charged with the duties of ordinary soldiers. Their mode of life is essentially idle, and their idleness results in demoralization. Thus, badly equipped, badly paid, and badly disciplined, they could not, one would suppose, be of any great benefit to their country. They may be, and probably they are, of some use in putting down or preventing local disturbances, though in doing it they are sure to commit extortions and cruelties of every kind. But the protection which they would afford their country, in case of hostile invasion, would probably be very small. The soldiery of this province a few years ago, when called to face the long-haired rebels, were not only weak, but they were utterly contemptible. It was said of them, and I believe with entire justice, that they were more formidable to their friends than to their enemies. They may have improved somewhat since then; yet, even now, were similar troubles to arise, is it likely that their behavior would be such as to redeem them from this old contempt? I think it very doubtful.

7. On the whole, then, the war power of this province, so far as concerns the number, character, and equipment of its soldiers, does not seem to be very formidable. Formidable no doubt it would be in attacking and cutting down unarmed peasants, and in burning and ravaging their districts. But placed face to face with well-armed and well-disciplined troops, it would not and could not stand.

8. The fortifications that are kept up in this province are not numerous, and most of them, I should judge, would be of very little use in case of hostile invasion. An exception to this remark should perhaps be made in favor of a fort of some pretensions recently built at the mouth of the Ningpo River. I have not Visited this fort myself, and I can give no better account of it than that found in the Reports on Trade at the Treaty Ports in China for the year 1875, page 181, and which, to save the trouble of reference, I will here copy: “The out station of Chinhai has been some time in the hands of the military engineers. A large fort is being built there on the extremity of the citadel hill, on the left bank of the river. This fort is being built after foreign designs—I believe supplied by Germans. It stands about 60 feet above the water, and commands the entrance to the river, the direct line of fire of the guns bearing (as far as I could judge) on the Seaon Yew Spit buoy. This fort, which is being built of native stone, is intended to be bomb-proof. The guns will be mounted on three platforms, four on the lower, three on the next, and one on the top. The lower ones at least will be mounted en embrasure, the openings being plated with iron to a thickness of about three inches, and provided with riveted iron doors of about the same thickness. The guns on the lower platforms are English made, of rather early date, but I believe they have been bored out and refined. The piece de resistance will be mounted on the upper platform. It is a large, breech-loading 10-ton Krupp cannon, mounted on a carriage worked by hydraulic power, and made to train over an arc of some 150°. It was brought here on the 5th June in the Chinese gun-vessel Fupo, and remained for some time on board pending the devising of some means of getting it landed at Chinhai. After some three or four months it was landed close under the fort and raised to the necessary elevation on a series of wooden platforms securely fixed into the rock. I have not yet heard of its being mounted. The estimated cost of the whole fort is put down at Haikwan taels 30,000. The work is being principally done by soldier labor.”

There was a fort in the process of construction in the harbor of Ting-hai at Chu-san, in the summer of 1876. I saw it at that time. It was built of stone. Its form was round or polygonal. Its walls were some seven or eight feet high, and some five or six feet thick. It had ports, I think, for some five or six guns, and quarters sufficient to accommodate some fifty soldiers. The work was yet unfinished. No guns were seen in or about the place. The work appeared to me unsubstantial, and good for nothing against heavy cannon shot. I do not know whether the work has been completed, but I suppose it has.

There are two forts that I have noticed on the banks of the Wenchow River; one is at the city of Wenchow, a little east of the city wall, the other is on the opposite bank of the river and several miles further down. I have not seen the inside of either, but I should judge them to be frail structures, and with no effective armament.

9. There is no arsenal or place where arms are manufactured or ships are built in this province. The war steamers on this station (there are three of them now) were built at the Foochow Arsenal. Two of these vessels are stationed at Ningpo, and one at Wenchow. This vessel is but recently built. She was waiting for her armament a week or two ago. These three vessels, both in size and equipment, are very respectable, and in war, if well handled, they would no doubt do good service. They are commanded and worked entirely by natives.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD C. LORD.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 704.]

Mr. Denny to Mr. Seward.

United States Consulate,
Tientsin, February 3, 1880.

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 70, requesting me to report to you such facts, as I may be able to obtain regarding the war power of China, the condition of her army, navy, forts, arsenals, and training establishments, I beg to say in regard to the questions generally, that as my experience with them is limited, perhaps the most appropriate thing I can do is to refer to the valuable report of that accomplished soldier and military critic General Upton, upon the war power of China, contained between pages 12 and 32, and continued on page 389, made to the War Department in December, 1877.

The condition of the army, its numbers, and kinds of arms used, are about the same as when the general visited China. The navy in these waters now, instead of consisting of two wooden gun-boats as it did then, has had added to it eight small iron gunboats, each with one 35-ton gun, which are intended for harbor defense only. These additions, as well as all other military and naval changes, have hitherto been fully reported to the War Department at Washington by the commanders of the different United States gun-boats visiting this port.

The number and condition of the forts remain the same, the only increase in strength being the addition of a few medium sized Krupp guns.

There are two arsenals at Tientsin, and a recent visit to these showed them to be apparently in good working condition.

As to training establishments, I am not aware that there are any such in my district, except the torpedo school, which is now closed temporarily.

I am, sir, &c.

O. N. DENNY.

No. 172. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 172.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, June 11, 1880. (Received August 2.) No. 705.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith copies of the answers which have been received from our consular officers in this empire to the inquiry made in a circular addressed to them as to efforts being made to educate the Chinese in foreign branches of knowledge, either by the Government of China, by private enterprise, or by missionary effort. The circular referred to was forwarded to the Department with my dispatch No. 600.

While these reports are not as full as I could have wished, they still furnish an outline of the work which is being done, and may be of interest to the Department.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 705.]

Mr. Goldsborough to Mr. Seward.

Amoy, April 23, 1880. No. 107.]

Sir: In response to your dispatch No. 86, of February 27, 1880, I beg to state that there are two private English schools at this port for the education of Chinese, conducted by native-born Chinese, who possess a fair knowledge of the English language, but there is no institution of the kind founded or supported by the government.

The missionaries have several schools of their own for the tuition of Chinese boys and girls in the Chinese language.

I have, &c.,

W. ELWELL GOLDSBOROUGH.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 705.]

Mr. Cheshire to Mr. Seward.

Canton, March 29, 1880. No. 55.]

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your dispatch No. 78, calling upon me to furnish you with such information as may be available to me in regard to the education of Chinese in foreign languages within this consular district, whether in schools founded and supported by the Chinese Government or by private enterprise, or by missionaries, as far as the secular branches are concerned, and also to report upon the schools established at Hong-Kong by the colonial government. I now beg to submit the following report:

The Tung wen Kwan is the only scholastic institution under government auspices for teaching foreign knowledge in Canton. It was established by order of the Tsung-li Yamên about sixteen years ago; it is under the official control of the Viceroy, the Hai Kwan (superintendent of customs), the Tartar general, and two lieutenant Tartar generals, but the practical control is left almost entirely in the hands of the Tartar general, to whom it affords opportunities of patronage, for the staff is large, and the members thereof not only benefit by the salaries they receive, but their official appointment as officers of the college (Tang wen Kwan) forms a stepping-stone to promotion in other branches of the public service. The staff consists of three superintendents, the chief of whom holds rank about equivalent to that of a major-general, three Chinese teachers, a foreign teacher, with a Chinese assistant, two Chinese clerks, doorkeepers, cooks, and other servants. The number of students is fixed at thirty, of whom twenty are classed as students proper and ten as supernumerary students, the latter being intended to fill vacancies as they occur in the former, and when, from various causes, the total number falls to twenty or twenty-live, fresh supernumeraries are added to make up the number. The students proper receive a small pay of three taels a month, but the supernumeraries receive nothing except a free breakfast every day.

It is difficult to define the raison d’être of the Tung wen Kwan College; in theory it is established to provide the Chinese Government with a staff of interpreters and persons conversant with foreign literature and foreign habits of thought; but so far as can be judged by patent facts, the patronage above referred to is the element most appreciated, and it may be well to notice the extent to which the theoretical object has been carried out, and how far the Chinese Government has availed itself of the material for the production of which something like eight hundred dollars a month has been expended for the last sixteen years in the maintenance of the college.

About ten years ago fourteen students were drafted from Canton to the Peking College; of these five have retired from various causes, six are still attached to the Peking College, and the remaining three have appointments in legations abroad; one in Washington, one in London, and one in Japan. Since 1870, not one student has been drafted to Peking; not one of the Canton students has in any way been called upon to Tender service to their government; most of them have received an honorary literary degree (Hsin Tsai) equivalent to B. A., and three or four of them are nominally interpreters, for which they receive a small additional pay.

Year after year passes, and boys of 17 grow up to be men of 27, marry and become fathers and go on with their foreign studies without so much as a word of encouragement from their own authorities. Under such discouraging circumstances, it must be that studying is often done in a perfunctory way, and yet, while some of the students have, as I understand, a very good knowledge of English, wanting only practice outside the school walls to render it equal to that of any Chinaman who has not had the advantage of living abroad, they constantly witness men of less technical knowledge than themselves, men of lower stamp altogether, men picked up here and there without any proper steps being taken to ascertain their fitness, called upon to perform the very duties for the performance of which the students of the Tung wen Kwan are in theory specially educated. The course of study, I am informed, consists chiefly of the English language, together with, but subordinate to, which there are geography, arithmetic, history, algebra, mathematics, and astronomy. A very small proportion of the students have made any progress in algebra or mathematics; few are even fair arithmeticians, and much that they are called upon to learn of geography, history, and astronomy, is soon forgotten. This arises from no want of ability, but from an utter want of encouragement on the part of the Chinese authorities, for the students to trouble themselves with such studies. Without a reasonable knowledge of the language, they are liable, on the motion of the foreign teacher, to be dismissed from the school, and in the acquisition of that they are to some extent buoyed up with hope, a hope that sometimes becomes lamentably faint, that the language will ultimately be of service to them; but with respect to the other branches, I am given to understand, no person in authority except the foreign teacher seems to know or care whether they are taught or not. The students consist almost entirely of Tartars (including banner-men); originally about one-third were Chinese, but it was found that after learning English at the expense of government, these latter generally disappeared; the Tartars are much more bound to the government, and are loyal both from training and self-interest. As young men they are far more noble and honorable in their character than the Chinese, lacking in a great measure the low cunning which often characterizes the latter, especially when they get official employment; but it is hard to say how far their natural nobility and honor would suffer if they were thrown into that vortex of corruption and dishonesty which pertains to official life.

I am informed that there has, for the past year or two, been an intention to add a German and a French department to the Canton College, and that extensive premises have been erected for this purpose; but some difficulty about funds seems to have caused further steps to be postponed.

private schools.

There are no private schools worthy of the name in Canton for teaching foreign languages. Now and then a small school is opened in which English is professed to be taught by a man whose knowledge of that language is too limited to fit him for other employment, and after a brief struggle these schools die out one after another. There is no doubt that the advantages offered by the government schools in Hong-Kong are too great to enable private schools in Canton to compete with them.

missionary schools.

None of the missionaries in Canton teach English or any other foreign language to their Chinese pupils now, nor have they done so for some years. They found by experience that it was very difficult to teach English to their pupils, because of their inaptitude to learn Western languages; that the object of the majority who came to their schools (formerly) to learn English was simply to get a sufficient knowledge of that language to enable them to get some lucrative employment with foreigners, and as soon as they had acquired a little smattering of English they disappeared and passed away beyond their Christian instruction.

I shall endeavor to furnish you with some particulars in regard to the schools established at Hong-Kong by the colonial government shortly.

I have, &c.,

F. D. CHESHIRE.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 705.]

Mr. Scruggs to Mr. Seward.

Chin Kiang, March 24, 1880. No. 21.]

Sir: I had the honor to receive, on the 21st instant, your dispatch No. 63, of the 27th February last. In response thereto, I regret to say there is not a school of any kind, native or foreign public or private, secular or religious, within this district, in which Chinese are educated by foreign methods or in foreign knowledge. The missionary schools are all conducted in the native language, and their curriculum confined to purely religious and sectarian instruction. A few young men among the native residents of this port take lessons in the English language from a native interpreter educated at Hong-Kong, but now employed herein the customs service. But they seek to know no more of our language than is barely necessary to aid them in business tranactions with foreigners; and what they do thus acquire is little else than the barbarous and childish dialect known as “Pigeon English.” I know of but one exception, and that is the case of General Wong, the military commandant here, an educated Chinaman, who is ambitious to enter the diplomatic service of his country.

I am, &c.,

WILLIAM L. SCRUGGS.

[Inclosure 4 in No 705.]

Mr. De Lano to Mr. Seward.

Foo Chow, May 5, 1880. No. 164.]

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your dispatch No. 109, asking me for such information as may be available to me in regard to the education of Chinese in foreign knowledge in this consular district.

There are at the Foochow Arsenal two schools, one under English and the other under French management. In the former the number of students varies between thirty and fifty, and the studies pursued are English, arithmetic, geometry, geography, grammar, trigonometry, algebra, and navigation. In a four-and-a-half years’ course the students receive from the government a monthly stipend of four dollars.

There is a naval and a mechanical branch of the same school, each having an average of 25 students receiving the same monthly allowance from the government, which also pays a very liberal salary to the professors in charge.

The school under French management has about 40 pupils, in four divisions, studying French, arithmetic, elements of algebra, geometry, trigonometry, analytic geometry and calculus, mechanical engineering, transmission of power and friction. The branches of this school are a school of design and school of apprentices, the pupils pursuing many of the studies enumerated above, and receiving the same stipend of $4 per month. The professor is very liberally paid.

I know of no schools founded by private enterprise in which foreign studies are pursued. There are several schools for both males and females conducted by foreign missionaries in which other than secular branches of study are pursued; say, the elementary branches, such as geography, mathematics, astronomy, &c., but all in the Chinese language.

I am unable at present to state the number of pupils usually in attendance in these latter schools.

I have, &c.,

M. M. DE LANO.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 705.]

Mr. Shepard to Mr. Seward.

Hankow, April 10, 1880. No. 45.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 85, on the subject of educating natives in foreign sciences, I have to report that I cannot learn of anything done in my district of any moment. At sundry times some foreigners wanting employment have opened small schools in Hankow, intending to teach people of any age to read English. The results have been inconsiderable, as the enterprise has in all cases been abandoned as soon as more lucrative pursuits have been available. Besides this, I know of no efforts made in the direction of your inquiry except some work of Dr. A. C. Burns, of the American Episcopal Mission at Wuchong, who, before he left, gave some instruction to a few converts in the theory and practice of medicine. In his view, his results were encouraging, but not fully developed.

I am informed also that Dr. Manley, now located here in charge of the London Mission Hospital, is preparing a system of instruction and intends soon to put it in operation, for the systematic training of native pupils in the principles and science of physiology, with surgical and medical training, in a course of some years’ duration, in connection with his important hospital work.

Beyond these I know of nothing done in the line of your investigation.

I am, &c.,

ISAAC F. SHEPARD.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 705.]

Mr. Bandinel to Mr. Seward.

New Chwang, March 30, 1880. No. 42.]

Sir: In response to your excellency’s dispatch No. 66, I have the honor to state that, as far as I can learn, there is not within the three Manchurian provinces any school founded or supported by native official or private enterprise in which foreign knowledge is imparted to Chinese students. From inquiries among the missionaries, I learn that the Roman Catholics have a college, under foreign supervision, wherein 26 pupils are instructed in Latin, philosophy, theology, and the elements of geography, mathematics, &c., &c., and whence four pupils have been ordained as priests. The Irish Presbyterian Mission has a boys’ school, under the supervision of a clerical missionary, wherein 20 scholars, from nine to thirteen years of age, are instructed in geography, penmanship, and the course of (four) reading books used in the government schools at Hong-Kong. They will learn, when more advanced, arithmetic and other subjects. There is also the nucleus of a girls’ school, only two pupils, supervised by the missionary’s wife, who teaches them plain sewing in addition to the above branches of knowledge.

Mr. Carson also contemplates starting a day school in the heart of the city in connection with the above-mentioned, which are held in his compound.

The medical missionary of the Irish Presbyterian mission has in his own compound, a boys’ school with 15 scholars, and in an adjacent building a girls’ school with 9 scholars; many of these are too young to learn much, but the elder ones learn geography (Wade’s book), and three boys and three girls are taught to read and write English.

The Scotch United Presbyterians have a mission here, but apparently neither in their boys’ school, recently discontinued, nor in their girls’ school, which numbers 14 scholars, has any foreign secular education been, except indirectly, imparted. The girls, however, are learning foreign needle-work.

I have, &c.,

J. J. F. BANDINEL.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 705.]

Mr. Macintyre to Mr. Bandinel.

My Dear Mr. Bandinel: In our boys’ school, which we have now discontinued, our object was to give the children of our church members a Chinese classical education, such as they would receive in a first-class native school. Our principle was that of the grammar schools at home. Outside of the regular lessons there was daily the “religious hour,” or morning and evening class, where I instructed them in religious truth. I only hound myself to spend one hour per day with the scholars, and therefore never formally laid myself out to train them in foreign knowledge. But I have, of course, introduced all manner of subjects in my illustrations, making it a point, incidentally, to introduce whatever knowledge of historical and scientific subjects I myself possessed.

The school-room has always been well supplied with books. I think we have had almost every foreign work which has been translated; and we take in for the school, 1. The Globe Magazine. 2. The Scientific Magazine. 3. The Child’s Paper.

I have several times had teachers who took a great interest in these periodicals, and who did what they could to make the subjects intelligible to their pupils. We still continue a flourishing girls’ school. We also teach the Chinese classics there with great success, though the classics are, as it were, taught incidentally, and scripture history, &c., form the bulk of the teaching. The girls are being taught foreign needle-work, but have not made any very great attainments. But in most cases the direct teaching has borne mostly on Chinese subjects, and we have trusted to the personal influence of the foreigners to communicate foreign knowledge.

Yours, sincerely,

J. MACINTYRE.

[Inclosure 8 in No. 705.]

Mr. Carson to Mr. Bandinel.

My Dear Mr. Bandinel: In reply to your letter of the 18th instant, I beg to state that the secular subjects taught in the school are geography, penmanship, and the course of reading-books taught in the government school at Hong-Kong.

These reading-books, four in number, in a graduated series, treat of a great variety of subjects, both foreign and native. As soon as the children are far enough advanced they will be taught arithmetic and other subjects.

The school is a free boarding-school supported by the mission, and our object is to train for ourselves a staff of native helpers.

Believe me, &c.,

JAMES CARSON.

[Inclosure 9 in No. 705.]

Mr. Hunter to Mr. Bandinel.

My Dear Mr. Bandinel: The only secular instruction given in my school is in geography. I have given half a dozen children—three girls and three boys—lessons in English. The lessons are merely in reading and writing.

This is all I have to say in reply to your communication of the 18th instant.

I am, &c.,

J. M. HUNTER,
Medical Missionary.

[Inclosure 10 in No. 705.]

Mr. Lord to Mr. Seward.

Ningpo, April 20, 1880. No. 119.]

Sir: I am sorry that I have not been able to reply earlier to your dispatch No. 57, requesting such information as I might have in regard to the education of Chinese in foreign knowledge within this consular district.

Nothing, I believe, has been done in this respect by the Chinese Government or by Chinese officials in this province, either to found or sustain schools in which foreign knowledge has been taught. Nor has anything worth speaking of been accomplished by private enterprise, outside of missionaries. There was a small attempt made here a few years ago to get up an English school for natives, but it came to nothing, very likely through the incapacity of the person who undertook it.

Missionaries from the beginning of their work here have had schools of various kinds. The object of these shools has, of course, been religious; yet, as in religious schools at home, secular knowledge has been taught in them to some extent. Missionaries in this part of China have not, as a general thing, encouraged their pupils to learn English; but they have tried to teach them history, geography, mathematics, philosophy, astronomy, physiology, medicine, &c., and their efforts have no doubt been attended with some success. The number thus instructed may not have been very large, and, bearing in mind the great difficulties under which the instruction must have been given, we can hardly suppose that the results have been very great. Still, something has been done. A beginning at least has been made in the work of a higher and better education among this people.

Though aside from these mission schools there has been in this place no organized efforts for the education of Chinese in foreign knowledge, one will often meet with Chinese who have acquired more or less of this knowledge. Some of these have been taught in schools elsewhere, either at other ports or in foreign countries, and others have in one way or another been so related that this knowledge has in various degree come to them. And these instances are continually increasing.

The number of Chinese who speak English, and who have more or less English education, is less here than at some of the other ports. They naturally go to places where there is a demand for these qualifications. There has, so far, been very little demand for them here.

This reminds me of a matter to which I have long been wishing to call your attention. It is the inconvenience and disadvantage under which consular officers are placed in being required to write their dispatches in Chinese to Chinese officials. I wish to say something on this subject, but perhaps I had better do it in another letter and when I have more leisure.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD C. LORD.

[Inclosure 11 in No. 705.]

Mr. Denny to Mr. Seward.

Tientsin, March 9, 1880. No. 37.]

Sir: In reply to your dispatch No. 78, I beg to state that the only educational establishment of any kind where Chinese may acquire foreign knowledge is the torpedo school connected with the imperial arsenal. Up to last autumn the school had been for three years under the care of Mr. Betts, an English telegrapher, and the class of fifteen young men who graduated last year and carried off the honors of feathers and buttons, plumed themselves upon their acquirement of the English alphabet, words of two syllables, the first four rules of arithmetic, and a few chapters in geography. They were at once told off to the several forts and telegraph stations in this neighborhood, and having acquired official employment it is not likely that they will give more attention to foreign studies. A new class of twenty-seven boys is now being grounded in the alphabet by Mr. Spencer Laisun, a Chinese, who has attended school in the United States. There is now no foreigner connected with the school, and as a measure of economy, there is no intention to engage another.

At Chefoo there is a missionary school, where boys are taught foreign arithmetic, geography, and the elements of natural science, through the medium of their own language.

Excepting the imperial college at Peking, these are the only organized efforts being made within this consular district to introduce foreign learning.

I have, &c.,

O. N. DENNY.

No. 173. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 173.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, July 5, 1880. (Received August 27.) No. 718.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you herewith a translation of a note which I have received from Prince Kung, inclosing a copy of an important edict in the case of Chung How, late Chinese minister to Russia.

I am informed, on what seems to be good authority, that the Kuldja question and Chung How’s case have recently been made the subject of the deliberations of a council of state at this capital. One of the results of these deliberations is the decree given herewith. I learn further that a wide difference of opinion was manifested in the council between the members of the so-called pro-foreign and anti-foreign parties in Chinese politics as to the proper course to be taken in the present condition of affairs, and that eight of the members of the council, headed by the older brother of Prince Kung, refused to sign the report to the Throne upon which the present edict is based. The action thus taken indicates a disposition favorable to peace on the part of this government, and that the counsels of Prince Kung are again in the ascendency.

The childish condition attached to the suspension of punishment or the pardon of Chung How that he is to remain in prison until the settlement with Russia is effected, was probably demanded by Prince Kung’s opponents.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 718.]

Prince Kung to Mr. Seward.

July 3, 1880.

I had the honor to receive some time since a note from yonr excellency in the matter of the punishment inflicted upon the minister Chung How, to which a reply was duly made.

His Imperial Majesty the Emperor of China is much concerned lest aversion and distrust shall grow out of this business, the possibility of which was indicated in your excellency’s note. His Imperial Majesty therefore, as an act of special grace, has revoked the punishment denounced upon Chung How, in evidence of the friendly feeling between China and Russia.

I beg leave to submit herewith a copy of the imperial decree for your information, and to express my gratitude to your excellency.

Cards and compliments.

an imperial degree.

As Chung How, sent as our envoy to Russia, violated his instructions and exceeded his powers, and because the treaty made by him contained many stipulations which were impracticable, our high ministers of state in counsel deliberated upon his offenses and decided that he should be decapitated after the autumn assizes as a punishment befitting his guilt.

But now we hear from without* that this matter is discussed and that many are of opinion that the punishment of Chung How on the part of China reflects upon the dignity of Russia. This is very far from being the design of the Imperial Throne. China has been upon a footing of amity with Russia for more than two hundred years, and it is assuredly our desire that this may continue to the end of time, and that the amicable relations of friendly states may not be destroyed.

Chung How, in obedience to our mandate, acting as our minister, without deliberate and careful negotiations with Russia, recklessly gave assent to stipulations which China cannot fulfill. He has brought his punishment upon himself.

The Throne deals with him according to the statutes, and maintains that, in thus acting, the laws of China deal with a minister of China, and that Russia is not affected in any way.

But we fear that, as the report of our action must travel to a great distance and be transmitted from one to another, the real motives which have prompted the conduct of China in this business may not be perfectly understood; that aversion and distrust may spring from a misapprehension of our motives, and that friendly relations will be unavoidably interfered with.

We, therefore, acting outside of the statutes, and as a special mark of grace, remit temporarily the sentence of decapitation after the autumn assizes passed upon Chung How. Let him, however, he detained in prison until the Marquis Tseng shall have reached Russia, and it shall appear how the matters at issue may he adjusted, when a further decree in his case will be made known.

Let the Marquis Tseng upon the receipt of this decree inform the Government of Russia that the sentence of decapitation passed upon Chung How has been temporarily remitted, and let him state that in this act is to be seen an evidence of the friendly sentiments of China towards Russia.

In the treaty stipulations which he must negotiate, let him deal with the business and reach a satisfactory solution, in accordance with our will as already expressed to him.

Respect this.

* Outside the palace.—C. H.

No. 174. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 174.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Pelting, July 6, 1880. (Received August 27.) No. 719.]

Sir: I have the honor to hand to you, herewith, a copy of a dispatch which I have received from our consul at Ningpo, discussing the question why foreign officials should not make use of their own language in their communications to the Chinese authorities, and stating his conviction that the time has come when the Chinese should be called upon to do their share of the work of translating official communications.

I have responded to Dr. Lord, that he is at liberty to send his dispatches to the authorities in English if he can do so without sacrificing any of the interests committed to him.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 719.]

Mr. Lord to Mr. Seward.

Ningpo, May 31, 1880. No. 124.]

Sir: I venture to submit a few remarks for your consideration on the question which forms the subject of this letter, namely, “Why should not foreign officials use their own language in their communications addressed to the Chinese authorities?”

That they should do so, and that they should do so as soon as it could be made practicable, was certainly contemplated at the time when the treaties were made, as a number of these treaties have stipulations to that effect.

In the English treaty, Article I, we read: “All official communications addressed by the diplomatic and consular agents of Her Majesty the Queen to the Chinese authorities shall, henceforth, be written in English. They will, for the present, be accompanied by a Chinese version, but it is understood that, in the event of there being any difference of meaning between the English and Chinese text, the English Government will hold the sense as expressed in the English text to be the correct one.”

The language of the French treaty, Article III, is to the same effect, only more explicit. We read: “Les communications officio lies des agents diplomatiques et consulates français avee les autorités chinoises seront écrites en français, niais seront accompagnées, pour faciliter le service, d’une traduction chinoise aussi exacte que possible, jusqiv’au moment oú le gouvernemeut impérial de Pérkin ayant des interprètes pour parler et ècrire correctement le francais, la correspondance aura lieu dans cette langue pour les agents francais, et en chinois pour les fonctionnaires de l’empire.”

Several of the other treaties have similar stipulation, but I need not burden this letter with further quotations. Their language on this subject is the language of reason simply stating what should be, and what commonly is, official custom, that communications are made in the language of the party addressing, and that translations of them, if translations are needed, must be provided by the party addressed. There would be no justice, there would be great inconvenience in laying the burden of making these translations all upon one side. And so it is never done except under extraordinary circumstances, and then only, as here contemplated, till these circumstances can be changed. At the time these treaties were made’, it was understood that the Chinese Government could not perform its part of this work, for the want of suitable interpreters. So foreign governments kindly consented to perform this work for it, until it should have time to provide its interpreters, it being understood, of course, that prompt and efficient effort would be made in that direction. This was many years ago, time more than enough for all the interpreters needed to have been born, reared, trained, and put into service. But we see them not.

The burden which we took up then we have still to carry; and there is very little doubt but we shall have to carry it forever, unless we ourselves determine to lay it down. The Chinese certainly will never offer to relieve us of it. They understand too well the convenience and advantage afforded them by their present freedom. But we need not blame them for this. We might do the same in like circumstances, for we can easily imagine what a convenience it would be to us, if, in our intercourse with these officials, we could use our own language in our communications to them, and then have them use it in their communications to us. To be rid of the endless bother which we now experience, first in trying to understand them, and then in trying to make them understand us, would be a boon that we might well covet. This boon—this peculiar privilege—they have long enjoyed, and one can hardly wonder if they are loth to part with it now. Of course the peculiar privilege which they have enjoyed we cannot expect. We cannot ask the Chinese to speak and write to us in English. They will use their own language, and it is right and proper that they should, but we may ask and insist upon a similar right, the right to use our language in our communications to them.

* * * * * * *

I do not know whether you will regard this a subject of sufficient importance to demand your attention either now or at some future time. But it is one which practical difficulties have often forced upon my attention; and I have taken the liberty of submitting to you these few remarks upon it.

I have, &c.,

E. C. LORD.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 719.]

Mr. Seward to Mr. Lord.

Peking, June 12, 1880. No. 69.]

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your very interesting dispatch No. 124. I concur in your view that it is desirable to use the English language in letters addressed to the Chinese authorities, whenever we can do so without injury to the interests involved, and that it will be allowable to write in English, having reference to treaty stipulations and to some, at least, international usages.

If you believe, then, that you can discontinue the preparation of dispatches in Chinese, sending them to the authorities in English, without sacrificing the interest confided to you, you have my full approval for adopting such course.

I am, &c.,

GEORGE. F. SEWARD.

No. 175. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 175.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, July 10, 1880. (Received August 27.) No. 726.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 718, in which were inclosed copies of a note and edict regarding Chung How, late Chinese minister to Russia, I now have the honor to transmit herewith a copy of a note in reply which I am sending to Prince Kung.

Asking your approval of this action on my part,

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure in No. 726.]

Mr. Seward to Prince Kung.

Peking, July 10, 1880. Informal.]

I have had the honor to receive the letter which your imperial highness addressed to me on the 3d instant in regard to the case of Chung How.

When I had the honor some time since to communicate to your imperial highness certain views which I held touching the matter in question, I spoke, as is my habit, with sincere and earnest feelings of friendship for China, and I desire now to express to you my thanks for the very considerate manner in which you received my words.

It is not likely that I should have again spoken upon this subject had your imperial highness not again addressed me, for I recognize, as does my government, your right to deal with your officers in your own way. But since I have received a further letter from you, I think it not inappropriate to state that my government has informed me that it specially approved the language used in my earlier note. You will see from this that the information of the suspension of the sentence of the ex-embassador will be received with appreciation at Washington, and that the clemency of the Emperor will be regarded as indicating his disposition to promote peaceful relations with all countries, and to deal considerately with a person who has served the state in distinguished ways.

I seize this occasion, &c.

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 176. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 176.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, July 28, 1880. (Received September 15.) No. 739.]

Sir: Recurring to my dispatch No. 665, in which I informed you that the diplomatic body had confided to the German minister the negotiation on its behalf with the foreign office of the reforms needed in the export trade, and to my dispatch No. 695, covering a report of an interview had by Mr. von Brandt with the Chinese ministers upon this subject, I have now the honor to hand to you herewith a copy of a letter which I have received from him, giving the results of a second interview in the same matter.

You will notice that the ministers declared their inability to enter upon a further discussion at present.

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE F. SEWAED.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 739.]

Mr. von Brandt to Mr. Seward.

Mr. von Brandt presents his compliments to his excellency Mr. Seward, and has the honor to inform him that he met the ministers of the Tsung-li Yamên on the 17th instant, on the subject of transit-passes outwards.

The ministers present, Shen, Wang, Tung, and Chung-li, declared that they had not yet received the reports they had asked for from the provincial authorities, except from those at Wuhu and that they could not therefore enter upon any discussion of the subject. They added that they would prefer to arrange all the questions at the same time. Mr. von Brandt answered to this, that he did not object in principle to such a course being pursued, but that he could not allow the proposal to be used only as a means for postponing the settlement of the question now before the Yamên; that the treaties were explicit on the subject of transit-passes; that, moreover, regulations issued by the customs authorities and approved by the legations existed, and that therefore there could be no reason why the issue of transit-passes should not be proceeded with at all the open ports. Mr. von Brandt added that, in case the Yamên had any objection to arrive at a speedy settlement of the question, he was quite willing to inform his colleagues of it and return to them the powers which he held from them, but that in that case he would take up the question for himself and proceed accordingly.

His excellency Wang then declared that the Yamên was quite satisfied with most of the proposals laid before them by Mr. von Brandt; that some changes, however, were necessary, and that the Yamên had to take the opinions of the local authorities on the subject before coming to an understanding with the foreign representatives; that the local authorities had been written to already some time ago, and that the Yamên would press again for speedy answers; that in the meanwhile the Yamên had already instructed the authorities at Canton to issue transit-passes whenever asked for, and that the hoppo had answered that he would do so.

Mr. von Brandt asked for a copy of the hoppo’s letter, which was promised to him, but which, when it reached him, proved entirely unsatisfactory and of quite another tenor than the assurances given by his excellency Wang.

Peking, July 22, 1880.

No. 177. Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts. No. 177.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, August 13, 1880. (Received September 28.) No. 742.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 718, in which I forwarded to the department a translation of an imperial decree temporarily revoking the sentence of death passed upon Chung How, late Chinese minister to Russia, I have now the honor to hand to you a copy of a further decree by which he has been unconditionally set at liberty.

In acknowledging the receipt of this information, I have felt bound to convey to Prince Kung my satisfaction at the action thus taken, which, in my opinion, will serve to lessen the difficulties in the way of a peaceful solution of questions now pending between China and Russia.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 742.]

Prince Kung to Mr. Seward.

Peking, August 12, 1880. Informal.]

I have the honor to hand to your excellency a copy of an imperial decree, received to-day from the imperial council of state.

Cards and compliments.

an imperial decree.

(Received by the Privy Council of State, August 12, 1880.)

Some time since we issued our mandate that the sentence of decapitation—after the autumn assizes—passed upon Chung How be temporarily revoked, but that he be held in confinement until the Marquis Tseng had reached a satisfactory solution of the treaty negotiations with which he is charged.

We are now in receipt of a memorial from the foreign office, stating that they have a telegram from the Marquis Tseng saying that he has entered upon his negotiations and earnestly begging them to memoralize us in his name that further leniency be shown, &c.

Let further grace be shown to Chung How and let him be set at liberty.

The Yamên concerned will take note.

Respect this!

[Inclosure 2 in No. 742.]

Mr. Seward to Prince Kung.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, August 13, 1880. Informal.]

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of a note from your imperial highness? covering a copy of an edict from His Majesty, directing that the late minister, Chung How, he set at liberty.

I beg leave to express to your imperial highness the pleasure and satisfaction with which I have learned of this action on the part of His Imperial Majesty.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE F. SEWARD.

No. 178. Mr. Hay to Mr. Angell. No. 178.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Angell.

Department of State,
Washington, August 16, 1880. No. 26.]

Sir: I transmit herewith a copy of an unaddressed circular, dated at London, July, 1880, issued by Mr. Francis Parry, in which attention is called to the alleged practice of the mixed courts in permitting the employment of more or less inhumane modes of extracting evidence from criminals or witnesses who may be unwilling to confess or testify. It would appear from Mr. Parry’s statement that these practices are sanctioned by the foreign assessors who unite with the native magistrates to form the mixed courts. The publication of the communication thus made by Mr. Parry is understood to have occasioned considerable and not very favorable comment in the English press.

The instances cited by Mr. Parry purport to cover many cases of apparent punishment for crime. It is, of course, necessary to separate them from those of practical torture for the extraction of testimony or confession. The former may, unhappily, form part of the regular administration of justice in punishment of crime according to the Chinese laws, and while extreme severity of punishment should be discountenanced in the common interest of humanity, it is not at present deemed expedient to give you any precise instructions on this point until the working of the new and improved methods of judicial administration, as reformed under the control and with the co-operation and sanction of the foreign powers, shall be apparent. That a code framed with the assistance of the enlightened body which represents foreign interests in China should fail to safeguard the common interests of humanity is hardly conceivable, especially with the knowledge possessed of the earnest efforts made for the amelioration of the prisons and prison discipline of China and the doing away with the barbarous modes of confinement which made the simple fact of detention often a worse torture than corporal punishment. You will, however, give this branch of the question your attention, and should abuses appear to have been retained, you will report the views of yourself and your colleagues thereon.

With respect to the infliction of pain as a means of judicial inquiry, the case is vastly different. Such methods should not be recognized or sanctioned by any civilized power; and, if they are practiced, no proper means should be spared to check the abuse, through the influence of the foreign assessors, who cannot be expected to lend themselves knowingly to the procedure described.

It is desired that you should investigate the matter, and if the report be ascertained to be well founded, and the character of the personal suffering inflicted should appear unwarrantable, you will use your exertions, through the assessors on the part of the United States and through your colleagues, to bring about a state of things less open to adverse criticism from the point of view of humanity.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

[Inclosure with No. 26.—Extract.]

The judicial torture of China.

The want of an abridged record of the proceedings of the “mixed court” of the foreign settlement of Shanghai, as reported in the Supreme Court and Consular Gazette, leaves something to be done in the collation and publication of some cases which, during the year 1879, have been adjudicated upon in a manner assimilating to the Chinese so closely as to create the apprehension that the foreign consuls yield to a pernicious influence. This memorandum has, therefore, been prepared and is circulated for general information.

As to the sentences of the court. Those in excess of one hundred blows are, according to the Chinese code, illegal; the punishment of the cangue, or huge wooden collar, is a torture; beating on the face is a mutilation; the most severe is the remission of persons convicted of capital and heinous crimes to be judged, tortured during examination, and imprisoned by the higher court of the district magistrate in the native city. This remission is not the ordinary “extradition” provided for in the treaty of Tientsin, Article XXI; the criminal is not demanded by the city authorities; the rendition is a matter of convenience.

These matters demand rectification. The association of the foreign consul with the Chinese mandarin is a point of contact capable of being made the inlet for that regard for humanity common to civilization—the base of all the humanities.

Japan has abolished judicial torture. Turkey no longer legalizes the mutilation of offenders. China has yet to gain a good name by repressing the cruelty which is the marked characteristic of her judicial system.

FRANCIS PARRY.
2, Stanhope Gardens, S. W., July, 1880.

[Extracts from the “North China Herald and Supreme Court and Consular Gazette.” Vol. xxii.]

Case 1, March; 20.—“Yesterday morning Shun Che-sze was taken before Chen and Br. Macgowan, the U. S. assessor, at the mixed court, when he admitted having arranged the abduction and paid his confederates $100. He stoutly refused to divulge their names, boldly telling the magistrate that he had paid them for what they had done, and therefore they should not be punished. The magistrate ordered him to receive fifty blows on the face for his contumacy, which were accordingly inflicted, but he still refused to divulge their names, and another fifty blows were administered, but only with the same result. Ultimately the examination was postponed.”—Fo. 280.

Case 2, March 25.—“Three hundred blows were inflicted on the culprits, who groaned a good deal during the infliction. As there were several travelers present, Dr. Macgowan explained that after mouth-slapping, which the abductor had suffered for contempt of court, the punishment first inflicted was of the mildest description. Speaking comparatively, confinement in a Chinese prison was much more severe than such floggings as were inflicted in this court.”—Fo. 311.

Case 3, April 17.—“It is satisfactory to learn that the district magistrate in the city has already taken steps towards the investigation of the case of the murder of Moh Yungohing, at the tea-shop in the Maloo. We are informed that the four prisoners were before him on Thursday. Koo Ching-chee and Moh-lee, who are charged with the murder, were secured in chains, and during the trial had to kneel on them with the full weight of their body, their feet being braced up. Neither would divulge the names of the others who took part in the murder, and for this they were beaten with hammers on the ankles, but still they were obdurate.”—Fo. 395.

Case 4, May 15.—“We hear that one of the prisoners convicted a month ago for stealing ginseng from a foreign cargo boat died in the Shantung Road Hospital on Wednesday. He was sentenced to three hundred blows, which were given, and to six months imprisonment.”—Fo. 567.

Case 5, May 27.—Escapes from jail.—“One of them gained notoriety in February last by filing a thick chain while serving a sentence of eighteen months imprisonment. He was captured a day or two afterwards, and for his diversion was sentenced to receive 400 blows and to be imprisoned for an indefinite period, at the direction of the police.”—Fo. 512.

“From time to time one reads in the Peking Gazette of criminals sentenced to punishments the mere thought of which is enough to make the blood run cold. When such a barbarous mode of execution as the slicing into pieces is that recognized and approved by the highest authorities in the empire, it is easy to believe all the horrible tales of cunning cruelty that torment much and hold the sufferers long which are occasionally brought to light in the provinces. The distinction between legal and illegal methods of question is perfectly illusory, nor in any case is there much to choose between them. Each and all are alike sickening, whether we try to realize the, sensations of a victim hung up by a thumb or toe, a wrist or an arm-pit, having his joints squeezed, his back scourged with hooks, or his eyes smoked with pungent incense.”—Fo. 437.

[Extracts from “Stories from a Chinese Studio,” published recently by Mr. Herbert A. Giles, of Her Majesty’s Consular Service.]

“The judge in a Chinese court is necessarily very much dependent on his secretaries, and, except in special cases, he takes his cue entirely from them. They take theirs from whichever party to the case knows best how to; cross the palm.’”

“The real tortures of a Chinese prison are the filthy dens in which the unfortunate victims are confined, the stench in which they have to draw breath, the fetters and manacles by which they are secured, the absolute insufficiency even of the disgusting rations doled out to them, and above all the mental agony which must ensue in a country with no habeas corpus to protect the lives and fortunes of its citizens.”

No. 179. Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts. No. 179.
Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, August 20, 1880. (Received October 12.) No. 8.]

Sir: Referring to Mr. Seward’s dispatch No. 719, of July 6 ultimo, which covered a correspondence had with Mr. Consul Lord, of Ningpo? regarding the adoption of the rule that our officials should use only the English language in addressing the Chinese authorities, I have now the honor to hand you a copy of a further dispatch from Mr. Lord, together with a copy of my response.

While admitting the desirability of a change in this regard, I am of the opinion that it cannot suddenly be made, but must come gradually as the Chinese become provided with competent interpreters from among their own people.

I have, &c.,

JAMES B. ANGELL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 8.]

Mr. Lord to Mr. Seward.

Ningpo, July 22, 1880. No. 127.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 124, remarking on the impolicy of continuing to forego the right of using our own language in making communications to the Chinese authorities and to your “dispatch No. 69, in reply thereto, I have now a remark or two further that I should like to add.

First. I am much pleased with the approbation which you expressed of my views, and the encouragement which you gave to any attempt that I might make to carry out these views, so far as it could be done without detriment to the interests committed to my care.

Second. This encouragement is in itself valuable, asunder its influence a consul will, no doubt, find opportunities to do something in the direction of the reform desired. Still the reform must go on but slowly unless action is taken on the subject at Peking. What seems to be needed is that the foreign ministers there should unite in reminding the Chinese Government that the time has now come when it can and should provide its own translators. But if concerted action cannot be had, individual action might do, since what is desired is so obviously our right, both by the usage of nations and the stipulations of treaties. What is chiefly wanted is that the Peking Government should understand and assent to the desired arrangement, and that it should send to its provincial authorities the instructions needed in regard to it. Without such instructions these authorities will neither accept the situation nor make any preparations for it. If reminded that the situation belongs to them not only by the usage of nations, but by the stipulation of treaties, they would doubtless reply that the stipulation referred to, to receive without translations the communications of foreign officials, related to future time and future circumstances, and that these have not yet arrived; or if they have they are not supposed to know it until informed by their government.

But I need not multiply words on the subject. Your own knowledge and experience must show you how little consuls can do in a matter of this kind without ministerial help. I can only hope that such help may be possible and speedy, for, to my mind, the subject is one of very great importance.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD C. LORD.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 8.]

Mr. Angell to Mr. Lord.

Peking, August 20, 1880. No. 3.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 127 to my predecessor in office, Mr. Seward, calling attention to the desirableness of action of the diplomatic body at Peking in order to facilitate the adoption of the rule of addressing the Chinese authorities in our own language is before me.

I take pleasure in saying that I am in hearty accord with your views. Those views are, indeed, recognized formally in the instructions of the Department to the diplomatic representatives of the United States.

I shall be glad to improve any proper opportunity to hasten the result you desire, but progress in that direction must, of course, be somewhat slow, and there are, doubtless, some incidental advantages, which your long experience in China enables you to appreciate, in using their language as a medium of communication with the Chinese.

I am, &c.,

JAMES B. ANGELL.

No. 180. Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts. No. 180.
Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, August 20, 1880. (Received October 12.) No. 9.]

Sir: Referring to Mr. Seward’s dispatches Nos. 623, 643, and 654, having regard to an effort made by certain Chinese local authorities to levy a tax upon cargo-boats at the treaty ports of China, I have the honor to hand to you a copy of a dispatch received from Mr. De Lano, late United States consul at Foochow, reporting that a similar effort has been made at his port, and stating the action, in opposition to the rules, taken by the consular body and the Chamber of Commerce. I also beg leave to submit a copy of my reply, addressed to Mr. Wingate, in which I have expressed my concurrence with Mr. Seward’s views upon this subject, to which I have called Mr. Wingate’s attention.

I have, &c.,

JAMES B. ANGELL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 9.]

Mr. De Lano to Mr. Seward.

Foochow, June 3, 1880. No. 168.]

Sir: I have to inform you of another effort put forward (although it has not yet as sumed official form) to impose restrictions upon foreign-owned cargo-boats, and to bring them so completely within the control of the customs as to hamper their movements, give undue annoyance to their owners, and greatly obstruct the trade of the port.

On the 28th ultimo the commissioner sent to the senior consul, Mr. Sinclair, a semi-official note covering a series, of rules, a copy of which I inclose herewith, which he proposed to submit to the inspector-general for approval; with the view to putting them in force, and he asked Mr. Sinclair to solicit for them the approval of his colleagues of the consular body. Mr. Sinclair called upon me and handed me a copy of the proposed rules, when we decided to elicit from the boat-owners and the Chamber of Commerce an expression of opinion as to the effect they might have upon the movement of cargo and the general interests of foreign merchants at the port.

After a consultation of the consular body with a committee of the Chamber of Commerce, the conclusion reached was that the rules were impracticable and could not be enforced without serious detriment to foreign interests and danger of much obstruction to trade.

On the 1st instant the commissioner was invited to meet the consuls and Chamber of Commerce committee, with a view to offering him an opportunity to explain the general object and intent of the rules, and why the change from the practice of many years was proposed.

The main and almost only reason given for the proposed change was that native boat-owners had been suspected of violating existing regulations and defrauding the revenue.

The commissioner stated that if the new rules were adopted they would be available to prevent unlawful practices of Chinese or unscrupulous foreigners who might hereafter engage in the carrying-trade of the port, but the practice as to present owners of boats would remain essentially the same as it now is and has been for years. His explanation was not deemed satisfactory, as it was thought to be injudicious to vest such authority in the hands of commissioners, some of whom might be found to avail of it to the serious damage of trade.

On yesterday the commissioner notified the consuls that he would not take further action in the matter until after communicating with the inspector-general.

It may be pertinent for me to state that, in the interests of American citizens who are the largest owners of cargo-boats here, I should object to the adoption of any rules which would place foreign-owned boats any more within the control of the customs authorities than they are at present.

Looking to Article XIV of the British treaty, and Regulation X, framed in pursuance of the treaty of 1843, it appears to me that foreign merchants may employ any lighters or cargo-boats they please when they have cargo to load or discharge, and that if smuggling is done or attempted the customs have their remedy in seizure.

I have, &c.,

M. M. DE LANO.

cargo-boat registration.

1. All cargo-boats must be provided with a customs register certificate, to enable them to ply as such within the limits of the harbor.

2. The name of the bona fide owner of the cargo-boat will be required to be given, and, in the case of those registered in the name of Chinese, that of a guaranteeing hong deemed satisfactory by the customs.

3. The limits of the harbor are “Upper Limit,” the stone bridge known as the “Wan Shou Chiao,” “Lower Limit,” Pagoda anchorage, inside a straight line running southeast from Lo Sing Island to a white square marked on the rocks on the opposite side of the river, having the letters LL in black inscribed therein.

4. All cargo-boats must come to the customs house jetty at Nantai once every three months to be inspected, when the certificate issued at the time of register will be endorsed according to result of inspection.

5. Cargo-boats found plying, whose certificates have not been indorsed as above, will be suspended from work till the owner shall have complied with this requirement.

6. No alteration affecting the construction of cargo-boats to be made without securing the sanction of the custom-house.

7. Any change in regard to ownership or guarantor of any cargo-boat to be notified in writing to the custom-house.

8. Customs officers will have instructions to lock the boats at the termination of the working of cargo.

9. Cargo-boats cannot return up river after the examination of their export cargo at the customs jetty (Nantai), nor can they pass that jetty with import cargo till after examination thereof.

10. Cargo-boats cannot carry any other export cargo but that declared in permits, which will give the number of the cargo-boat as entered on the application.

11. Cargo-boats cannot leave the customs jetty or ship’s side with cargo on board before being locked up by a customs officer, except in the case of discharge of imports, where there is no officer on board when the boat is ready to leave the ship’s side.

12. Cargo-boats laden and started on their journey, up or down the river, as the case may be, cannot anchor in the river except for good reasons assignable.

13. The numbers of all cargo-boats registered in the names of Chinese must be painted on white ground in black letters, and those registered in the names of foreigners on a black ground in white letters.

14. Breach of any of the above regulations will render the owner or his guarantor liable to punishment according to the circumstances of the case and the law applying thereto.

May 28, 1880.

General Regulation X, under which the British trade is to be conducted at the five ports of Canton, Amoy, Foo-Chow, Ningpo, and Shanghai.

lighters or cargo-boats.

Whenever any English merchant shall have to load or discharge cargo he may hire whatever kind of lighter or cargo-boat he pleases, and the sum to be paid for such boat can be settled by the parties themselves without the interference of the government.

The number of these boats shall not be limited, nor shall a monoply of them be granted to any parties.

If any smuggling take place in them the offender will of course be punished according to law.

Should any of these boat people, while engaged in conveying goods for English merchants, fraudulently abscond with the property, the Chinese authorities will do their best to apprehend them. But at the same time the English merchants must take every due precaution for the safety of their goods.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 9.]

Mr. Angell to Mr. Wingate.

Peking, August 20, 1880. No. 2.]

Sir: On assuming the duties of my office I find here a dispatch (No. 168) from your predecessor, Mr. De Lano, to Mr. Seward, giving a series of cargo-boat rules proposed by the commissioner of customs at your port, and the action of the consular body and Chamber of Commerce in relation thereto.

The subject of the establishment by the local authorities of the ports of rules for cargo-boats, and especially of subjecting the boats to charges, has engaged the attention of this legation, and indeed of the whole diplomatic body here.

I fully concur in the views set forth by my predecessor in a circular issued March 15, 1880, No. 112, which you may take for your guidance.

As Mr. De Lano states that the commissioner had notified the consuls that he would take no further action until after communicating with the inspector-general, it is to be hoped that the local authorities at your port will not attempt to enforce these rules without authority from Peking.

I am, &c.,

JAMES B. ANGELL.

No. 181. Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts. No. 181.
Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, August 20, 1880. (Received October 12.) No. 10.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit to you herewith a letter, No. 172, from Mr. De Lano, until lately consul at Foo-Chow, giving an account of an enforcement in an offensive way of certain rules of the governor-general of the province of Fukien, which are prejudicial to the interests of foreign residents wishing to acquire property.

I send to you also a copy of my reply sent to the present consul, Mr. Wingate.

You are well aware that the spirit of the inhabitants of Fukien has long been more unfriendly to foreigners than that of most of the other inhabitants of the coast provinces. It is thought that since, some time ago, the English supreme court found the title of one of the English missionary societies to the premises it occupied invalid, and restored the property to the Chinese claimants, there has been kindled in the minds of the Chinese, both citizens and officials, a new desire and a strong hope of making it uncomfortable, if not impracticable, for foreigners to secure and hold leases of real property.

Obviously, if the example set by the officials in the case recited by Mr. De Lano is to be followed, great and perhaps insuperable obstacles will be put in the way of our citizens who desire to lease property.

I trust my course in the matter may meet your approval.

I have, &c.,

J. B. ANGELL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 10.]

Mr. De Lano to Mr. Seward.

Foochow, June 23, 1880. No. 172.]

Sir: I have on several occasions of late, in my dispatches, called your attention to various acts of the local and provincial officers calculated to prejudice the natives against foreigners, and more particularly to intimidate their people so that they shall not dare to effect leases or sales of property to missionaries.

In the autumn of last year the American Board mission purchased on perpetual lease a piece of land in one of the suburbs of the city, which they had occupied for a number of years under leases effected from year to year. They sent their deed of lease through the consulate to the magistrate for registration in the usual way, and in February last they reported to me that the sellers, the Tepo of the ward, the middleman, the writer, and the witnesses had all been summoned to the Yamên for examination, were kept in the Yamên lock-up two days and nights, and had been mulcted collectively in the sum of some 13,000 cash.

This was a sudden departure from the prevailing custom at the port, and was doubtless intended to make it impossible for the mission to make further purchase of ground. I first made inquiry about the matter, and found that the new system had been inaugurated by order of the viceroy, and later on I addressed a letter to the intendant on the subject, complaining that this official interference was contrary to the spirit and letter of Article XII of our treaty, as well as to Article XXVIII, which forbids the extortion of illegal fees.

I stated that, according to my interpretation of those articles of the treaty, when Chinese subjects effected sales or leases of property to American citizens voluntarily, and without fraud or coercion, the authorities should not interfere or intimidate. That the custom of the past of sending a single Yamên runner to the seller to inquire if the sale had been voluntary, and collect a fee of some 1,200 cash for stamping the deed, had answered all necessary requirements, and had not been complained of, and that when new regulations were made, or were about to be made, affecting the interest of foreign residents it would be only fair and courteous to give notice to the resident consuls.

I also suggested that, as a means of preventing the possible extortion of unlawful fees by the runners, it would be better if the foreign lessor be required to pay the official fee for stamping the leases, and that it be sent by the consul when sending the lease for registration.

The intendant in his reply said, “I find that in cases of perpetual lease by foreigners from Chinese, of buildings or grounds, if the lease is sent to the consul and by him to the local authorities, the latter ought immediately to summon the sellers, middlemen, witnesses, &c., before them, and after finding, by clear examination, that there has been no breach (of treaty) nor harm to the free course of the elements, and after making these men prepare a bond, they are immediately to affix their seal to the lease, retain a copy, and return the other to the consul. But when these men (the sellers, middlemen, witnesses, &c.) are before the magistrate, any illicit extortion of fees by the runners would be extremely improper.”

I replied to the intendant’s dispatch protesting against the practice, and added that if the new system was to be adhered to, American citizens, when effecting leases, would be permitted to enter upon the possession of their property on depositing their title papers in the consulate, and the consul might elect when he would send them to the magistrate for registration. My last dispatch brought no response, and as I have had no deeds for registration since there has been no revival of the question.

I shall feel obliged for your advice as to the proper course to be pursued in case the subject should again come up.

If the new system were to be enforced, there would be no Chinese who would venture to sell or lease property to our people.

I have, &c.,

M. M. DELANO.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 10.]

Mr. Angell to Mr. Wingate.

Peking, August 20, 1880. No. 3.]

Sir: I have before me Mr. De Lano’s dispatch No. 172 to Mr. Seward, giving an account of the enforcement by the governor-general’s order of certain new rules, which are prejudicial to the interests of foreign residents wishing to acquire property.

When one examines these rules and the manner in which they were enforced in the case described, and especially when one recalls the spirit so often shown in and near Foochow towards foreigners, one cannot escape the conviction that these regulations are intended, as they are calculated, to render the acquisition of real property by foreigners extremely difficult, if not impossible.

I heartily approve the general spirit or Mr. De Lano’s remonstrance against this innovation. I may suggest that Article XII of our treaty of 1858 furnishes a stronger ground than Article XXVIII on which to rest objections to these rules and, an altogether sufficient and impregnable ground. Clearly, the treaty assures to our citizens the right to rent real estate freely of Chinese citizens who are willing to lease.

Clearly, the procedure resorted to in the transaction described by Mr. De Lano must have the effect to deter Chinese from leasing and so to hinder our citizens from obtaining leases.

You are authorized to say to the intendant that the matter has been referred to this office, and that we cannot assent to rules and procedures so clearly in antagonism to our treaty. You may also say that in case any modification of the old regulations concerning the leasing of property by foreigners is made, it seems to us but courteous and proper that the consul should be informed of it before it is put into execution.

Mr. De Lano states that he had informed the intendant that “henceforth, American citizens, when effecting leases, would be permitted to enter upon the possession of their property on depositing their title papers in the consulate, and the consul might elect when he would send them to the magistrate for registration.”

It is so desirable to comply promptly with all reasonable requirements about the registration of leases that I will ask you to consider carefully what is wise in that regard. Your acquaintance with the circumstances and your discretion will, I am sure, lead you to a prudent decision.

I am, &c.,

JAMES B. ANGELL.

No. 182. Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts. No. 182.
Mr. Angell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Peking, August 28, 1880. (Received October 12.) No. 14.]

Sir: Mr. John F. Wilbur, of Germantown, Pa., has written me, as he says, by the advice of the Assistant Secretary of State, asking what are the rights of a foreign author to his publications in this country, and also whether a resident here can represent the author and so protect his rights.

As other Americans may desire information on the subject, I herewith communicate to you my answer to him.

I have, &c.,

JAMES B. ANGELL.

[Inclosure in No. 14.]

Mr. Angell to Mr. Wilbur.

Peking, August 28, 1880.

Sir: I have received your letter of June 30, 1880, inquiring what are the rights of a foreign author to his publications in this country, and also whether a resident here can represent the author and so protect his rights.

In reply, I beg leave to say that there is no copyright law and no law of any kind in China to protect the right of authors in their works. On the other hand, there is hardly any risk that any publisher will attempt to reproduce any of your works which you may print here or send here. The foreign community is so small that there is no inducement to a publisher to make a reprint of a work in any European language; and mo one would think of reprinting any work you might publish in Chinese.

I am, &c.,

JAMES B. ANGELL.

No. 183. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Angell. No. 183.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Angell.

Department of State,
Washington, October 11, 1880. No. 47.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Seward’s dispatch No. 742, of the 13th of August last, in relation to the case of the late Chinese minister to Russia, Chung How, recently sentenced to death, but who has now, by imperial decree, been unconditionally set at liberty.

This government has been much gratified to learn of the humane action of His Imperial Majesty towards one of his high officials, and the spirit of humanity so liberally shown in this case will, it is hoped, go far towards helping at least the satisfactory and peaceful adjustment of the pending differences between the Government of China and that of Russia.

I am, &c.,

WM. HUNTEE,
Acting Secretary.

Correspondence with the Chinese Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the Chinese Legation in Washington.

[184] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State, Washington, February 17, 1880.

[185] . Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation, Washington, March 2, 1880. (Received March 2.)

[186] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State, Washington, May 25, 1880.

[187] . Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation, Washington, July 31, 1880.

[188] . Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation, Washington, August 9, 1880.

[189] . Mr. Hay to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State, Washington, August 13, 1880.

[190] . Mr. Hay to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State, Washington, August 23, 1880.

[191] . Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation, Washington, September 4, 1880.

[192] . Mr. Evarts to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State, Washington, September 8, 1880.

[193] . Mr. Evarts to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State, Washington, November 23, 1880.

No. 184. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Yung Wing. No. 184.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State,
Washington, February 17, 1880.

Sir: In a recent dispatch to this Department in relation to the emigration of Chinese subjects from their own land to other countries, one of the United States consuls in China transmitted for the information of the Department what purports to be a transcript of section cclv of the penal code of China, as translated by Sir George Thomas Staunton, F. R. S., an English baronet, whose translation is reputed to be the only one known. The law referred to is in relation to the vicarious punishment to be inflicted upon the relatives of a Chinaman who may renounce his country and allegiance, and it may therefore be of interest to this government, in connection with the large Chinese immigration on our Pacific coast, to be conversant with the nature of this among the other Chinese statutes touching the general subject.

I have the honor, therefore, to inclose herewith a copy of the translated law as received from the consul, and to inquire whether the same correctly represents the law, and whether it is understood to be now in’ force in all or any part of the dominions of His Imperial Majesty.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure.]

Penal Code of China: translated by Sir George Thomas Staunton, Bart., F. R. S. [Extract]. Section CCLV. Renunciation of allegiance.

All persons renouncing their country and allegiance, or devising the means thereof, shall be beheaded; and in the punishment of this offense no distinction shall be made between principals and accessories.

The property of all such criminals shall be confiscated, and their wives and children distributed as slaves to the great officers of state. Those females, however, with whom a marriage had not been completed, though adjusted by contract, shall not suffer under this law; from the penalties of this law, exception shall also be made in favor of all such daughters of criminals as shall have been married into other families. The parents, grandparents, brothers, and grandchildren of such criminals, whether habitually living with them under the same roof or not, shall be perpetually banished to the distance of 2,000 li.

All those who purposely conceal and connive at the perpetration of this crime shall be strangled.

Those who inform against and bring to justice criminals of this description shall be rewarded with the whole of their property.

Those who are privy to the perpetration of this crime and yet omit to give any notice or information thereof to the magistrates shall be punished with 100 blows, and banished perpetually to the distance of 3,000 li.

If the crime is contrived, but not executed, the principal shall be strangled and all the accessories shall each of them be punished with 100 blows and perpetual banishment to the distance of 3,000 li.

If those who are privy to such ineffective contrivance do not give due notice and information thereof to the magistrates, they shall be punished with 100 blows and banished for three years.

All persons who refuse to surrender themselves to the magistrates when required, and seek concealment in mountains and desert places in order to evade either the performance of their duty or the punishment due to their crimes, shall be held guilty of an in-tent to rebel, and shall therefore suffer punishment in the manner by this law provided. If such persons have recourse to violence and defend themselves when pursued, by force of arms, they shall he held guilty of an overt act of rebellion, and punished accordingly.

No. 185. Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts. No. 185.
Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation,
Washington, March 2, 1880. (Received March 2.)

Sir: Your communication of the 17th ultimo, containing an inclosure of a translation of section cclv of the penal code of China, as translated by Sir George Thomas Staunton, and inquiring “whether the same correctly represents the law, and whether it is now understood to be in force in all or any part of the dominions of His Imperial Majesty,” was duly received, and I have the honor to say in reply that section cclv of the Chinese penal code referred to has no reference whatever to Chinese emigration as contemplated in and sanctioned by the Burl in game treaty. Under the general head of “Renunciation of allegiance,” the specific acts so carefully defined, with their corresponding punishments, point to the presumptive existence of a lesser or greater degree of treasonable intent against the government, and it contemplates conspiracies and overt acts of rebellion against the government as being the logical sequence of “renunciation of allegiance,” which antecedes them both in time and existence; hence their classification under that head or section. Emigration, as sanctioned by foreign treaties, is taken out of the category of treasonable acts, and is therefore beyond the scope of the section.

In Article V of the Burlingame treaty we find this language, which is conclusive on this point: “The United States of America and the Emperor of China cordially recognize the inherent and inalienable right of man to change his home and allegiance.”

Accept, &c.,

YUNG WING.

No. 186. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Yung Wing. No. 186.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State,
Washington, May 25, 1880.

Sir: I am alike honored and gratified in being enabled to inform you that the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, has appointed two of our distinguished citizens, Messrs. John F. Swift, of California, and William Henry Trescot, of South Carolina, as commissioners, to act conjointly with the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States to China, to negotiate and conclude a settlement by treaty of such matters of interest to the two governments, now pending, as may be confided to them.

It is expected that these commissioners, in company with the newly appointed minister to China, Mr. James B. Angell, will sail from San Francisco, en route to Peking, in the steamer of the 17th of June proximo.

I have instructed the present minister near the Government of His Imperial Majesty to take as early an opportunity as may be practicable and proper to acquaint the Chinese Government with the high mission of these gentlemen, and to make fitting arrangements in advance of their arrival for their appropriate reception in their elevated diplomatic character as the specially commissioned plenipotentiaries of the President and Government of the United States.

I take a singular satisfaction in expressing to you, and through you to the government you so worthily represent, the assurance of the President’s deep conviction that the sending of this high commission to China cannot fail to draw closer even than before the bonds of amity between the two governments, by opening a favorable channel for the speedy and harmonious adjustment of the questions of moment now pending between them, and that the result of its wise and conciliatory counsels, met in a like spirit of wisdom and conciliation by the enlightened statesmen who rule the destinies of the great empire of the east, will build up a lasting monument of the goodwill and kindred interests which animate the two nations.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 187. Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts. No. 187.
Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation,
Washington, July 31, 1880.

Sir: We have the honor to inclose herewith copies of a note dispatched some time since by the Tsung-li Yamên at Peking (the foreign office) to the ministers of China in foreign countries.* We were instructed by our government to communicate its contents to your excellency, and we have caused an English translation of the note to be printed, to facilitate its examination.

Accept, &c.,

CHEN LAN PIN.

YUNG WING.

* See appendix 6 to Mr. Seward’s No. 510 of Nov. 21, 1879, ante, page 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 134].

No. 188. Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts. No. 188.
Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation,
Washington, August 9, 1880.

Sir: We have the honor to inform you that the Chinese screw steamer Wo Chung, the first Chinese steamer entering an American port, is soon expected to arrive at San Francisco, and to prevent any misunderstanding in regard to duties or other charges, we would ask you to be so good as to notify the Secretary of the Treasury, that he may issue orders to the customs authorities of that port to extend to that vessel the privileges which are conceded to vessels of other nations in treaty relations with the United States.

Accept, &c.,

CHEN LAN PIN.

YUNG WING.

No. 189. Mr. Hay to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing. No. 189.
Mr. Hay to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State,
Washington, August 13, 1880.

Gentlemen: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 9th instant, whereby you informed this Department of the expected arrival at San Francisco of the Chinese steamer Wo Chung, being the first of her class to enter an American port, and, in order to prevent any misunderstanding in regard to duties or other charges, you request that the Secretary of the Treasury be notified, to the end that the customs authorities at San Francisco may extend to that vessel the privileges conceded to vessels of other nations in treaty relations with the United States. The matter was forthwith referred to the Secretary of the Treasury, from whom I now learn that under the laws of the United States and the provisions of the existing treaties with China it will be necessary to exact tonnage tax at alien rates.

It appears that discriminating duties of tonnage and impost on foreign vessels and their cargoes are to be charged, as provided by law (section 4219 Revised Statutes), in all cases except where exemption is secured by treaty stipulations, or where special exemption is proclaimed by the President upon evidence of reciprocal exemption accorded to vessels of the United States, conformably to the provisions of section 4228 of the Revised Statutes, or where an exemption is created otherwise by law.

The treaties between the United States and China do not establish reciprocal exemption from discriminating taxes. While the tonnage tax to be collected from American vessels in the open ports is fixed by the treaty of June 18, 1858, between the two countries, it does not appear that Chinese vessels entering those ports are subject to the same charges. Neither does it appear that Chinese vessels resorting to the ports of the United States may not trade directly with the closed ports of China whither American vessels are debarred from going.

Under these circumstances the Secretary of the Treasury, conforming to the prescriptions of the statute as to tonnage duties, section 4219 of the Revised Statutes, has directed the collector of customs at San Francisco to exact, upon the arrival of the steamer, tonnage tax at alien rates, in addition to the ordinary tonnage tax paid annually, if the vessel be engaged in regular voyages between the two countries. He has, however, reserved for the present, consideration and decision of the question of duties on the cargo which the vessel may bring.

Accept, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 190. Mr. Hay to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing. No. 190.
Mr. Hay to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State,
Washington, August 23, 1880.

Gentlemen: Referring to your note of the 9th instant relative to the expected arrival of the Chinese steamer Wo Chung at the port of San Francisco, and to my reply thereto of the 13th, I have now the honor to inform you that the reserved question of the customs duties of importation chargeable upon the cargo which the vessel may bring has received careful consideration.

Like the question of alien tonnage dues, of which my former note treated, the matter of customs duties on cargo entering the ports of the United States from foreign ports is one to be exclusively decided, in the absence of specific and reciprocal exemption by treaty, according to the domestic legislation of the country.

The existing treaties of commerce between the United States and China do not provide for such reciprocal exemption, but stipulate solely “that citizens of the United States shall never pay higher duties” [on merchandise entering China] “than those paid by the most favored nations” The question is, therefore, remitted to the domestic legislation of the United States. That legislation prescribes, in section 2502 of the Revised Statutes, a discriminating duty of ten per centum ad valorem in addition to the regular duties imposed by law on goods imported in vessels not of the United States; but it also provides that this discriminating duty shall not apply to merchandise imported in alien vessels which are entitled by treaty or any act of Congress to enter the United States on the same footing as though imported in vessels of the United States.

An act of Congress, applicable to the case in point, is found embodied in section 4228 of the Revised Statutes, which empowers the President, upon satisfactory proof being given by the government of any foreign nation that no discriminating duties of tonnage or import are there levied upon United States vessels, or upon merchandise carried thither in American bottoms, to issue a proclamation suspending and discontinuing the discriminating duties aforesaid with respect to the vessels and cargoes coming to the United States under the flag of such foreign nation.

In order, however, that the discretionary authority conferred by this enactment should be applied in conformity with its entire spirit as well as its letter, it becomes necessary that the satisfactory proof it contemplates shall cover not merely American imports into China, but the flag under which they enter the empire, on which point the treaty is silent.

It is found practicable, in this view of the question, to join the question of tonnage dues, treated of in my former note, to the question of customs duties now under consideration between us, inasmuch as both matters are within the competence of the President under the above-mentioned section 4228 of the statutes.

I have, therefore, the honor to inquire whether you are prepared to support the request contained in your note of the 9th instant, for the accordance of the most favored nation treatment to the Wo Chung, and consequently to Chinese vessels in general which may enter our ports with cargo, by giving, on behalf of your government, satisfactory proof on the following points: First. Are any other or higher tonnage dues exacted in the open ports of China, from the vessels of the United States resorting thereto, than are paid by Chinese vessels or any foreign vessel engaged in like trade therewith?

Second. Are any other or higher customs duties of impost exacted in China from American citizens importing merchandise thither than are paid by Chinese subjects, or the citizens of the most favored power, importing the like merchandise into China?

Third. Is there any discriminating or additional customs duty imposed upon merchandise, whether of American or foreign origin, entering the open ports of China in vessels of the United States, which is not imposed upon the like goods entering those ports in Chinese vessels, or in the vessels of any foreign power?

I have thus presented my inquiries in categorical form, in view of the circumstance that the most favored nation treatment which is sought by your note of the 9th, for the Wo Chung and her cargo, is identical with that which a vessel of the United States and her cargo receive on entering the ports of the United States. I have also, as you will perceive, limited my inquiries to the open ports of China, because a Chinese vessel coming from or trading with a port of the empire closed to the commerce of non-Chinese vessels would necessarily have no claim to exemption or favor based upon reciprocity of treatment.

Upon the receipt of your reply to the foregoing inquiries, the Department will be in a position to decide whether and to what extent the case of the Wo Chung and vessels of her class come within the discretionary power of the Presidential proclamation contemplated in section 4228 of the Revised Statutes, both as to tonnage and customs duties.

Accept, &c.

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 191. Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts. No. 191.
Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing to Mr. Evarts.

Chinese Legation,
Washington, September 4, 1880.

Sir: We have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your two notes dated respectively the 13th and 23d ultimo, relating to questions of tonnage and import dues raised by the arrival of the Chinese steamer Wo Chung at the port of San Francisco, and stating that discriminating tonnage dues and import duties are to be charged on all foreign vessels and their cargoes in all cases except where exemption is secured by treaty stipulations or where special exemption is proclaimed by the President upon evidence being furnished of reciprocal exemption being accorded to vessels of the United States, pointing out the statutes of the United States governing the subject and inquiring of us whether we are prepared to support our request in our note of the 9th ultimo in behalf of the Wo Chung by giving satisfactory proof in regard to the payment of tonnage dues by American vessels in Chinese ports, in regard to the payment of import duties by American citizens bringing foreign merchandise into China, and in regard to the existence of discriminating duties on cargoes in virtue of their origin.

To these inquiries propounded in your note of the 23d ultimo, we beg leave to reply—

First. No other or higher tonnage dues are exacted in the open ports of China from vessels of the United States than are paid by Chinese vessels or any foreign vessels entering those ports. The tonnage dues were fixed by the treaty of 1858, article 16, at the rate of four mace per ton on vessels of one hundred and fifty tons and upwards. The same rate was, at that time, fixed in the British treaty, article 29, and in the treaty with France, article 22, and the same rate will be found in the subsequent treaties with other powers. No discriminating tax is levied in Chinese ports upon the vessels of any foreign power.

Second. No other or higher duties of import are exacted in China from American citizens importing merchandise thither than are paid by Chinese subjects or the citizens of the most favored power importing the like merchandise into China.

The rates of duties in the open ports were agreed upon in 1858 between the Chinese commissioners and the British plenipotentiary, and they were accepted at the same time by the plenipotentiaries of the United States and France. It is provided in article 15 of the treaty of 1858, that “citizens of the United States shall never pay higher duties than those paid by the most favored nation,” and in article 30, that “should at any time China grant to any nation or the merchants or citizens of any nation, any right, privilege, or favor connected either with navigation, commerce, political, or other intercourse which is not conferred by this treaty, such right, privilege, and favor shall at once freely inure to the benefit of the United States, its public officers, merchants, and citizens.”

Third. No discriminating or additional customs duty is imposed upon merchandise, whether of American or foreign origin, entering the open ports of China in vessels of the United States which is not imposed upon the like goods entering those parts in Chinese vessels or in the vessels of any foreign power.

An examination of the Chinese “maritime and customs regulations” for the treaty ports shows that no discrimination of this kind exists, and that the question of the origin of the cargo coming from a foreign port is not raised. The flag of an American vessel entering a Chinese port, not only covers its cargo, but also entitles it to carry that cargo from each one to every other of all the open ports; and further still, the flag covers the cargo in a chartered Chinese vessel, as will be seen by referring to article 6 of the revised regulations of trade on the Yang-tze-Kiang.

In the recent circular-note of the Tsung-li Yamên it is stated in regard to foreign goods destined for the interior (page 2) that “foreigners must pay duties at each custom-house and taxes as Chinese merchants do.” Again, page 3, it is asserted that such produce has to pay the duties and taxes to which Chinese merchants are liable.”

The principle there is repeatedly asserted (pages 5 and 10) that the foreigner and the native are to be on an equal footing in matters of trade and commerce, and this principle is carefully maintained in the administration of the laws and regulations pertaining to the collection of customs and tonnage dues in Chinese ports.

Permit us here to inquire if complaints have ever reached the United States Government from any of its consuls or from any American citizens in China of discrimination in this regard in favor of Chinese vessels or subjects? It can hardly be, for such discrimination is not knowingly permitted. It finds no lodgment in the treaties, none in the local port regulations, and none in usage.

The steamer Wo Chung, whose expected arrival suggested our note of the 9th ultimo, is now at San Francisco from the open port of Canton, and we learn that she has been charged discriminating duties, both of tonnage and cargo, but we venture to hope, with this statement of facts, that she will be relieved of them by the President’s proclamation.

Accept, sir, &c.,

CHEN LAN PIN.

YUNG WING.

No. 192. Mr. Evarts to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing. No. 192.
Mr. Evarts to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State,
Washington, September 8, 1880.

Gentlemen: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 4th instant, in reply to the two notes from this Department, dated the 13th and 23d of August ultimo, in regard to the questions of tonnage and other duties required to be collected from the Chinese steamer Wo Chung, which has recently arrived at the port of San Francisco.

In reply, I have to express the satisfaction with which the Department has received the assurances of the treatment accorded by the Government of the Emperor to American commerce in China.

The Wo Chung has, it appears, already arrived at San Francisco, and the alien dues and taxes exacted of her have been paid, as is understood, under protest. Upon the arrival of official advices as to what has really taken place there, I shall then confer with my colleague, the Secretary of the Treasury, in regard to the matter, and as soon as the necessary inquiries have been made, such action will be taken by this government as the circumstances of the case and the demands of equity, among nations, may seem to require.

Accept, gentlemen, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 193. Mr. Evarts to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing. No. 193.
Mr. Evarts to Chen Lan Pin and Mr. Yung Wing.

Department of State,
Washington, November 23, 1880.

Gentlemen: Referring to previous correspondence respecting the Chinese steamer Wo Chung, which recently arrived at the port of San Francisco, and upon which were levied discriminating tonnage tax and import duties, I have now the honor to inform you, adverting to your note of the 4th of September last, that the assurances therein contained, that no discriminations of such tax or other duties are made upon American vessels or their cargoes in the waters of China, are accepted as satisfactory by this Government, and that the President’s proclamation, as provided by the statute, will be issued without delay.

In this relation I may remark, adverting to the concluding inquiry in the note of your legation of September 4, that no complaints have reached this government from its consuls or other American sources in China of discriminations being practiced in Chinese open ports against the ships or goods of American citizens.

I avail, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

By the President of the United States of America.

a proclamation.

Whereas satisfactory evidence has been given to me by the Government of His Majesty the Emperor of China that no discriminating duties of tonnage or imposts are imposed or levied in the ports of that nation upon vessels wholly belonging to citizens of the United States, or upon the produce, manufactures, or merchandise imported in the same:

Therefore, I, Rutherford B. Hayes, President of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority in me vested by law, do hereby declare and proclaim that the foreign discriminating duties of tonnage and impost within the United States are, and shall be, suspended and discontinued so far as respects the vessels of China, and the produce, manufactures, and merchandise imported therein into the United States from China, or from any other foreign country, so long as the exemption aforesaid on the part of China, of vessels belonging to citizens of the United States and their cargoes, shall be continued, and no longer.

In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my hand and caused the seal of the United States to be affixed.

Done at the city of Washington this twenty-third day of November, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and eighty, and of the Independence of the United States of America the one hundred and fifth.
[l. s.] R. B. HAYES.

By the President:
Wm. M. Evarts,
Secretary of State.

ColombiaColombia

[194] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, August 2, 1879. (Received September 22.)

[195] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, August 11, 1879. (Received September 22.)

[196] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, August 23, 1879. (Received September 29.)

[197] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, September 4, 1879. (Received October 20.)

[198] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, September 20, 1879. (Received October 25.)

[199] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, October 2, 1879. (Received November 8.)

[200] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State, Washington, October 15, 1879.

[201] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, November 9, 1879. (Received January 12.)

[202] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, November 9, 1879. (Received January 12.)

[203] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State, Washington, December 9, 1879.

[204] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State, Washington, March 8, 1880.

[205] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State, Washington, June 7, 1880.

[206] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, July 13, 1880. (Received August 20.)

[207] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, July 19, 1880. (Received August 31.)

[208] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1880.

[209] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, August 16, 1880. (Received September 28.)

[210] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, September 7, 1880. (Received October 12.)

[211] . Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Bogotá, September 11, 1880. (Received October 22.)

[212] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State, Washington, November 29, 1880.

Contents

Correspondence with the Colombian Legation in Washington. (Documents 213-218)

No. 194. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 194.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, August 2, 1879. (Received September 22.) No. 119.]

Sir: In my No. 100, of June 21, 1879, I had the honor to bring the position of this government in relation to the war between the three South American republics to your notice, and I also communicated the fact that the Colombian Government had sent a special mission to the governments of Peru, Bolivia, and Chili for the purpose of offering the friendly mediation of Colombia.

Since the date of that dispatch, President Trujillo has made inquiry of me on several occasions, if I had received any information from you as to the course which the Government of the United States would pursue in regard to the war, and he also expressed the hope that the Government of the United States would not spare any effort to bring about a cessation of hostilities.

My answer to the President on these occasions was always to the effect that I had no hesitation in saying that the war between the three republics must be a cause of profound sorrow to the government and to the people of the United States, and that the course of the war and the means and time for bringing about a cessation of hostilities were, undoubtedly, matters of anxious consideration at Washington.

* * * * * * *

I now beg to invite your attention to the accompanying note from the Hon. Luis Carlos Rico, secretary of the interior and foreign relations, on the matter herein mentioned.

* * * * * * *

It is, perhaps, well to state that the Hon. Dr. Pablo Arosemena, who has been charged with the special mission above described, is now supposed to beat Lima, having left Panama about two weeks ago. He speaks English perfectly, and the representatives of the Government of the United States in the countries to which he will go, will find in him a courteous and agreeable gentleman.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 119.—Translation.]

Señor Rico to Mr. Dichman.

United States of Colombia,
Department of the Interior and Foreign Relations,
Bogotá, July 26, 1879.

The Government of the United States of Colombia, as your honor knows, resolved upon sending an extraordinary mission to the Republics of Peru, Bolivia, and Chili, with the special object of offering (interposing) its good offices and conciliatory and friendly mediation to the end of procuring, by these means, a termination of the war in which, unfortunately, these sister republics find themselves engaged.

Convinced of the elevated spirit of loyal American sentiment which predominates in the policy and the acts of the United States, whose worthy representative in this country your honor is, the citizen President of the Union, has charged me with the honorable task of divesting this present dispatch to you in order to request of you that you may be pleased to interest your government in the name of that of Colombia to contribute with the latter in the attainment of the laudable object of co-operating in the prompt re-establishment of peace between the said nations.

It is considered (and with abundant reason) by the national executive power, that the intervention of the government of your honor in this direction will be of the greatest influence and powerful efficacy in obtaining the most happy results from the proposed mediation, and on this account the national executive power trusts that the illustrious cabinet of Washington will not disregard the polite representation which, in fact, the cabinet of Colombia takes the liberty of addressing to it.

I entertain the well-founded hope that your honor will be pleased to support the idea thus put forward with anxious interest, and that your honor will recommend it on your part as a measure of humanity and fraternal sympathy towards the people of the Pacific, whose international relations are (find themselves) interrupted now by the disaster of war.

With sentiments of the most distinguished consideration,

I am, &c.,

LUIS CÁRLOS RICO.

No. 195. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 195.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, August 11, 1879. (Received September 22.) No. 128.]

Sir: In my No. 30 of December 31, 1878, I had the honor to bring the fact to your notice that the undefined condition of the boundaries with neighboring republics and the Empire of Brazil is a subject of anxiety to this government.

The mission to Venezuela (which was mentioned in the dispatch above referred to), for the purpose of effecting a settlement of the long pending and at times irritating question of boundaries with the government of that republic, returned to this capital some time ago, without being able to accomplish any of its objects.

Lately, the long-standing dispute which exists between Colombia and Costa Rica, concerning the boundary between the latter republic and the State of Panama, one of the constituent States of the Colombian Union, appears to have entered upon a new stage, as an invasion of Colombian territory, by parties acting under the authority of the Government of Costa Rica, is reported by the Government of the State of Panama.

The details of the reports are very vague, consequently the matter may not be of a serious character, and I only bring the same to your notice as showing the danger to the peace of this republic which may arise suddenly as long as this question of boundaries is left in its present unsettled condition.

The dispute between Colombia (New Grenada) and Costa Rica was brought to the notice of the Department immediately, in 1862, as will be seen by reference to the diplomatic correspondence for that year, page 885, 17th line from the top of the page, and page 902 of the same volume, 5th line from the top of the page.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 196. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 196.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, August 23, 1879. (Received September 29.) No. 130.]

Sir: From private information received by the Colombian Government it appears that General Guzman Blanco, President of the Republic of Venezuela, who is reported to be in Europe at present, is purchasing ironclad vessels of war and arms in England, with the avowed purpose of going to war with Colombia upon his return to Venezuela.

Although it is thought that in carrying out the hostile designs which are attributed to him he will meet with much opposition in his own country, yet it would be idle to deny that the intelligence is the cause of much anxiety to this government, particularly as Colombia has no navy and her ports are open and defenseless.

This anxiety is also increased by the information which has also been received of the negotiation of a secret treaty between Guzman Blanco and the Government of Ecuador, having for its object an offensive alliance against Colombia. The relations between Colombia and Ecuador are unfortunately of such a nature as to entitle such information, which would otherwise be an absurdity, to careful consideration and investigation.

* * * * * * *

The ostensible pretext, which would have to serve as a reason for hostilities between Venezuela and Colombia, is a dispute about boundaries, which has already been brought to the notice of the Department in my Nos. 30, of December 31, 1878, and 38, of January 25, 1879. This government has made several efforts to bring about an amicable settlement of the difference between the two countries, and I am informed that, failing in such amicable efforts for an adjustment of this question, it is prepared to submit the same to arbitration, in order to avoid a war and all its lamentable consequences.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 197. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 197.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, September 4, 1879. (Received October 20.) No. 133.]

Sir: I have read with much attention your dispatch No. 51 of June 13, 1879, and accompanying inclosure, relating to the protocol on the subject of the custody of registers of United States vessels in the ports of Colombia. As this protocol, with the exception of the fifth article, may be considered as superseded by the law 40, of 1879, a copy and translation of which were forwarded with my No. 104 of July 2, 1879, and which embodies the same principles as the protocol; I beg to refer to the law just quoted in the observations which I shall make in this dispatch in compliance with the instructions contained in your dispatch above mentioned.

In answer to your especial inquiry, whether the law (protocol) is intended to apply to the regular mail (steamers of the United States, and, if so, whether its literal application would or does result in any disadvantage to such steamers as compared with like vessels of other nations entering the free ports of Aspinwall and Panama, I beg to state that, for reasons which I shall set forth hereinafter, the law is intended to be applied generally, at all the Colombian ports, and that its application does not result in any such disadvantage. On the contrary, before the passage of the law above mentioned, and under the provisions of the protocol, the consuls of the United States exercised their lawful jurisdiction over the custody of registers of United States vessels, while the consuls of other nations and the captains of their vessels were obliged to comply with the provisions of the Fiscal Code and those of the law 60, of 1875, by delivering the registers of such vessels to the local authorities, both in the free ports and customs ports of Colombia.

* * * * * * *

During my stay at Aspinwall, I made myself familiar with all the facts of the case, and obtained copies of all the correspondence relating to the same on file at the office of the commercial agent of the United States at that port; but upon arriving at this capital I found that the legislation which had led to the difficulty at Aspinwall was a part of an objectionable system extending to all the ports of this republic, and which had given rise to trouble at different times during the course of nearly half a century.

I beg to refer in this connection to the inclosure with my No. 26 of December 14, 1878, and to No. 10 of October 14, 1878, from the Department. The annoyances arising from this legislation were, perhaps, more aggravating at a port like Barranquilla, which is frequented by much American shipping of the smaller class of sailing vessels, than at the free ports of Aspinwall and Panama, where powerful and wealthy corporations have always been able to enlist the support of foreign governments in correcting abuses to which their steamers may have been subjected. At Barranquilla registers were lost or mislaid and vessels were detained on this account, most of which cases were never reported, for it was a rare occurrence that the same vessel with the same commander would return to the port. Upon inquiring for the reason for this legislation, I found that not only in this country, but in some others of Latin origin, a practice had obtained of making use of the municipal laws of foreign nations, in order to facilitate the police supervision of their own ports.

An entirely erroneous idea prevailed here as to the nature of the instrument called a ship’s register. It was thought that the “register” was of international obligation, and that its absence from a ship brought the latter within the definition of a pirate; and this view was entertained by many who ought to have been better informed. It was, therefore, supposed that for the local authorities to have possession of a ship’s register was a more effective pledge to prevent a ship’s leaving a port than if the rudder had been unshipped.

This pledge the Colombian Government was reluctant to surrender. I realized that a change in the Colombian legislation on this matter, in order to be beneficial at all, would have to be thorough and general.

With this view, I brought the discussion of the subject under the stipulations of the treaty between the United States and Colombia, the result of which was the protocol signed by Dr. Arosemena, and myself. This constituted, as before stated, an exceptional position for the consuls and shipping of the United States in Colombian ports, which position was claimed immediately for the consuls of other nations.

As a natural consequence the legislation of Colombia had to be adapted to the principles of the protocol, and the law 40 of 1879, which was reported in my No. 104 of July 2, 1879, now takes the place of all previous legislation on the subject.

In that dispatch I also took occasion to allude briefly to the difficulties which had been met with in Congress, during the passage of the law.

It may also be well to state here, that in the draft of the same, Icon-suited with the attorney of the Panama Railroad Company at this capital, in order to avoid the possibility of any infringement upon the rights of the company.

* * * * * * *

I discussed the advisability of inserting an article providing that the regular mail steamers or vessels touching at the free ports of Colombia in connection with the transit of the Isthmus, being represented by agents at either port, should be freed from all local restrictions, but upon a careful canvass of the House, and in view of the temper of that body, we arrived at the conclusion that it would be impossible to pass any measure containing such a provision. The most that could be obtained from Congress without endangering the passage of the bill was article 4 of the law, the effects of which have been explained in my No. 104.

In taking these steps I was solely guided by an anxious desire to carry out fully the instructions contained in your No. 6 of August 23, 1878, in which I am directed “to express the confident hope entertained by the President of the United States, that steps will be taken to complete the diplomatic agreement entered into on the 27th of July, 1876,” &c. By examining this agreement, a translation of which will be found in inclosure No. 4 with my dispatch No. 62 (marked A in the margin), it will be found that the pertinent part thereof reads as follows: So that there might well he adopted the usual and legal practice in the United States of America, providing that the register be delivered to the consul of the nation to which the vessel belongs, or in his absence to the consul of a friendly nation. This officer shall return the register as soon as he is informed that the vessel is clear of all national dues, has not violated any law or regulation, and that neither the captain nor the crew have any criminal or civil suits pending, being able in consequence to leave the port, &c.

This is exactly what is provided for by the protocol and the subsequent law 40 of 1879, with this difference, that the diplomatic agreement of 1876 was only applicable to the free ports of Aspinwall and Panama, while the protocol and the law apply to all the ports of this republic, and the additional provision entertained in article 4 of the law.

Nor ought it to be forgotten in connection with the diplomatic agreement of 1876 that it was virtually annulled by the Colombian Congress, that body having passed resolutions in two different sessions (see inclosure No. 4 with my No. 62), requiring and insisting upon the enforcement of the law 60 of 1875, and that in the report of the secretary of the interior and foreign relations for 1878, in treating of this matter, he states the following conclusion: The secretary in charge of this department conceives that this matter is partly one of the maritime police in our ports, and as such is an indisputable duty (right) of the government of the republic, whose jurisdiction cannot be delegated to foreign consuls, and that under this view Congress should legislate when the revision of that law is brought before it.

The department of Hacienda (finance), which has the direct charge of all matters pertaining to customs and the police of the Colombian ports, was also very much opposed to any change in the Colombian legislation, and in view of the difficulties just stated, I respectfully submit it to your considerate judgment if any more satisfactory result could have been accomplished.

* * * * * * *

I know it as a fact that the foreign representatives at this capital have expressed their satisfaction at the enactment of the law just mentioned, and one of them read to me a dispatch to the consuls of his nation, enjoining a strict compliance with its provisions.

* * * * * * *

The main issue in the matter is a conflict of jurisdiction between the Panama Railroad Company and the Colombian Government at the terminal ports of the railroad, Aspinwall and Panama. In the present instance this question of jurisdiction is raised by the conflicting positions of the harbor-master of the company and the inspector of the port of the Colombian Government at the port of Aspinwall. It is held by the Government of Colombia that the office of inspector of the port of Aspinwall is a necessity in order to pre vent smuggling with the customs ports of the country. On the other hand I take the position of the Panama Railroad Company to be, that the exercise of the office of inspector of the port at the free ports of Aspinwall and Panama is a hinderance to its business and an encroachment upon its chartered rights. The former is perhaps founded in reason; in regard to the latter I am not so certain. It appears to me that the readiest solution of the difficulty would be an understanding with the Colombian Government whereby no clearance should be required from vessels arriving at the free ports in connection with the transit of the Isthmus.

Such an understanding I shall endeavor to effect, but the reasons for the same must be sought for under a liberal construction of the guaranteed free transit in the treaty between the United States and Colombia.

It may be held with much reason that the words “shall be open and free” imply transit from ship to ship and freedom from all local restrictions. In my discussions on this subject the following query was also submitted by the Colombian Government: How are we to maintain the neutrality of the Isthmus, which is guaranteed by the United States, if we cannot exercise any police supervision over the vessels arriving at the free ports of Aspinwall and Panama? While I am free to admit that this view is entitled to some consideration, I am also of the opinion that its importance is more theoretical than practical.

If a case should arise when the neutrality of the Isthmus would be called into question, it would undoubtedly be the duty of the Colombian Government to come to an understanding with the Government of the United States, providing for a definition of the word “neutrality” and the manner in which the same shall be enforced. On this subject I shall express my views in a separate dispatch.

* * * * * * *

Permit me to state in conclusion that the protocol (law 40 of 1879) applies to all the ports of this country and to the vessels of all nations alike; that in executing the protocol and procuring the passage of the law, I have endeavored to comply strictly and fully with the instructions contained in your No. 6, of August 23, 1878, and your No. 10, of October 14, 1878, acting under the conviction that the protocol and subsequent law would be a completion of the diplomatic agreement entered into on the 27th of July, 1876, which I was directed to accomplish; that in regard to the customs ports of this country I believe the law to be satisfactory, and in regard to the free ports I believe it to be a great improvement upon the previous legislation known as the law 60 of 1875; and that I shall endeavor to arrive at an understanding with this government providing for such modification of the port regulations at the free ports of Aspinwall and Panama as may be required by the exceptional position of their ports and the interests of the Panama Railroad Company.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 198. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 198.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, September 20, 1879. (Received October 25.) No. 138.]

Sir: In order that the Department might be in possession of the knowledge of all the successive steps taken by this government in connection with the subject of the deposit of ships’ papers, I beg to inclose a retranslation of that part of the report of the Colombian secretary for foreign relations for 1878, which treats of this matter.

The original will be forwarded by the first favorable opportunity.

This report shows how the diplomatic agreement of 1876 came to be set aside, thus leading to the difficulty in the case of the Lorine.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 138.]

deposit of ships’ papers.

Report of Colombian foreign secretary for 1878. [Extract.]

In the report from this office, presented last year, an account was given of the “memorandum” which was transmitted to the honorable members of the diplomatic corps, dated July 15, 1876, upon the duties with which the captains of vessels arriving at the free ports of Colombia have to comply, and of the result established in consequence of the answers given by said gentlemen.

The illustrious Señor Ancizar, who was then charged with the department of the interior and foreign relations, in order to remove the difficulties created by the law 60 of the 3d of June, 1875, reforming certain provisions relating to customs, and by those of certain articles of the Fiscal Code connected therewith, relating to the presentation of the registers of the vessels arriving at the free ports of Colombia, indicated to the foreign legations that until the said law 60 should be repealed there might well be adopted the usual and legal practice of the United States of America, providing that the register be delivered to the consul of the nation to which the vessel belongs, or, in his absence, to the consul of a friendly nation. And he added the following:

“This officer shall return the register when he is informed that the vessel is clear of all national dues; that no law or rule has been violated, and that the captain or the crew have no civil or criminal proceeding pending against them, being in consequence able to leave the port. The collectors of customs, the fiscal agents in the free ports, and the commanders of the harbor guards, when by article 404 of the Fiscal Code they may be required to cause a compliance with the provisions relating to the harbor police, will be ordered to give the aforesaid information to the consul, in order that he may return the register.”

Several of the collectors of customs made observations, more or less well founded, upon this resolution, the placing of which, in operation, it may be said, was accompanied by many irregularities.

Congress did not pass any law in the sense indicated to that body (to repeal the law 60 of 1875), but the House of Representatives approved in the last days of the session the following proposition (resolution):

“Let the executive power be reminded to cause a compliance with the Fiscal Code and the law 60 of 1875, upon the presentation of documents by the captains or supercargoes of merchant vessels to the respective national agents or officers.”

On account of this resolution, the secretary of finance communicated to this department that he would transmit the resolution to the custom-house and port inspectors in order that the same should be carried out.

In the condition in which this matter is found, it is therefore urgent to call the attention of the legislative body of the republic to the same, in order to determine clearly by means of a law the rules which should govern in the future the formalities to be observed by the captains of the vessels which arrive at the ports of Colombia.

The secretary, charged with this department, conceives that this matter is purely one of the maritime police in our ports, and as such is an indisputable duty (right) of the government of the republic, whose jurisdiction cannot be delegated to foreign consuls, and that under this view Congress should legislate when the revision of the law is brought before it.

Memorandum A.

The action taken by the Colombian Congress in 1878, in answer to the urgent request of the secretary of the interior and foreign relations, was a resolution passed by the senate on the 28th of May, 1878, which reads as follows:

“Let the executive power be informed that, until Congress repeals or changes the law 60 of 1875, additional to and reformatory of the law upon customs, and orders be given as will insure the strictest compliance with the law, as well as with such legal provisions as may correspond with the same, by whom it may concern.

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 199. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 199.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, October 2, 1879. (Received November 8.) No. 146.]

Sir: In continuation of my No. 139, of September 22, 1879, relating to the subject of a riot at the city of Bucaramanga, I beg to inclose a translation of a letter received from that city and published here, giving an account of the causes and progress of that barbarous proceeding. As far as I can learn, the writer of the letter is trustworthy, and the statements made appear to be correct. What will strike you, perhaps, more than the outburst of savage brutality displayed on that occasion, is the small amount of public spirit manifested by the respectable part of the population in allowing an “alcalde,” whose office is akin to the combined functions of mayor and justice of the peace, and his gang of ruffians to terrorize over a community which is reported to have from 11,000 to 12,000 inhabitants. The letter gives a fair indication of * * * a feeling or idea which prevails here to altogether too great an extent, that security for life, liberty, and property should depend upon guarantees from the government or authorities instead of springing as a self-evident fact from a proper sense of right and duty and a spirit of true manhood. The last sentence of the letter, which is evidently intended to set forth a stern determination, beginning with an invocation to the Deity, and followed by the threat of protesting in all forms, becomes absurd by the succeeding anti-climax to take to the woods as the last alternative in the effort of obtaining peace and security.

* * * * * * *

The subject of this dispatch would not be deserving of so extended a notice, and would perhaps have little claim upon your attention, * * * were it not for the complications which may possibly arise between the Colombian and German Governments on account thereof. For this reason, and in order to enable you to form a judgment as to the matter, I deem it my duty to lay all the facts connected with the riot reported in my No. 139 of September 22, 1879, before you.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 146.]

BucaraManga, State Of Santander,
September 15, 1879.

I shall begin at the beginning. In Colombia all parties have contributed to the present evil on account of political interest; liberals or conservatives, we have all contributed more or less to the ruin of morality and the bases of society. Some excite the poor against the rich, and for the purpose of getting votes flatter vice and court the rabble, talking of equality and the sovereignty of the people; others stir up fanaticism smoldering in the masses and enliven hatred and passion in the name of the religion of peace and love. All of us, whether in power or in the opposition, have resorted to immoral means in order to gain elections, and have struck a blow at virtue in the republic.

The governments have given their entire attention to these matters; appointments are not made according to merit and capacity, but according to the audacity and skill possessed by the candidate to carry elections, and from this evil I do not even except the radicals in their best days.

Latterly, we have seen a condition of affairs which follows the general demoralization as a natural result; soldiers preventing citizens from being present at the opening of the ballot-boxes, votes counted in advance by hundreds, polling-lists arranged with apparent legal formality in such a manner that districts which did not have more than a dozen voters appeared with more than one hundred; soldiers sent to all districts and placed at the side of the ballot-box; alcaldes, judges, and inspectors all working actively and walking arm in arm with the most ignorant men, bringing the latter to the polls in order to vote early and often under fictitious names. We have seen at the last election the independents work for a ticket for members of the council of this city composed of names of the most ignorant men belonging to the lowest classes of society. It suffices to say that many of these men are now prisoners for their participation in the great crime of the riot; in fact enough of them are prisoners to form a quorum of the council. This picture is a sad one, but we are all to blame for it, radicals, independents, and conservatives, in neglecting the interests of society for those of a clique or party.

But to pass now to the more immediate cause of the catastrophe. When General Vilches (the governor of Santander), made the appointment of Pedro Rodriguez, a chief of this department, he could not have known that the latter was entirely un-suited to the place on account of his antecedents, which are very bad, and particularly on account of his intimate connection with the “Culebra.” [Culebra—Snake, the name of a secret society of communistic tendency. The name itself is suggestive of the purposes and mode of accomplishing them.—E. D.]

On the day on which Rodriguez arrived to take possession of his post he was met by the members of this society and given a dinner, on which occasion Pedro Callazos talked against the merchants, saying that they were thieves and robbers, and should be exterminated.

On the following day this orator, who had been chief of the “Culebra,” and who has been sentenced to the penitentiary for various crimes, was appointed alcalde of this city of Bucaramanga.

The task which the new alcalde took upon himself was to cause the poor people to rise against the merchants and property-holders, and to this end he made speeches every day in the plaza [square], exciting the savage passions of the lower classes.

On the 7th instant the elections for President of the Republic took place, audit may be said that they passed off quietly. The radicals and conservatives had agreed upon a ticket for members of the council, comprising the most honorable names of both parties. The ticket of the independents, as has already been said, was composed of the most obscure names belonging to the lowest classes of society.

At last the hour of explosion came. On the evening of the 7th instant Mr. Vicente Mateo was wounded by a bullet while passing the portico of the church, and Mr. Obdulio Estéves, while standing in front of a billiard-room, was killed by a shot from a revolver, fired into his back, and from so short a distance as to burn his clothes. The alcalde, who was near by, soon arrived on the spot. He kicked the body and otherwise insulted the dead victim. Seeing Dr. Guillermo Forero, he called him, insulted him, pulled his hat off, and obliged him to carry the body on his back.

The death of Mr. Estéves was celebrated by the bandits with great shouting, the firing of rockets, and a dance.

On the following day the chief of the department left the city early in the morning. In the afternoon many of us were at the funeral of Señor Estéves, and while in the church one of the bandits made an attack with a dagger upon Senor Valenzuela, who avoided the blow and defended himself with his revolver.

Soon the gang of armed bandits arrived on the spot, headed by the alcalde, and as only three of us had revolvers we took to flight, seeking for a place where to hide. We made for the house of Señor Albert Fritsch, and leaping a mud wall were safe. Two young men, Eduardo Mutis and Ernesto Mueller, did not leap the wall, but remained in a room of the house. The first was killed while on his knees begging for his life, and the last was beaten almost to death. They were quite young men, and the last was entirely foreign to our quarrels.

From the house of Fritsch the ruffians went to different houses, breaking doors, windows, and furniture, firing shots and yelling like demons. Ladies and children had to climb the roofs of houses for safety. What an awful situation! Two Germans, Mr. H. Hedrick and Mr. C. Goelkel, both entirely foreign to our political difficulties, and relying upon their national character, went to inquire about Mrs. Valenzuela; they were killed upon falling in with the ruffians. The former was shot, and the latter was first cruelly beaten and then shot.

As I have said before, the chief of the department absented himself early on the morning of the 8th, when the murder of Señor Estéves had just taken place on the evening before, and when the ruffians had tasted blood and manifested their joy by giving a dance, where a list was made of those who were to be murdered.

On the evening of the 9th the chief of the department returned from his excursion to see the work of his alcalde.

On Wednesday, the 10th instant, while the criminals were still walking the streets, he caused a proclamation to be made declaring order restored, but nobody dared leave their hiding-places until protection was afforded the same evening by a friendly force which came from a neighboring village.

The excesses committed by the ruffians are beyond my powers of description Fortunately, the first night they became so drunk they could not continue their work of destruction. Upon his arrival, the chief of the department appointed Carlos Delgado alcalde of this city, and to-day this new alcalde is among the prisoners who are accused of participating in the riot.

The President of the State came to this scene of misfortune, and appointed M. A. Vilches chief of the department, upon the unanimous request of the citizens. The latter is a young man whose name inspires confidence and gives security to this society.

But God forbid that we may have authorities placed over us again who do not afford us security, for in that case we are resolved to protest in all possible forms, and as the last resort we had better leave with our families and seek the peace and security of the woods.

No. 200. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. No. 200.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State,
Washington, October 15, 1879. No. 73.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 119, of the 2d of August last, has been received. Its subject is the mediation of Colombia in the war of Peru and Bolivia against Chili, for which purpose it appears that Don Pablo Arosemena, an eminent citizen of Colombia, has been dispatched to the belligerent countries. It is gratifying to learn that Colombia has seen indications that the interposition of a neutral American power might tend to bring about a cessation of hostilities, and has shaped her course accordingly. You may assure the administration of that republic that this government has a desire to do everything which may be practicable, likely to accomplish that result. We have bestowed close attention to the progress of the war, with the wish to interpose our good offices in favor of peace. Thus far, however, no evidence has been seen that such interposition would be useful.

The confidence shown in this government by the note on this subject of the 6th of July last, addressed to you by Don Luis Cárlos Rico, the minister for foreign affairs, is appreciated. A continuation of that confidence is desired, especially in imparting any information which that government may receive to the effect that the belligerents would look with favor on the aid of the United States in bringing about a peace.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 201. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 201.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, November 9, 1879. (Received January 12.) No. 156.]

Sir: For the purpose of bringing article 3 of the protocol, relating to the right of transport claimed by the Government of the United States across the Isthmus of Panama (a copy of which was forwarded in my No. 58 of March 17, 1879), within the views on this subject expressed in the last part of Department’s instruction No. 41 of May 12, 1879, I entered upon a negotiation with the Colombian secretary of foreign relations suggesting such a modification of article 3 of the protocol above mentioned as would remove the objectionable feature pointed out by the Department.

After repeated conferences on this subject we agreed upon such a modification of article 3 of the protocol executed on the 22d day of February, 1879, as will leave any prisoner of the United States to be transported across the Isthmus of Panama in the custody of a civil officer of the United States, who will be accompanied by a civil officer of the United States of Colombia. The duty of the latter officer will be, in the case of necessity, to provide for the due detention and transport of such prisoner.

The agreement arrived at between the Colombian Government and myself was embodied in a new protocol executed on the 23d day of October, 1879, (copy of which, as well as of the preliminary correspondence to the same) is respectfully inclosed.

I venture to express the hope that article 3 of the protocol of February 22, 1879, as modified by that of October 23, 1879, will be found to meet the views of the Department.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 156.]

Mr. Dichman to Señor Rico.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, September 4, 1879.

Sir: Referring to the protocol executed on the 22d of February, 1879, between your honorable predecessor, Dr. Pablo Arosemena, and myself, on the subject of the right of transport claimed by the United States under the thirty-fifth article of the treaty of 1846, I take pleasure in informing you that the same is accepted by the Government of the United States as a just recognition on the part of the Colombian Government of its obligations under the said treaty, and as a due consideration of the heavy contingent liability which the obligations of the same treaty impose Upon the United States.

At the same time I beg to state that it is thought at Washington that the third article of the protocol might perhaps have been scarcely necessary, inasmuch as the custody of a prisoner, under the circumstances to which the protocol applies, is almost always assured by means of a civil officer, and I would therefore thank you to take the said third article of the protocol and the correspondence between this legation and your department relating to the same into consideration, with the view of making such a change in the third article of the protocol as would leave it optional with the officers of the United States to require national or state troops as a guard.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

protocol.

At a conference held at the department of the interior and of foreign relations at Bogota’ on this, the 23d day of October, 1879, between the secretary having charge of said department, Luis Carlos Rico, and the Hon. Ernest Dichman, minister resident of the United States of America, both having been clothed with ample powers by their respective governments to examine the statements made by that of the United States of America, and communicated to its legation at this capital, with respect to the amendment of article 3 of the protocol, which was signed on the 22d day of February of the present year, in reference to the right of transit of the American Government via the Isthmus of Panama, it was agreed to modify the said article 3 as follows:

Article 3.

The custody of prisoners whose transportation across the Isthmus of Panama shall be requested by the Government of the United States of America of that of the United States of Colombia shall be exercised by a civil officer of the United States of America, accompanied by a Colombian civil officer, who shall ask of the proper authorities, if necessary, the assistance of the national or state forces, in order to secure the due detention and transportation of the prisoner.

In testimony whereof they sign and seal two copies of this protocol at Bogotá on the twenty-third day of October, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine.
[seal.] LUIS CÁRLOS RICO.
[seal.] ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 202. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 202.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, November 9, 1879. (Received January 12.) No. 158.]

Sir: Referring to the series of correspondence on the subject of the custody of registers of American vessels by the consuls of the United States in the ports of Colombia, I beg to inform the Department that I am assured by the Colombian secretary of foreign relations that the attention of the next Congress will be called to the matter, with a recommendation to make such a change in the law as may be required by the exceptional position of the free ports of Aspinwall and Panama.

The accompanying copy of a note from the Colombian secretary of foreign relations, which clearly sets forth a promise to that effect, also contains an explicit statement showing that the vessels of all nations are treated alike in Colombian ports, and that no discriminations are practiced.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 158.]

Mr. Dichman to Señor Rico.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, September 4, 1879.

Sir: It having been represented to the Government of the United States that the regulations concerning the clearance of vessels at the free ports of Colon-Aspinwall and Panama, when such vessels touch at said ports in connection with the transit of the isthmus, are prejudicial to the freedom of the transit guaranteed by Colombia under the treaty with the United States, I beg to bring this matter to your notice, and will thank you to indicate a time when it will suit your convenience to hold a conference with me in relation to the same.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 158.—Translation.]

Señor Rico to Mr. Dichman.

United States of Colombia,
Department of the Interior and of Foreign Relations,
Bogotá, October 23, 1879.

Sir:Referring to your excellency’s communication of the 4th of September last, and to the private interviews which you have had with me concerning the delivery of registers of vessels in the free ports of the Republic, I have the honor to inform your excellency that, inasmuch as the provisions of the 40th law of June 24, 1879, which is an amendment to the 60th of 1875, are positive, it is not in the power of the Executive to introduce any correction or modification of those provisions.

In view, however, of the views expressed by your excellency on this subject, and of their justice, the attention of the next Congress will be called to the propriety of introducing some modifications in the general method established for the presentation of registers, either on account of the topographical peculiarities of some of our ports, or of the postal services rendered by the vessels of the lines which periodically visit our coasts, or, finally, on account of the short time that vessels putting into port accidentally remain there.

I must inform your excellency that the Colombian Government has established and makes no distinction in favor of vessels of any nationality as to the formalities with which their captains are obliged to comply on arriving in the ports of the Union; all are treated on a footing of absolute equality, according to the legal provisions existing on the subject.

With sentiments of distinguished consideration, I subscribe myself,

Yours, &c.,

LUIS CÁRLOS RICO.

No. 203. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. No. 203.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State,
Washington, December 9, 1879. No. 83.]

Sir: I transmit herewith a copy of a letter dated the 3d instant, addressed to this Department by the Postmaster-General in relation to the excessive tariff of postal charges in the Republic of the United States of Colombia on correspondence for the United States, the subject of which was brought to the notice of this Department by the commercial agent of the United States at Medellin in October last. It appears from it that all that is needed to establish uniform cheap rates of postage between that republic and this country is the adhesion of Colombia to the Universal Postal Convention, concluded at Paris on the 1st of June, 1878, and that this adhesion maybe effected on the simple demand of the Government of Colombia, with notice thereof through the diplomatic channel to the Government of the Swiss Confederation, and by that government to all countries of the Union.

In accordance with the suggestion of the Postmaster-General, you will bring the matter to the attention of the Colombian Government, and urge upon it the importance of adhesion to the convention of Paris, as a measure not only of postal reform but of great commercial advantage.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in No. 83.]

Mr. Key to Mr. Evarts.

Post-Office Department,
Washington, December 3, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 25th ultimo, transmitting a copy of dispatch, No. 8, dated the 4th of October last, from the United States commercial agent at Medellin, United States of Colombia, in relation to the excessive tariff of postage charges in that republic on correspondence for the United States.

I would state, in reply, that the adhesion of the United States of Colombia to the Universal Postal Union Convention, concluded at Paris on the 1st of June, 1878, is all that is needed to establish uniform cheap rates of postage, not only between that republic and the United States, but with all countries of the Postal Union; and that this adhesion may be effected on the simple demand of the Government of Colombia, with notice thereof through, the diplomatic channel to the Government of the Swiss Confederation, and by that government to all the countries of the Union.

The United States of Venezuela has recently declared, diplomatically, its adhesion to the Universal Postal Union from the 1st of January next. Honduras was admitted from the 1st of October last; Brazil, the Argentine Republic, Peru, and Salvador were parties to the Paris convention, and entered the Union on the 1st of April, 1879, and the earnest desire of this Department, in common with all other Postal Union administrations, is, that the United States of Colombia and other Central and South American countries which have not yet adhered to the Universal Postal Union formed by the convention of Paris should do so as soon as practicable.

I would respectfully suggest in this connection that our minister to the United States of Colombia might properly be instructed to urge upon the government of that republic the importance of adhesion to the convention of Paris, as a measure not only of postal reform but of great commercial advantage.

I am, &c.,

D. M. KEY,
Postmaster-General.

No. 204. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. No. 204.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State,
Washington, March 8, 1880. No. 102.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 156, of the 9th of November last, transmitting a modification of the transit protocol of February 22, 1879, between Dr. Pablo Arosemena and yourself, whereby Article III of the original instrument is changed to conform to the suggestions of this government contained in the Department’s instruction No. 41 of May 12, 1879, has been received.

The change, as expressed in the additional protocol between yourself and Señor Rico, of October 23 ultimo, is entirely satisfactory, and the protocol, thus amended, is accepted as the standard by which extradition, by way of transit, across the Isthmus of Panama, shall be assured and regulated in the absence of treaty stipulations to the same end.

In event of the conclusion of a convention of extradition between the two countries, embracing a special provision securing transit, it is doubtless intended by the Government of Colombia that the protocol, as amended, shall subsist and form the proper basis for the local execution of the treaty stipulation.

* * * * * * *

I am. &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 205. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. No. 205.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State,
Washington, June 7, 1880. No. 115.]

Sir: I transmit herewith for your information copies of correspondence* recently exchanged between this Department and the Colombian representative at this capital, concerning the reported operations of the United States vessels Adams and Kearsarge in the waters of the Isthmus of Panama.

Your unnumbered dispatch, written from Aspinwall on the 6th ultimo, in which you reported your friendly interview with the chief executive of the State of Panama, and especially your report of President Cervera’s pledge that he would hold in abeyance any contemplated steps with regard to the Adams and Kearsarge until you should have made to the federal authorities at Bogota the communication with which you were charged, left the Department totally unprepared for the precipitate and unfriendly action of President Cervera on the 12th of May, only one week after your interview with him, when, in a communication to the consular officers of the United States at Aspinwall and Panama, he abruptly ordered the cessation of the friendly operations of the two vessels and the immediate withdrawal of the Adams from Golfo Dulce, on the ground that no custom-house facilities existed there.

It is presumed that you are already in possession of the text of President Cervera’s unprecedented order, but nevertheless a copy in the original language, as received from Mr. Thoringtou, is appended hereto to complete your record of the matter.

You will lose no time in making earnest but dispassionate representations to the Colombian Government concerning this arbitrary act of the authorities of Panama. It is desirable that in so doing, in terms which are left to your discretion, you should, so far as practicable, pursue the mode of treatment of the subject followed in my note to Señor Arosemena, contrasting the conciliatory nature of the federal representations made at this capital by the national representative of Colombia with the harsh and utterly unwarrantable course of the state authorities in violation of the common amenities of treatment among civilized and friendly nations. It is desired that the firm and dignified representations you are hereby directed to make shall leave no doubt in the minds of President Nuñez’s cabinet of the gravity which we attach to President Cervera’s action and of the necessity that it should be disavowed or so explained as to deprive it of the unfortunate appearance of unfriendliness which it now bears.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Appendices.—Vide correspondence with the Colombian legation at Washington, infra.

* For correspondence with the Colombian legation in Washington, vide infra, pp. 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], et seq.

No. 206. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 206.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, July 13, 1880. (Received August 20.) No. 185.]

Sir: After all the reports which have been circulated about the unfriendly attitude of the Government of Colombia towards the United States, it will undoubtedly be gratifying to you to learn that in the celebration of the Fourth of July at this capital the Colombian Government took an unusual interest.

The President of this Republic sent a military band of music to play at the legation during the hours of a reception, which took place from 12 to 6 p.m., and during these hours the legation was visited by all the representatives of foreign governments at this capital, the archbishop and other dignitaries of the Catholic Church, the foreign consuls, members of the government, and many prominent citizens. The public buildings and legations had their flags displayed, and at noon a national salute of twenty-one guns was fired in volleys by the entire garrison of Bogota, consisting of three battalions of infantry and one battery of artillery, which for that purpose had been drawn up in the principal public square of the city.

On the following day, the 5th instant, the Colombian senate adopted a resolution in honor of the anniversary of American independence.

This resolution was communicated to me officially by the secretary of foreign relations under date of the 9th of July. For a copy of his communication, as well as my answer, I beg to refer to the inclosures with this dispatch.

On the 6th of this month I paid a visit to President Nuñez, for the purpose of expressing my high appreciation of the acts of courtesy shown by his government in honor of the United States on the Fourth of July. During the interview, which was of the most pleasant nature, President Nunez expressed great admiration for the United States, and the hope that all questions between the two governments would be amicably adjusted.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 185.—Translation.]

Señor Rico to Mr. Dichman.

United States of Colombia,
Department of Foreign Relations,
Bogotá, July 9, 1880.

Sir: The senate of plenipotentiaries of the republic, during the session of the 5th instant, adopted the following resolution:

“The senate of plenipotentiaries of the United States of Colombia commemorates with patriotic exultation the grand political movement which was celebrated by the sons of the great North American republic on yesterday, and believes it to be its duty to enter this fact upon the records of the session to-day.”

I have the honor to communicate the same to you, in order that you may be pleased to make the illustrious Government of North America acquainted therewith.

With all consideration, I subscribe myself, &c.,

LUIS CÁRLOS RICO.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 185.]

Mr. Dichman to Señor Rico.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, July 11, 1880.

Sir: It is with great pleasure that I hasten to acknowledge your note of the 9th instant, in which you are pleased to communicate a copy of a resolution passed by the senate of plenipotentiaries of the United States of Colombia, on the 5th of this month, in which that honorable body expresses its patriotic joy at the occurrence of the anniversary of the Declaration of Independence of the United States, and makes entry thereof upon the records of that day’s session.

Permit me to avail myself of your kind offices, by requesting you to inform the honorable senate of plenipotentiaries of the United States of Colombia that I shall bring this act of courtesy on their part immediately to the notice of my government, and to convey to them in advance my assurances of the high appreciation with which it will be acknowledged in the United States.

I also beg to ask you to convey to his Excellency the President of the United States of Colombia my thanks for the courtesies and honors shown to me as the representative of the Government of the United States on the 4th instant, and to assure him that in my reports to Washington I shall not fail to make particular mention of the unusual compliment of the national salute of twenty-one guns which was fired by the orders of his Excellency in honor of the day and of the United States.

With the renewed assurance of my high consideration,

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 207. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 207.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, July 19, 1880. (Received August 31.) No. 187.]

Sir: Referring to the subject of the differences existing between Costa Rica and Colombia on account of disputed boundaries, which has been brought to your notice in previous dispatches, as well as the warlike attitude assumed by Colombia in relation to the same matter, I now have the honor to inform you that more prudential counsels having found acceptance with this government, it has been determined to send a special minister to Costa Rica for the purpose of arriving at an amicable understanding on the subject of these differences before resorting to the alternative of war.

* * * * * * *

The newly appointed Colombian minister to Great Britain has been directed to proceed, to Costa Rica on his way to England, and as he is a gentleman of common sense and ability he may be able to arrive at a satisfactory settlement of this vexing boundary question with the Government of Colombia’s northern neighbor.

In connection with the subject of this dispatch, it is, perhaps, opportune to bring to your notice that in accordance with a resolution of the Colombian senate, besides claiming, as Colombian, the territory south of a line following the course of the river Golfito from its mouth on the Pacific to its source in the mountains of Las Cruces, and from thence along the crest of said mountains to the source of the river Culebra, and thence along the course of that river to the Atlantic, Colombia also claims the sovereignty over, and ownership of, the territory on the Atlantic coast now comprised within the boundaries and forming the Atlantic littoral of Costa Rica and Nicaragua, extending from the mouth of the river Culebra to Cape Gracias á Dios (in about 15° N. and 83° W.).

* * * * * * *

As several of the articles of the resolution of the Colombian senate, above referred to, are kept secret, I shall be unable to forward an account thereof until I shall have acquired a knowledge of the whole of it. I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

No. 208. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. No. 208.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1880. No. 123.]

Sir: I transmit herewith, for your confidential information, copies of correspondence had with the Costa Rican foreign minister concerning the recent visit of the Adams to Golfo Dulce.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EYARTS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 123.]

Señor Castro to Mr. Evarts.

Department of Foreign Relations of the Republic of Costa Rica,
National Palace, San Jose, June 10, 1880.

Most Excellent Sir: The steamer Adams, belonging to the Navy of the United States, has entered Golfo Dulce, a port of this republic which is not open to foreign commerce, and the captain of said vessel has engaged in mysterious operations which he says are performed in obedience to orders from his government. This proceeding has attracted the attention of my government.

As it is not possible for us to doubt either the cordial and sincere friendship of your great republic for our own, or its respect for the most elementary and sacred principles of international law, we have been expecting a full explanation of the matter from your excellency’s government; inasmuch, however, as the minister resident of the United States in Central America, who was in Nicaragua when the Adams entered the waters of Costa Rica, did not visit this capital, as we expected that he would do, and as no communication has as yet been received in reference to the matter in question, I deem it my duty to bring the foregoing facts to your excellency’s notice, as I hereby do, to the end that a duplicate may be sent of the note which your government has undoubtedly addressed to that of this republic in regard to this matter, and which has been delayed or gone astray.

I beg your excellency to accept, &c.,

JOSÉ MA CASTRO.

To His Excellency the Secretary of Foreign Relations of the United States of North America.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 123.]

Mr. Evarts to Señor Castro.

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1880.

Your Excellency: I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s note of the 10th of June last, wherein you mention the recent visit of the United States steamer Adams to the port of Golfo Dulce, and invite the explanations of this government in regard to that visit.

Your excellency is right in conjecturing that the voyage of the Adams to the waters of Gulfo Dulce, and the incidents which attended that event have already been made the occasion of instructions to the minister resident of the United States accredited to the several Central American republics. In the absence, however, of any representations made or action taken in respect of the Adams or her commanding officer by the local or federal authorities of Costa Rica during her stay in Golfo Dulce, it seemed to me premature to direct Mr. Logan to tender explanations or take other action toward the government you represent, which would imply prejudgment by the United States Government of the questions of disputed boundaries in that region which are understood to have been for some time pending between Costa Rica and the neighboring Republic of Colombia.

With regard to the operations of the Adams in those waters, it affords me great pleasure to state to your excellency, that, neither in her visit nor in the informal reconnaissances made in the vicinity during her brief stay, was there any intention of performing any act which could be regarded as affecting the just sensibilities of a power with which the United States maintain close relations of cordial friendship; and that in taking avail of the shelter afforded by the open roadstead and anchorage of a friendly state, it was not presumed that the hospitality thus sought, being of a character common in the intercourse of nations and one which the United States themselves would not question in respect of a foreign vessel of war resorting under a friendly flag to their own shores, would be qualified by mere technical or commercial considerations founded on the existence or non-existence of a port of entry and trade in the neighborhood.

It is, however, a source of sincere regret to the President that the incident should, have given rise to any misconceptions on the part of a people to whom we are allied by so many and strong ties of traditional friendship, kindred interests, and similar free institutions: and I am confident that the friendly relations which it has been always the pleasure and the duty of the Government of the United States to maintain and strengthen between this country and the republics of this continent, and especially with Costa Rica, will find in this occurrence no motive for questioning the absolute good-will and sincerity of either towards the other.

It is possible that this government may have been misinformed as to the waters visited by the Adams, in regard to the inhabited settlements in their vicinity, or the local presence of official representation on their shores. In order, therefore, that any inattention, however inadvertently, to the rights or claims of Costa Rica may not again occur, this government would desire information of the geographical boundary between the Republic of Costa Rica and the United States of Colombia, as well as some designation of the local authorities of Costa Rica exercising jurisdiction in that region.

Had the representative of Costa Rica in the United States been here at the time, I would doubtless have availed myself of an early occasion to become acquainted with the views of your excellency’s government in this relation. As it is, however, and in view of the opportunity which your excellency’s esteemed communication affords me for the proper presentation of such an inquiry, I have instructed the minister resident of the United States accredited to Costa Rica, in transmitting this reply to your excellency’s note of the 10th of June last, to seek such information as your excellency may be disposed to furnish on these points.

I avail myself, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

His Excellency Señor Don José María Castro,
Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Costa Rica.

No. 209. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 209.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, August 16, 1880. (Received September 28.) No. 198.]

Sir: Immediately upon the receipt of your No. 115, of the 7th of June last, relating to the unfriendly action of the president of the State of Panama towards the United States vessels Adams and Kearsarge, I brought the contents thereof informally to the notice of President Nunez, with whom I had an extended conference in relation to the matter, in the course of which I endeavored to impress him fully with the gravity of the occurrence, and also intimated to him, politely, but firmly, that, in addition to whatever explanations his government might be able to offer, the readiest manner in which your just complaints could be satisfied would be by a frank disavowal of the act of the Panama executive.

As soon after this conference as the same could be prepared, I addressed an official note to the secretary of foreign relations, a copy of which I beg to inclose, and in both the language and substance of which I trust you will find a correct interpretation of and a strict compliance with your instructions upon this subject.

You will also please find inclosed a copy and translation of the answer of the secretary of foreign relations, in which, after some introductory remarks, being a recital of the substance of my note just mentioned, he enters upon a lengthy explanation of the unfriendly act in question by attributing the chief blame for the same to the imperfect transmission by the telegraph of the orders from the government at Bogotá to the president of Panama. He also states that the orders in question were discretionary; and as the Panama executive saw fit to act without exercising any discretion, his action is distinctly disapproved. After communicating the steps taken by his government to prevent a recurrence of any similar action, or any other cause of complaint in the State of Panama, the note of the secretary of foreign relations concludes with expressions of friendly considerations for the United States.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 198.]

Mr. Dichman to Señor Rico.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, July 31, 1880.

Sir: In recent dispatches from my Government, I am instructed to make earnest representations to the Government of the United States of Colombia concerning the arbitrary act of the president of the State of Panama in abruptly ordering a cessation of the friendly operations of the United States war vessel Kearsarge in the waters of the Bay of Chiriqui and the immediate withdrawal of the United States war vessel Adams from the Gulf of Dulce, and to inform you that this precipitate and inconsiderate act of the Panama executive is considered at Washington as an unfriendly and discourteous act towards the United States, the gravity of which is augmented by the fact that on the 6th day of last May, only six days previous to the date of his extraordinary communication to the consuls of the United States at Panama and Aspinwall, conveying to them the orders above referred to, the president of the State of Panama had been informed by me that as soon as the orders given by the Navy Department of the United States could reach the two vessels above mentioned they would cease their operations and proceed on other duty, and that upon this assurance on my part freely given in order to allay what seemed to me groundless disquietude on his part, he expressed himself fully satisfied and agreed with me not to take any further steps in the premises.

As you are undoubtedly in possession of a copy of this singular communication of the president of the State of Panama to the consuls of the United States at the Isthmus, I shall take the liberty of observing in connection therewith that if, previous to venturing upon a step of such gravity, the Panama executive had only taken the trouble of informing himself correctly as to the status of the two ships in question, he would have learned that on the 12th day of last May—the date of his communication—the Kearsarge, having completed her errand, had ceased her friendly operations in the Bay of Chiriqui and was about to quit Las Bocas del Toro, under the orders of the Navy Department given some time previously; and that on the 8th day of last May, being four days previous to the date of his communication, the Adams was anchored at Punta Arenas, being in the waters of the friendly and neighboring Republic of Costa Rica, the government of which, in pleasant contrast to the unfriendly disposition manifested by that of Panama, not only expressed itself very much gratified at the visit of the ship, but also supplied her with coal, and extended such courtesies to her officers as were in its power.

Irrespective of many other considerations which will readily occur to you, I am sure that upon learning these facts you cannot but experience a feeling of regret that, for at least the want of ordinary prudence, not to characterize it by any more appropriate name, and governed by influences, perhaps, difficult to understand, but in which I am confident the Federal Government of Colombia has no part, the Panama executive should have hastened into the commission of an act which, in addition to constituting an affront to the United States, was entirely gratuitous, being devoid of any basis of fact which might be pleaded in explanation.

It is, of course, unnecessary to state for your information that, in conformity with international usage and courtesy, the ports and harbors of friendly nations, whether open to commerce or not, are at all times free to the national vessels of a power with which relations of peace and good-will prevail, for even if this international usage did not obtain the relations of friendship which have always been maintained between the United States of America and of Colombia, and the treaty stipulations in force between the two countries, constituting them in a certain sense allies, would rebut the presumption that the Federal Government of Colombia, which in its intercourse with that of the United States has always given expression to its considerate and amicable purposes, could allow its cool judgment to be influenced by unfounded popular clamor to such an extent as to close any of its ports to the national vessels of the United States.

In bringing this cause of complaint of the Government of the United States to your notice, I need not assure you that instead of its being conceived in a spirit of querulous indignation it is prompted by the hope that by disavowing the ill-judged and inconsiderate action of the president of the State of Panama, or by explaining the same in such a manner as to relieve it of the unfortunate aspect of unfriendliness which it now bears, the Government of Colombia will remove the variance existing between the apparently unfriendly act of one of its local officers in the State of Panama and the expressions of sincere friendship and thoughful consideration professed in its name by its minister at Washington towards the Government of the United States, and which, I am happy to state, are reciprocated to the fullest extent by that government, which cannot bring itself to entertain the thought that the Government of Colombia would give utterance to sentiments of sincere friendship and thoughtful consideration towards the United States through its ministers at Washington, and thus maintain the appearance of amicable relations while prescribing a contrary line of conduct to be observed by its local officers in Colombia.

With the assurances, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 198. Translation.]

Señor Rico to Mr. Dichman.

United States of Colombia,
Department of Foreign Relations,
Bogotá, August 11, 1880.

Mr. Minister: I have been duly impressed with the note of your honor dated the 31st of July last.

In it your honor informs me that in compliance with recent dispatches from your government you are instructed to make earnest representation to the Government of Colombia concerning the arbitrary act of the president of the State of Panama in abruptly ordering a cessation of the friendly operations of the man-of-war Kearsarge, of the Navy of the United States, in the waters of the Bay of Chiriqui, and the withdrawal of the Adams of the same Navy from the Gulf of Dulce, and to inform me that this precipitate and inconsiderate action or the Panama executive is considered at Washington as wanting in friendship and even discourteous towards the United States, and that the gravity of this act is augmented by the fact that on the 6th of May last, only six days prior to the date of the communication of the president of the State of Panama to the United States consuls at Panama and Colon, in which said orders were conveyed to them, that functionary had been informed by your honor that so soon as the orders from the Navy Department of the United States could reach them, said vessels, they would cease their operations and proceed upon other duty, and that upon receiving these assurances on the part of your honor, assurances freely given for the purpose of calming what seemed to your honor unfounded disquietude, he expressed himself fully satisfied, and agreed with your honor that he would not take any further steps in the matter.

In this incident lamentable mistakes have occurred. In the first place, the order of the national executive, concerning the vessels Kearsarge and Adams, to the Government of Panama was altered in the course of transmission by the telegraph, which will not surprise your honor, as you are well acquainted with the difficulties to which telegraphic communication in this country is subjected, this being due to the inexperience of the operators, to the fact that the line from this capital to the Pacific runs in part through an uninhabited country, and to the difficulties caused by nature. The order referred to above said that in the Gulf of Dulce were not even ports open to commerce. Suppressing, as was the case, the words “not even,” the entire sense of the phrase is changed.

As your honor will readily understand, it was not intended to be understood that the vessels of war of friendly nations had no right to visit, for innocent purposes, ports not open to commerce. The words “not even,” omitted in the telegram, as it was received at Panama, referred to the fact that in the Gulf of Dulce were not even national or State officers to observe and aid, if necessary, the operations which it was said the Adams was carrying on; operations, the importance of which had been increased by the force of circumstances, placed the State of Panama and the whole republic in alarm.

Moreover, the orders given to the Government of Panama were entirely conditional that is to say, they were only to be complied with under the supposition that the information was correct, which reached the Federal Government from different quarters, concerning the objects which had brought said vessels of the United States Navy to Chiriqui and the Gulf of Dulce, and if the Government of Panama gave the orders another interpretation it was solely owing to the excitement caused by the presence of said vessels in the waters just mentioned, an excitement carried to the highest pitch by the news telegraphed to Panama from New York concerning the purposes of said expedition. To which may be added that the note which the Colombian representative at Washington addressed to the Hon. Mr. Evarts, under date of February 13, was not answered for a month afterwards; and, as in this note explanations were solicited touching the news published by the daily journals of New York about the sending of the vessels mentioned above to the State of Panama, it was natural that this silence should induce the thought that the objects attributed to them were correct.

Although the circumstances giving rise to the facts which have caused such a bad impression with the government at Washington, and which have pained the Government of Colombia, might be sufficient to excuse them, and to diminish the qualifications which the government at Washington has given to thorn, as appears from the note of your honor, the Executive, for the purpose of fully satisfying the Government of the United States, has ordered me to say to your honor that the steps taken by the Government of Panama, by reason of the latitude given to the above-mentioned orders, have not been approved by him, and that the necessary measures have been taken in order that in future the relations between this government and that of the United States will meet with particular care in the entire republic, and more especially in the State of Panama, for such is the wish and the convenience of the Government and people of Colombia.

With this object there has just been stationed there a considerable veteran force, commanded by distinguished officers, and the federal offices in the same State have been filled with citizens of high character, charged particularly to preserve peace, maintain the free transit across the Isthmus, and protect foreign interests.

I do not entertain the least doubt but what the aforegoing free explanations and the measures adopted by the Executive, in order to prevent a recurrence of cases similar to the one which has given rise to this answer on the part of high officials of the State of Panama, will satisfy completely the government of your honor. Nor do I hesitate in assuring your honor that my government desires nothing so much as to maintain the relations of sincere and profitable friendship which have always existed between the two countries, relations which are destined to increase in importance day by day, and which it would be lamentable to see interrupted even for a short time.

In closing, I beg to express my appreciation of the fact that, through the friendly and kind solicitude of the government of your honor, the cause of these trifling questions has been dissipated, and my desire that even the last vestige thereof will disappear promptly, in order that the field will be clear for discussions of much more utility, upon subjects of common interest, which will attract both the govemment which your honor represents and that of Colombia.

With sentiments, &c.,

LUIS CÁRLOS RICO.

No. 210. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 210.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, September 7, 1880. (Received October 12.) No. 205.]

Sir: The relations between Colombia and Chili having been of an unfriendly nature for some time past on account of the alleged acts of Colombian officials at Panama, which the Government of Chili has considered as violations of neutrality and of the treaty in force between the two countries, I am happy to inform you that harmony has been restored by the execution of a treaty between the two countries, a copy and translation of which I beg to inclose.

The principle which underlies the treaty is the submission of all matters in dispute to arbitration; and in connection therewith your attention is respectfully called to Article II, which constitutes the President of the United States the arbitrator.

The proposition contained in Article III, to induce other nations to make similar treaties, and to make the practice of arbitration in the settlement of international disputes a principle of international law, is worthy of consideration, as tending to bring about a peaceful settlement of many misunderstandings, the seeds of which have existed in all the Spanish American countries from the time of the colonial period down to the present day.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 205.—Translation.]

convention for the preservation of peace between chili and colombia.

The Republic of Chili and the United States of Colombia, desiring to give a solid foundation to the cordial relations of friendship which have always existed between the two nations, and at the same time to affirm the sentiments of international fraternity which must serve as the foundation of the prosperity and peace of the Americas, have resolved, with this object, to celebrate a convention, and to that effect have named their plenipotentiaries, that is to say: His excellency the President of the Republic of Chili has appointed Don Francisco Valdes Vergara, chargé d’affaires of the said republic in the United States of Colombia.

His excellency the President of the United States of Colombia has appointed Don Rustacio Santamaria secretary of foreign relations;

Who, after exchanging their full powers, found to be in due and proper form, have agreed upon the following articles: Article I. The Republic of Chili and the United States of Colombia contract the obligation in perpetuity to submit to arbitration whatever controversies or difficulties may arise between the two nations, notwithstanding the zeal with which their respective governments will constantly endeavor to avert them, when by diplomacy they cannot succeed in giving them a satisfactory solution.

Art. II. The selection of an arbitrator, whenever the necessity may arise that one be named, will be made by a special agreement, which will also clearly determine the question in dispute and the manner of proceeding to be observed during the progress of the arbitration. If there should not be harmony in celebrating this agreement, or if it should be expressly agreed to dispense with this formality, the arbitrator, fully authorized to exercise the functions of such, will be the President of the United States of America.

Art. III. The Republic of Chili and the United States of Colombia will procure the celebration, at the first opportunity, of similar conventions with the other American nations, to the end that the settlement of every international dispute, by means of arbitration, may become a principle of American public law.

Art. IV. This convention will be ratified by the high contracting parties, according to their respective formalities, and the ratifications will be exchanged in Santiago or Bogotá within one year, counting from this day, or sooner if possible.

In witness whereof we have signed our names at Bogotá, this third day of September, one thousand eight hundred and eighty.
FRANCISCO VALDÉS VERGARA.

EUSTACIO SANTAMARÍA.

United States of Colombia,
National Executive Power,
Bogotá, September 3, 1880.

The present convention is approved.

The President of the Union:
RAFAEL NUÑEZ.
The Secretary of Foreign Relations:
EUSTACIO SANTAMARÍA.

No. 211. Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts. No. 211.
Mr. Dichman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Bogotá, September 11, 1880. (Received October 22.) No. 208.]

Sir: Referring to the subject of increased postal facilities with Colombia, and in compliance with your instructions to urge upon this government “the importance of adhesion to the convention of Paris as a measure not only of postal reform, but of great commercial advantage,” I beg to state that the matter has been brought frequently to the notice of the Colombian Government in both its executive and legislative branches, and I am now enabled to report the enactment of a law, a copy and translation of which I beg to inclose, which contains the necessary authorization for the incorporation of Colombia into the Universal Postal Union.

In accordance with the authorization conferred upon the Colombian Executive by this law, instructions have been sent to the Colombian minister at London to take the necessary steps to bring about the much-desired annexation of Colombia to the postal system of the world.

But I regret to be obliged to inform you at the same time that in the instructions just mentioned this government finds itself under the necessity to qualify its application for the annexation by asking to be permitted to effect the same without being obliged to assume the expense of the transportation of the foreign mails which are carried across Colombian territory by way of the Isthmus of Panama.

The reason for this action on the part of the Colombian Government is found in Article XVI of its contract with the Panama Railroad Company, a translation of which reads as follows: Article XVI.

The company hinds itself to transport gratis over the railroad the national and state mails that may have to he carried from ocean to ocean, or to any intermediate point, and it may make such pecuniary arrangements as it thinks proper for the transportation of foreign mails, the passage of which over the Isthmus is declared free to all nations; hut the government of the republic may prohibit the passage by the railroad of the mails of those nations that may be at war with it, in which case the company shall refuse to carry them over the railroad.

The position of this government practically reduces itself, therefore, to a willingness to enter the Postal Union for all the territory of Colombia, with the exception of the State of Panama.

Whether such a qualified adhesion to the convention of Paris is admissible is a question which I beg to submit to the Post-Office Department for its consideration.

Under any circumstances I consider the incorporation of Colombia into the Universal Postal Union only a question of time, for if the qualified application of Colombia should be inadmissible, I have no doubt but that the Colombian Government will be obliged by public opinion and the wants of commerce to come to such an understanding with the Panama Railroad Company in regard to a modification of Article XVI of the contract above cited as will enable it to apply for admission to the Postal Union without qualification of any kind.

I deem this occasion opportune to inclose for your information a copy of a letter addressed to me by a number of American citizens at Puerto Berrio, in the State of Antioquia, from which you will be pleased to learn that in compliance with your instructions their just complaints as to excessive postal charges and other drawbacks connected with postal matters have been remedied.

I also beg to inclose a copy of the last report of the Colombian Postmaster-General, inviting your attention to the marked paragraph on page 5 of the report.

I am, &c.,

ERNEST DICHMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in 208.—Translation.]

Law 90 of 1880.

(August 18.)

upon the annexation of colombia to the universal postal union.

The Congress of the United States of Colombia, in view of the diplomatic convention which created the “Universal Postal Union “adjusted in Paris June 1, 1878, by the plenipotentiaries of the Governments of Germany, the Argentine Republic, Austro-Hungary, Belgium, Brazil, Denmark and her colonies, Egypt, Spain and her Spanish colonies, the United States of North America, France and the French colonies, Great Britain and various English colonies, English India, Canada, Greece, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands and the Dutch colonies, Peru, Persia, Portugal and the Portuguese colonies, Roumania, Russia, Servia, Montenegro, Norway, Salvador, Sweden, Switzerland, and Turkey; in view also of the rules attached to said convention, effected in the same city and on the same date, and of the diplomatic correspondence between the minister of Colombia and the Government of the Swiss Confederation upon the annexation of Colombia to the said Universal Postal Union, decrees: Article I. The executive power is authorized to carry into effect the annexation of Colombia to the Universal Postal Union according to the terms of the said convention.

Art. II. Colombia having been admitted into the Universal Postal Union, and due notice thereof having been given, according to diplomatic usage, by the Government of the Swiss Confederation, there shall be published in the official daily organ and in pamphlet this law, the notice of admission, the rules and details accompanying, and the executive decree, in which will be stated the date of their coming into force.

Art. III. By the provisions of Article VII of the convention, and of Article IV of the accompanying rules, and considering that in the national money system the unit is the live-cent piece, the executive power will propose to the Swiss Government the following equivalents as the rule to be observed in the mail charges in Colombian post-offices: Twenty-five hundredths (0.25) of a franc to be equal to five Colombian cents.

Ten hundredths (0.10) of a franc to be equal to two Colombian cents.

Five hundredths (0.05) of a franc to be equal to one Colombian cent.

Art. IV. The equivalents having been accepted, the executive power will cause the emission of special stamps for the use of the Universal Postal Union of the value of one, two, and five cents.

Art. V. The executive power is authorized to have postal cards made, and to monopolize their sale on account of the republic, under the conditions expressed in Article XV of the rules and regulations. The cost will be one cent each; this price being independent of the value of the stamp which it must bear in order to be transported through the mails.

Art. VI. The executive power will take care to include annually in the estimates of expenses the amount necessary to cover what may be charged to the national government according to the tenor of the same convention.

Given in Bogotá, the 17th day of August, 1880.
The president of the Senate of Plenipotentiaries:
PEDRO A. LARA.
The president of the House of Representatives:
DEMETRIO REI RODRIGUEZ.
The secretary of the Senate of Plenipotentiaries:
JULIO E. PÉREZ,
The secretary of the House of Representatives:
CÁRLOS CÓRTES.

National Executive Power,
Bogotá, August 18, 1880.

Let it be published and put into execution.

The President of the Union:
[l. s.] RAFAEL NUNEZ.
El secretario de fomento:,lb/>GREGORIO OBREGON.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 208.]

Puerto Berrio, Antioquia,
United States of Colombia,
May 19, 1880.

Sir: We take this occasion of your presence to offer our sincere thanks for the efforts made by you in the past year for the improvement of the postal facilities between the United States of America and this country, in the reduction of rates and other advantages, the benefit of which we have for some time past realized, and, while we regard most respectfully the interest you have manifested in the accomplishment of what has already been done, we feel forced to say that, in our estimation, still greater and more advanced regulations in the postal service between two such countries as America and Colombia ought to be pressed to a conclusion without delay.

The determination of the manner and method we leave to those who are more competent to decide, but we earnestly ask, in the interest of Americans in the interior of this portion of Colombia, that, at least, our own government appoint, at once, a postal agent in Barranquilla, to protect us against the delays and mistakes to which the transmission of letters to and from the interior is now subject, and which, under the postal regulations of this country, seem to be unavoidable.

We beg to subscribe ourselves, in behalf of the American colony in this port,

Respectfully, yours,

C. P. Yeatman.

J. W. Fry.

J. I. Plume.

F. J. Middleton.

A. D. Middleton.

Geo. E. Middleton.

J. Stack.

Wm. Owens.

L. H. Plume.

J. H. Ackerly.

M. A. Smith.

G. W. Plume.

William T. Parker.

Hon. Mr. Dichman.
American Minister to Colombia,
On board Steamer Isabel, Magdalena River.

No. 212. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman. No. 212.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Dichman.

Department of State,
Washington, November 29, 1880. No. 143.]

Sir: The present time, prior to the annual meeting of Congress, when the utterances of the National Executive on matters of international import are watched with more than usual interest, seems to be an appropriate one for replying to your dispatch No. 198, of the 16th of August last, wherewith you transmitted the correspondence exchanged with the Colombian Government respecting the unfriendly action of the president of Panama towards the United States vessels Adams and Kearsarge. The explanations tendered on behalf of his government by Señor Rico, in his note of the 11th of August last, are of the frank and friendly character which was naturally to be expected from the representative of the diplomatic councils of a government for which the United States have on so many occasions shown signal proofs of amity and good will; and in the light of Señor Rico’s declarations, the grounds for the complaint which formed the subject of my instruction to you of June 7 last (No. 115) may be regarded as now dispelled.

I have delayed acknowledging your dispatch until now, thinking that it might possibly fall within the purview of the instructions of the new Colombian minister near this government to make a similar declaration in conclusion of the correspondence had between this Department and his predecessor, but from the silence of General Santo Domingo Vila on the subject I am led to the agreeable conclusion that the Colombian Government, in anticipation of the satisfactory disposition of the matter which would result from Señor Rico’s note to you, deemed no further action or renewed communication through other channels necessary to a complete good understanding between” the two governments in this behalf.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Correspondence with the Colombian Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the Colombian Legation in Washington.

[213] . Señor Arosemena to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States of Colombia, New York, April 1, 1880. (Received April 2.)

[214] . Mr. Evarts to Señor Arosemena.

Department of State, Washington, April 17, 1880.

[215] . Señor Arosemena to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States of Colombia, Washington, April 19, 1880.

[216] . Señor Arosemena to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States of Colombia, Washington, May 19, 1880.

[217] . Mr. Evarts to Señor Arosemena.

Department of State, Washington, June 5, 1880.

[218] . Señor Arosomena to Mr. Evarts.

Colombian Legation, Washington, June 10, 1880.

No. 213. Señor Arosemena to Mr. Evarts. No. 213.
Señor Arosemena to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States of Colombia,
New York, April 1, 1880. (Received April 2.)

Sir: On the 13th of February, I had the honor to address to your excellency a communication stating that, according to reports published in the newspapers, the Government of the United States had senta naval expedition to Chiriqui Bay, in the Atlantic Ocean, and to Dulce Gulf, in the Pacific, which was said to be connected with the establishment of coaling stations for the use of the American Navy, on lands purchased by a citizen of the United States, and sold, or about to be sold, to the government of this country.

I also remarked that, on the one hand, it was not credible that the lands in question had been purchased with all due legal formalities by the person who was supposed to have sold them to the Government of the United States, and that, on the other, the purchase made or contemplated by this government, and the establishment of coaling stations, or anything of the kind, required the consent of the Colombian Government, on whose territory such establishment was to take place; for which reason, if the reports published were correct, I begged your excellency to request his excellency the President to order the withdrawal of the expedition, and the suspension of all measures connected therewith, until an understanding with the Government of Colombia should have been reached.

I received no reply to my aforesaid communication I was still hoping to receive one, when the newspapers made known the fact that war vessels of this country, sailing under sealed orders, had arrived in Chiriqui Bay, where they were making surveys and soundings, without having obtained permission to do so from the authorities of the country, which, together with the people at large, regarded those operations as mysterious and alarming.

I do not entertain the same fear; that is to say, I do not believe that this examination of Chiriqui Bay has any purpose underlying it that can be considered as even remotely hostile to the United States of Colombia, whose relations with the United States of America are of the most friendly character. I do fear, however, that it is connected with the supposed purchase of lands and the projected establishment of coaling stations, both of which are liable to the objections which I have already presented to your excellency, and which I hereby repeat.

As I must hope that your excellency’s explanations will dispel any apprehensions to which the facts stated may have given rise, first in the State of Panama, and afterwards in the rest of the Colombian Union, I have thought proper to remind your excellency that my former note has remained unanswered, now that the new facts that have come to light will tend to render your answer thereto more explicit and satisfactory.

With this motive, I reiterate, &c.,

JUSTO AROSEMENA.

No. 214. Mr. Evarts to Señor Arosemena. No. 214.
Mr. Evarts to Señor Arosemena.

Department of State,
Washington, April 17, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your several communications of February 13, April 1, and April 15.

You will remember that soon after the receipt of your note of February 13 I took occasion to have an interview with you, in which I intimated that this government could scarcely consider the newspaper reports referred to as a sufficient basis for the demand of formal explanations; that I was not then in possession of the information upon which the definite wishes of this government would finally take shape, but that you might rest assured that no action had been taken or was contemplated which could in any degree be regarded as inattentive to the complete equality and independence of the Colombian Republic or in the least disregardful of its interests; and that, in case this government should find it useful to its commercial and naval interests to establish coaling stations in any ports of the isthmus, it would present the matter in the usual manner to the friendly allowance of the Colombian Government.

Upon the receipt of your note of April 1, from New York, I several times made inquiries as to the time of your return in order that I might secure an interview, and upon the receipt of your note of the 15th of April, advising me of your return, you were immediately desired to do me the honor of calling at the Department, when you were informed that my necessary absence in New York would postpone my reply for a day or two, but that I would endeavor to furnish you an answer in season for your mail of the 20th instant.

I have recalled these facts to your attention simply to confirm the assurance, which you must already feel, that there has been on the part of this government no disposition to misconstrue or neglect your natural desire to be duly informed of any action, which might affect the interests or dignity of the State you represent.

It is only since the receipt of your letter of April 1 that this government has been enabled to furnish you that precise information of the movements of its naval vessels on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of the isthmus which you have expressed a desire to receive.

The Government of Colombia has been for a long time aware that the safety and convenience of both their naval and mercantile marine might require the establishment by the United States of coaling stations at some points on the Atlantic and Pacific coasts of Central America; and the Government of the United States has never doubted that the friendly feeling existing between the two countries, and the treaty obligations of this government to the Government of Colombia would induce that government to afford it every aid and facility in obtaining and occupying such stations, should they be desired, within the territory of Colombia. This government was aware that the acquisition of such places, whether by the purchase of private property or by public grant, would need to be brought to the notice of the Colombian Government, and it has never entertained a doubt that its assent would be cheerfully given. Nor has this government ever supposed that the examination and survey of the harbors and unoccupied shores of these coasts could excite the apprehension of any of the Central American powers.

This convenience sought by a commercial and naval power has, as you are well informed, been accorded to this government at various points in the Atlantic and Pacific waters by all friendly powers upon the mere suggestion by this government that it was desired. I have therefore to inform you that this government, having under consideration the propriety of establishing coaling stations at the earliest practicable moment at such points in the State of Panama as might seem best adapted for that purpose, orders were given to the United States steamer Adams, Commander Howell, to visit the Gulf of Dulce, and to the United States steamer Kearsarge, Commander Picking, to visit the Boca del Toro and Chiriqui Lagoon, and to report fully the capabilities of those locations. Within the last few days only reports have been received from both of these commanders.

From Commander Howell the government learns that the point best adapted for its purpose is Golfito, in the Gulf of Dulce, and that with the permission of the local authorities he has made a small deposit of coal in that neighborhood.

As the boundary line in the Gulf of Dulce between Costa Rica and Colombia has not been determined, this government is at present unable to say within the territorial limits of which of the two States the point selected is situated.

From Commander Picking the government learns that, in his opinion, Shepherd’s Harbor, in Almerante Bay, is the situation, in the Boca del Toro, best adapted for a coaling station.

It is deemed at present unnecessary to discuss the character of the title which it may be proper for the Government of the United States to acquire, as the United States minister at Bogotá will be fully instructed to bring this whole subject to the immediate attention of the Government of Colombia, to submit to its friendly consideration the wishes of this government and to conclude any arrangement that may be necessary to secure the object desired.

It is gratifying to me, in conclusion, to acknowledge the spirit of friendship with which the vessels of the United States have been received and the facilities which have been afforded them, and to anticipate the confirmation of those cordial relations which have constantly existed between the two countries, by the friendly concurrence in its present wishes which this government has occasion to ask from that of Colombia.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 215. Señor Arosemena to Mr. Evarts. No. 215.
Señor Arosemena to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of the United States of Colombia,
Washington, April 19, 1880.

Sir: I yesterday evening had the honor to receive the very polite note of the 17th instant with which your excellency favored me, in reply to mine of February 13, and April 1 and 15.

The object of that note, in which your excellency reproduced, in substance, the statement made by you to me verbally, in the conference to which you invited me on the 15th, was, on the one hand, to state that my two former notes had not been answered because of the lack of information, since received, concerning the definitive movements of the steamers Adams and Kearsarge, and on the other, to apprise me that those vessels had, indeed, been sent to examine the most suitable points in Chiriqui Bay and Dulce Gulf, for the establishment of coaling stations, for the use of the American Havy.

Your excellency adds that their commanders have found places which they recommend as suitable; these are Shepherd’s Harbor in the bay, and Golfito in the gulf, where a small deposit of coal has already been made, with the consent of the local authorities and that the intention has never been entertained of establishing such stations without the permission of the Government of Colombia, which is on terms of friendship with that of the United States.

I have never thought that the final result of the operations of those vessels could be in the slighest degree hostile to the United States of Colombia, which I represent; and only the manner in which they were dispatched, the alarm produced in the towns of the Isthmus by their arrival, and the delay (which you have just explained) in the reply to my former communications on the subject, would have led me to solicit with so much insistence the explanations which you have been pleased to give me.

I am glad to learn that the honorable minister of the United States of America at Bogotá has received the necessary instructions to adjust this matter in Colombia, in accordance with the desire expressed by the government of your excellency, making such arrangements as the case may require.

I avail myself, &c.,

JUSTO AROSEMENA.

No. 216. Señor Arosemena to Mr. Evarts. No. 216.
Señor Arosemena to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of the United States of Colombia,
Washington, May 19, 1880.

Sir: Without desiring to interfere at all with the arrangements that may be made at Bogotá by the honorable Mr. Dichman with regard to coaling stations on the Colombian Isthmus, which arrangements are referred to in your excellency’s esteemed note of April 17th, to which I had the honor to reply on the 19th, I trust that orders have been issued by the competent department for the withdrawal from the Bay of Chiriqui and from Dulce Gulf, of the American vessels of war which at that time were engaged in taking soundings, and in other operations preparatory to the establishment of coaling stations.

Such a step on the part of the government at Washington would greatly facilitate any arrangement or agreement that may be entered into by the United States of Colombia, which I represent, in relation to the matter; inasmuch as it would calm the agitation produced, which still prevails to a great extent throughout the country, according to the latest advices, and which must inevitably find an echo in official circles.

I have, &c.,

JUSTO AROSEMENA.

No. 217. Mr. Evarts to Señor Arosemena. No. 217.
Mr. Evarts to Señor Arosemena.

Department of State,
Washington, June 5, 1880.

Sir: I had the honor to receive your note of the 19th ultimo, wherein, while disclaiming desire on your part to interfere with any arrangements which may be made at Bogotá by the United States minister, Mr. Dichman, with regard to coaling stations on the Colombian Isthmus, as contemplated in my note to you of April 17, last, you intimate your trust that orders have been issued by the competent department for the withdrawal from Chiriqui Bay and Dulce Gulf of the United States war vessels lately engaged there in taking soundings and other operations preparatory to the establishment of such coaling stations. You are pleased to add that such a step on the part of this government would greatly facilitate any arrangement or agreement that may be entered into by the United States of Colombia in relation to the matter, inasmuch as it would quiet the agitation which has been caused in your country by the operations of the vessels in question, and, which you suggest, must inevitably find an echo in official circles.

I cannot but share the regret, which I doubt not you must feel, that the operations of the Adams in the Gulf of Dulce and of the Kearsarge in Chiriqui Bay should have given rise to the disquietude you mention. Our conferences hitherto, and the frank and full note I had the honor to address to you on the 17th of April last will, I doubt not, have removed from your own mind and from that of the Government of Colombia any impression that the movements of the Adams and Kearsarge were in violation of comity or in disparagement of the national independence and sovereignty of the United States of Colombia, or that they were, in short, otherwise than in the routine of amicable intercourse and in conformity to the usage and courtesy of friendly nations, whose ports and harbors, whether open to commerce or not, are at all times free to the national vessels of a power with which relations of peace and good will prevail.

I am in receipt of official advices to the effect that on the 12th of May, ultimo, the executive of the State of Panama, in compliance, as alleged, with the orders of the citizen President of the nation communicated to the consular officers of the United States at the ports of Panama and Aspinwall an intimation to the commanders of the vessels in question to not only cease the operations of taking soundings, which it was alleged they had been engaged in, but, furthermore, that the Adams should forthwith quit the port of Golfito on account of its not being open to commercial operations (puerto habilitado).

I need hardly advert to the aspect of unfriendliness which this proceeding assumes, and the spirit in which it might readily be received, were not this government confident that the whole proceeding on the part of the authorities of the State of Panama is based on an unhappy misconception, which, in the interest of good will, this government is desirous to see removed. For I am sure you will agree with me that the peremptory notification thus conveyed to the distant vessels and officers of the United States, although, perhaps, an echo in official regions of the baseless disquietude of the populace, is not consonant with the calm and amicable communication looking to the accomplishment of the same end in the withdrawal of the vessels, which you, a week later in point of time, make, officially, at the seat of this government in your note of the 19th ultimo, to which I now have the honor to reply.

Under these circumstances you will have no difficulty in understanding my readiness and desire to regard the act of the authorities of Panama as ill-judged and unsupported by the cool good sense of your federal government, whose considerate and amicable purposes I find reflected in your recent note.

The information I possess from the officers of the United States in Colombia and from the naval authorities of the United States in those regions, enables me to inform you with pleasure, that at the time of the action taken by the executive of the state of Panama, the United States steamer Adams was no longer in Colombian waters but lay at Punta Arenas, in the friendly neighboring Republic of Costa Rica, and that having accomplished the peaceable object of her voyage, she was then under orders of recall to a home port of the United States.

I may also add, with regard to the corresponding operations of the Kearsarge in the waters of Chiriqui Lagoon, that at the date of last advices and under the orders of the Navy Department, given some time previously, that vessel was about to quit Las Bocas del Toro, having completed her errand.

It is therefore, very probable that, at the time you addressed me, the Kearsarge, like the Adams, was already out of Colombian jurisdiction.

The present occasion seems a fitting one for me to again assure you, as I have done in my note of April 17th, that the errand upon which these national vessels of the United States visited the waters of a state to which we are allied by ties of friendship and treaty guarantees, neither in design nor in execution justified any feeling of alarm or irritation on the part either of the government of the state of Panama or of the population thereof. The repetition of this assurance is, I feel, all that it is now needful to add to the explanation of that note.

It is, therefore, confidently hoped by the President, that the actual course so inconsiderately adopted by the executive of Panama, notwith-withstanding the ample and frank explanations made to him by Mr. Dichman, on the occasion of the official visit of the latter to Panama on the 5th of May last, and notwithstanding, moreover, an explicit promise then made by President Cervera to Mr. Dichman, of which this government was duly advised, that he would hold in abeyance any step then contemplated toward the Adams and Kearsarge, until Mr. Dichman should have made to the federal authorities at Bogotá, the communication with which he was charged, will either be promptly disavowed or satisfactorily explained by the supreme government of the United States of Colombia. For in whatever way the act of President Cervera, as communicated to the consuls of the United States at Colon (Aspinwall) and Panama on the 12th ultimo may be regarded, it cannot be deemed as otherwise than unprecedented, and, if not unfriendly in its conception as at least partaking to an unfortunate extent of the appearance of unfriendliness.

It is the purpose of the Department to place before the government at Bogotá the just grievance of this government in the matter, not in a spirit of querulous indignation at the treatment offered to its vessels under an irresponsible impulse of uninstructed suspicion, but in confidence that the apparent offense of wishing to exclude the public vessels of the United States, in time of peace, from any of the ports and places of the Colombian Union may be speedily relieved of its unhappy features, and that your note to me, to which I now reply, will be found to truly represent, as I have assumed it to do, the spirit of sincere friendship and thoughtful consideration which I cannot but believe the Colombian Government feels toward that of the United States, and which, I am not slow to affirm, is felt in like eminent degree by the United States toward their sister republic.

I am confident, Mr. Minister, that your enlightened judgment and marked friendliness will lead you to concur with me in the need of a better understanding of this strange and precipitate action of the Executive of the State of Panama.

Accept, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 218. Señor Arosomena to Mr. Evarts. No. 218.
Señor Arosomena to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Colombian Legation,
Washington, June 10, 1880.

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s communication of the 5th instant in reply to mine of the 19th ultimo, the object of which was to express my confidence that the Kearsarge and Adams would be withdrawn from the ports of Bocas del Toro and of Golfo Dulce, without prejudice to the arrangements for the establishment of coaling stations that might be made with the government at Bogotá by the Hon. Mr. Dichman, and as a means of facilitating those arrangements by calming the agitation which the presence and the operations of those war vessels in Colombian ports had created among the people, which agitation had naturally found an echo in official circles.

Your excellency, in informing me with regard to the subject of my aforesaid note, repeated that the object of the war vessels in question was wholly innocent and peaceful, and based upon the friendly relations which happily exist between the United States of America and the United States of Colombia, and recognized that I had so considered it, notwithstanding the reasons of a different order which gave rise to my communications in reference to the matter, all of which was very gratifying to me.

Your excellency stated, nevertheless, with regret, that, according to official advices received by you, the Executive of the State of Panama, in pursuance, as it seems, of orders from the national Government of Colombia, had addressed the American consuls at Panama and Colon (Aspinwall), to the end that the aforesaid vessels of war of the United States, the Adams and the Kearsarge, should not only suspend the sounding operations in which they were engaged, but that the former should leave the port of Golfito inasmuch as it was a port not open to commerce. Although your excellency did not wish to complain in a querulous spirit, you nevertheless thought, and so repeatedly stated, that that step on the part of the authorities of Panama was by no means friendly, and at best only explicable in view of the agitation caused by a misunderstanding of the purpose with which the United States vessels had visited the aforesaid Colombian ports.

Your excellency hoped that the action of the said authorities would be disavowed by the Federal Government of Colombia, or that it would be explained in such a manner as to deprive it of the aspect of harshness which it presented, which was so opposed to the sincere friendship professed by the American Government for that of Colombia, which friendship your excellency hoped to see reciprocated by the latter, and expressed confidence that the note to which you were then replying would be found truly to represent the spirit of sincere amity and thoughtful consideration felt by the Colombian Government toward that of the United States.

Your excellency stated your purpose of asking such an explanation at Bogotá through the Hon. Mr. Dichman, and expressed the hope that I shared the painful impression made upon the Government at Washington by the action of the President of Panama, as well as the desire that that impression might speedily be made to disappear, and that the relations between the two governments might be restored to the same degree of cordiality that had previously existed.

As to the object of my last communication, your excellency informed me that the aforementioned war vessels, having finished their innocent task, which was to ascertain the feasibility of establishing coaling stations in the ports in question, the Adams had left the waters of Colombia, and had reached Punta Arenas before the execution of the measure adopted by the President of Panama, and that the Kearsarge had received, likewise previously, orders to return to the United States, for which reason it was probably out of Colombian jurisdiction at the date of my communication.

I hasten to inform your excellency that I have received no advices, either official or private, of the step taken by the President of Panama in relation to the vessels of war in question, and that I know only what has been published in reference to the matter by the press of Panama and New York. I remember to have read in some newspaper that the said President had received a telegram from the national government containing orders to act in the manner announced to your excellency, and it immediately occurred to me that it was possible, both by reason of the usual brevity of that style of correspondence and of the imperfection of telegraphy in Colombia, that some mistake had occurred, at least, in the expression of the intention of the Colombian Government.

I sincerely hope that such may prove to be the case, and that your excellency will be fully satisfied with the explanations which I doubt not you will receive in reference to the matter from the Hon. Mr. Dichman, among which will probably be the standing constitutional provision of that country that no foreign vessel of war shall be stationed in its ports without the express permission of the Executive.

For my own part, I do not hesitate to give the assurance that my government desires nothing so much as to maintain the relations of sincere and genuine friendship which have connected the two countries, which relations are destined daily to increase in importance, and the interruption of which, even for a short time, would be much to be regretted.

I do not hesitate to say that your excellency is not mistaken in thinking that I share the pain caused your government by the intimation given to its consuls at Panama and Colon (Aspin wall) which, if it really did emanate from the national Goverment of Colombia, must have been misinterpreted and erroneously communicated by its agents, for I am firmly convinced that that government is actuated by the same friendly spirit that your excellency recognizes in my notes, which are a mere reflex of its disposition toward the Government of the United States of America.

In conclusion, I would express my gratification that the cause of these little questions has been removed by the withdrawal of the Adams and the Kearsarge, and my hope that even the vestiges which they may have left will soon disappear, so that the field maybe open to much more useful discussions, to which matters of common interest will inevitably give rise between the governments which your excellency and I represent.

I reiterate, &c.,

JUSTO AROSEMENA.

DenmarkDenmark

[219] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, August 30, 1879. (Received September 12.)

[220] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Cramer.

Department of State, Washington, September 1, 1879.

[221] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, October 8, 1879. (Received October 25.)

[222] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, October 17, 1879. (Received November 3.)

[223] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, January 2, 1880. (Received January 17.)

[224] . Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Copenhagen, February 4, 1880. (Received February 24.)

No. 219. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. No. 219.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, August 30, 1879. (Received September 12.) No. 551.]

Sir: Yesterday morning I received a note from the Danish minister for foreign affairs, dated the 27th instant, in which he requested me to inform him— 1. Whether foreigners who settle in the United States may become naturalized as citizens thereof after having resided there for two years; and, 2d, whether, in order to become naturalized, it is necessary for such foreigners to make a previous declaration that they have been absolved from the bonds that bound them to their mother country?

In reply to these, questions I addressed, under yesterday’s date, a note to the said minister, in which I quoted verbally sections 2165, 2166, and 2170 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, second edition, respecting the naturalization of aliens, as well as the last clause of section 102 of the United States Consular Regulations for 1874, in which it is declared that “Persons who have merely declared their intention to become citizens are not citizens of the United States within the meaning of the law,” and then added: It is evident, therefore: 1. That no alien can become a citizen of the United States who has not for the continued term of five years resided within the United States; and,

2. That such alien, when he makes application to become a citizen of the United States, is not required to make a previous declaration that he has been released from the bonds that bound him to his mother country, but that he is required, under oath, to absolutely and entirely renounce and abjure all allegiance and fidelity by name to the prince, potentate, state, or sovereignty of which he may be at the time a citizen or subject.

* * * * * * *

I trust that the Department will approve both the form and the substance of my reply to the minister’s two questions.

I am, &c.,

M. J. CRAMER.

No. 220. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Cramer. No. 220.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Cramer.

Department of State,
Washington, September 1, 1879. No. 303.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch, No. 547, of the 11th ultimo, in response to an instruction No. 297 from this Department, relative to the rumor then current at St. Thomas of pending negotiations between Denmark and, presumably, Great Britain, for the transfer to this latter government of that island, and in which you deny, upon the authority of the Danish minister for foreign affairs, the truth of the report of such negotiations with any government looking to that end.

* * * * * * *

In reply I have to express the satisfaction with which this government receives the information contained in your dispatch, for it could not look with indifference upon the transfer of the island of St. Thomas to any European power.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

No. 221. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. No. 221.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, October 8, 1879. (Received October 25.) No. 556.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 552, of the 23d ultimo, describing the condition of the Danish Islands in the West Indies, I have now the honor to further inform you that the Danish minister of finance, who is at the same time also president of the council of state, laid before the Rigsdag a bill authorizing an increase in the military garrison of these islands at the expense of the mother country.

In the course of his remarks he said that since 1867 a series of misfortunes had happened, especially to Santa Cruz, which rendered the condition of that island, financially, hopelessly bad. In the opinion of the government the assumption upon which the legislation for these colonies had been based, namely, their ability not only to defray their own administrative expenses, but also to pay an annual tribute into the state treasury, no longer exists, and, if left to themselves, financial ruin would surely and speedily overtake them. The total loss sustained by Santa Cruz on account of the negro riots during October, 1878, amounted to about $1,100,000, and the export of sugar between the years 1865—’78 fell from about 15,000 hogsheads annually to about 3,800, thus greatly reducing the income not only of the planters, but of the communal treasury as well. But it had been found impossible to reduce the administrative expenses to a correspondingly low amount. “St. Thomas,” the minister said, “is also financially retrograding.” “Therefore,” he concluded, “it is high time that a final determination should be reached as to the exact position to be assumed by the mother country toward these islands, for the present state of things is no longer tenable.” These appear to be ominous words.

I am, &c.,

M. J. CRAMER.

No. 222. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. No. 222.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, October 17, 1879. (Received November 3.) No. 557.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 301, of the 9th of August last, in relation to immigration into the United States of Mormons, I have the honor to inform you that, in compliance with your instruction, I have brought this matter to the attention of the Government of Denmark, in a note addressed to the Danish minister for foreign affairs, on the 3d ultimo.

Yesterday, it being the weekly conference day, I had a personal interview with him on the subject. On asking him whether he had taken any special cognizance of it, he replied that my note had been referred to the minister of the interior, but that no particular steps had as yet been taken in relation to it. As polygamy is prohibited in Denmark, he thought it would be difficult to control the emigration of any person, or set of persons, who leave their native country in accordance with existing laws.

As the Danish press has pretty generally discussed this subject, and warned people against emigrating to Utah for polygamous purposes, I did not deem it proper to add a similar warning directly through the press. I shall, however, give timely protests whenever I deem it needful.

I am, &c.

M. J. CRAMER.

No. 223. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. No. 223.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, January 2, 1880. (Received January 17.) No. 569.]

Sir: It being customary for the diplomatic corps, on New Year’s day, to present their felicitations to the King, the members of that body residing at this capital were accordingly received by His Majesty in special audience yesterday, at 12.30 o’clock p.m., at the Christiansborg Palace.

In conversing with the chiefs of the different foreign missions, the King made no allusions to politics, either at home or abroad. He simply inquired after the health of the heads of those governments whose diplomatic representatives were present on this occasion. In my case he added: “You have my best wishes for yourself, personally, and for the prosperity of your country.” In thanking His Majesty, I reciprocated his good wishes.

Afterwards the Crown Prince received us and thanked us for bringing him our felicitations.

The Queen received the ladies of the diplomatic corps at the same hour in which the King received the gentlemen of that body.

At 5 o’clock p.m., the King gave a grand banquet, to which the heads of the different foreign legations, the Danish cabinet ministers, and other high civil, military, and naval officers had been invited. The King proposed a toast to the prosperity of Denmark.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.

M. J. CRAMER.

No. 224. Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts. No. 224.
Mr. Cramer to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Copenhagen, February 4, 1880. (Received February 24.) No. 573.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 301, of the 9th of last August, relative to the immigration into the United States of Mormons, &c., I have the honor to inform you that a few days ago I received a note from the Danish minister for foreign affairs, dated the 31st of January last, in reply to a note from this legation of the 3d of September last. A copy of the latter was sent to you with my No. 557, of the 17th of October last. A copy of the former, with a translation thereof, is herewith inclosed.

I am, &c.,

M. J. CRAMER.

[Inclosure in No. 573.—Translation.]

Baron Rosenörn-Lehn to Mr. Cramer.

Copenhagen, January 31, 1880.

Sir: In the note which you had the goodness to address to me on the 3d of September last, you observed, on the one hand, that polygamy as practised by the Mormons at Salt Lake, constitutes an offense against the laws of the United States; on the other, that every year a considerable number of emigrants from Europe proceed thither, under the guidance of Morman emissaries and agents from Salt Lake, for the express purpose of joining that community; and, notably, that four agents from Utah Territory and twenty “elders” travel through this country for the purpose of making proselytes for that sect. Under these circumstances you have, at the request of your government, expressed the desire that the government of the King take steps that will prevent the organizing of like criminal enterprises by these agents whose aforesaid activity falls beyond the reach of the laws of the United States, and will stop the departure of bands already organized from here to America for the purpose of violating the laws of the last-named country.

The minister of justice, to whom I have not failed to communicate your note, sir, admits that an activity takes place in this country tending to make proselytes for the Mormon community, and he does not ignore that that community in Utah Territory shows itself disposed, in contempt of the laws of the United States, to tolerate, nay, even to permit its members to practice polygamy. Nevertheless it is not possible, according to the principles generally admitted in penal law, to see in that activity an attempt to incite to the violation of the laws of the United States, seeing that the joining the Mormon community can in no wise be likened to the resolution to contract polygamous alliances.

While greatly deploring the activity displayed here by these American agents with a view to induce Danish subjects to expatriate themselves for the purpose of joining the Mormon community in Utah Territory, the Government of the King does not see itself empowered to interfere in order to stop this abuse. It is, however, with great satisfaction that we learn from your note, sir, that the Government of the United States has resolved to adopt effective measures, of a repressive nature, against the state of things which has up to the present time existed in Utah, because the knowledge that polygamy will no longer be permitted to be practised with impunity in a Territory of the United States will doubtless not fail to deprive the Mormon sect of one of the conditions for its propagation in other countries.

Receive, sir, &c.

O. D. ROSENÖRN-LEHN.

FranceFrance

[225] . Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, November 14, 1879. (Received November 28.)

[226] . Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States. Paris, November 28, 1879. (Received December 10.)

[227] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hitt.

Department of State, Washington, February 10, 1880.

[228] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hitt.

Department of State, Washington, March 3, 1880.

[229] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, March 12, 1880. (Received March 26.)

[230] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, March 26, 1880. (Received April 8.)

[231] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, April 29, 1880. (Received May 13.)

[232] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, May 7, 1880. (Received May 19.)

[233] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, May 10, 1880. (Received May 26.)

[234] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, May 13, 1880. (Received May 26.)

[235] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State, Washington, June 17, 1880.

[236] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, June 18, 1880. (Received June 30.)

[237] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, June 26, 1880. (Received July 14.)

[238] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, July 15, 1880. (Received July 29.)

[239] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State, Washington, July 28, 1880.

[240] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State, Washington, August 14, 1880.

[241] . Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Paris, September 3, 1880. (Received September 16.)

[242] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State, Washington, October 30, 1880.

Contents

Correspondence with the French Legation in Washington. (Documents 243-254)

No. 225. Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts. No. 225.
Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, November 14, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 288.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a lithographed report of the Committee of Weights and Measures, showing what amount of money is required for the year 1880.

The president and secretary of the committee state that, experience having demonstrated the insufficiency of the sum allowed heretofore for the working of the Bureau, the committee has unanimously decided to avail itself of the privilege given by Article 6 of the regulations, and to raise the annual budget for the year 1880 to 100,000 francs.

A tabular statement on page 5 shows how this amount is to be used.

The committee states further that numerous expenses, which cannot be comprised either in the current expenses or in the expenses allowed for establishing the Bureau, have been rendered necessary by long and costly researches, chemical or mechanical, for the construction of the international prototypes, and that such expenses are, according to Article 21 of the regulations, to be paid by the parties to the convention.

The committee asked, therefore, for the reimbursement of these expenses, which extend in all to 56,725 francs.

According to the scale fixed by the convention (Article 20), the amount to be paid by the United States for the year 1880 would be 15,224 francs, of which 9,714 francs are for the current expenses, and 5,510 francs for the extraordinary expenses.

I have, &c.,

R. R. HITT.

[Inclosure with No. 288.]

International Committee of Weights and Measures.

special report to the governments of the high contracting parties

Proposed budget and table of the quotas of the various states for the International Bureau of Weights and Measures for the year 1880.

The Metric Convention fixes, at the beginning of the year, the payment of the contributions of the various states for the International Bureau of Weights and Measures, and the annual general report of the international committee must be addressed to the contracting states at the close of the year.

In order to inform the governments, with as little delay as possible, concerning the amount of each one’s contributions for next year, we are again obliged to send them, in a special report, which precedes the general report by about two months, a table of the contributions for 1880, as established by the committee in its session of October 11, together with a statement of the reasons for the action of the committee.

As explained in previous reports, the period of the construction and organization of the International Bureau is at an end, and our establishment has entered the phase of full scientific and administrative activity, for not only are its officers (the number of whom will be nearly complete in 1880) busy in examining our large instruments, whose constant quantities must be determined, but, although the new prototypes are not completed, the manufacturers have been actively working on them all this year, and there will be work enough for almost all next year in comparing the numerous old standards of the meter and kilogram which many states have sent to us in order to have them determined by the International Bureau, in pursuance of the proposal made last year by the International Committee.

Now, the experience which we have had during the present year has made it evident to us that the sum of 24,000 francs, which is provided for in Article 6 of the budget for “keeping the building in repair, for the purchase and repair of apparatus, fuel, gas, office expenses, &c,” is far from being sufficient for the needs of the Bureau when in full operation.

In fact, the careful study in which our commission of accounts has engaged, in conjunction with the Director of the Bureau, has enabled it to become fully informed with regard to the data furnished by experience, and has led it to estimate the amount necessary to meet these expenditures at a sum upwards of 20,000 francs in excess of that provided in Article 6 of the regulations, as appears from the budget submitted by it to the committee, which budget we are about to present.

Although we have effected a saving of 7,000 francs in the salaries by providing for only two assistants from the 1st of May next, yet that saving under the head of a does not make good the deficiency which appears under the head of b, and the experience of all previous years has shown that we cannot rely upon receiving the entire amount of the contributions during the year for which they are due. Thus, in the current year, there is again a deficit of 11,333 francs, not to speak of what is still due for past years, which amounts to 10,523 francs. As the International Bureau has no reserve fund, it is prudent, if we do not wish to run the risk of seeing the operations of our establishment brought to a standstill, to make provision for the deficiencies which the experience of a number of years gives reason to apprehend.

The result of all these considerations is that the committee is again obliged to fix the budget for the year 1880 at 100,000 francs, and that merely in order to meet actual running expenses, as will appear from the following statement, which has been prepared by the commission of accounts:

Budget for 1880.

Francs.

(a) Salaries 38,000

(b) 1. Keeping in repair of buildings, machines, and stationary apparatus 9,000

2. Expenses of laboratory and atelier 5,000

3. Purchase of auxiliary instruments and keeping of instruments 8,100

4. Cost of heating and refrigeration for the purpose of securing precision 8,000

5. Cost of ordinary heating, gas, and water 4,000

6. Library 1,000

7. Cost of printing and of meteorological publications 7,500

8. Expense of bureau and secretary’s office 1,500– 44,100

(c) Indemnity to the secretary’s office 6,000

(d) Sundry and contingent expenses, including possible delays in the payment of contributions 11,900

Total 100,000

The International Committee, basing its action on the above, has unanimously resolved, on motion of the Director of the Bureau, to exercise the privilege granted it by Article 6 of the conventional regulations, and to raise the budget for 1880 to 100,000 francs.

As we have already remarked, the present requirements of the International Bureau now render it impossible for the committee to meet the expenses that must still be incurred for the purchase of several important instruments by saving money from the annual expenses. It appears from the accounts for the year 1879, which we shall have the honor to communicate in our general report, that the expenses of the present year have not been strictly confined within the limits of the budget adopted during the session of 1878.

It was found necessary to spend, in addition, about 12,000 francs, chiefly owing to the unforeseen increase in the expenses for keeping the machinery and very complicated stationary apparatus in repair, as well as for heating and refrigeration for the purpose of securing precision. As, moreover, the receipts were 11,000 francs below the amount provided for, the deficit of 23,300 francs, as regards the budget, obliged the committee to defer certain outlays for the introduction of needed instruments until a more favorable time. How, the foregoing statement shows that the ordinary resources for the year 1880 will not be sufficient to cover these expenses, which are unavoidable.

The difficulties, with which the committee is thus obliged to contend in its management of the International Bureau, arise mainly from two causes: First, from the insufficiency of the sum of 400,000 francs, which was appropriated by the convention for the expenses of first establishment, as we have shown in detail in our previous reports; second, another fact, to which we must call the attention of the high governments, viz, that the committee has been obliged to make considerable outlays, which come neither under the head of expenses of first establishment nor under that of annual expenses of the International Bureau, as provided for by the regulations of the convention, but which were rendered necessary by the examination of the material for the prototypes and by the manufacture of a portion of the standards and test copies which were to accompany the international prototypes.

It appears from previous reports, as well as from those which will be speedily laid before the government, that in consequence of the difficulties arising from the chemical defects of the material prepared by the French section having charge of the manufacture of the prototypes, the committee has been obliged to engage in long and costly investigations, in order to discover chemical methods and mechanical processes that would permit the manufacture of prototypes of faultless chemical composition, thus rendering it possible to supply the want of those examinations which, according to the convention, should have been made by the French section, but the expense of which should have been defrayed by the contracting governments.

In the course of these investigations, the committee was obliged to proceed a little faster that it would have done in the ordinary run of business, and to cause to be constructed, for the examination of the material for the manufacture of prototypes, a certain number of typical standards (étalons types), which are eventually to accompany the international prototypes as auxiliary standards; that is to say, as means of control and comparison.

The committee was obliged to do this, because the manufacture of the prototypes being asigned by the convention to the French section, while the International Committee was perfectly free to construct auxiliary standards, the situation, taken as a whole, rendered it important to begin the examination of an improved material by the construction of typical standards which could be used in future as test standards (étalons témoins) of the international prototypes provided for in Article 21 of the regulations, and which, at the same time, could be used by the committee as valuable means for the previous examinations and for the work of comparison which it has undertaken in the interest of the weight and measure service of the contracting states.

Now, according to Article 21 of the regulations of the convention, the cost of the international prototypes, as well as that of the standards and test-copies which are to accompany them, is to be paid by the high contracting parties, besides the expenses of establishment and the annual expenses of the International Bureau, on the same scale as that which is established for the annual contributions.

In view of the foregoing facts, and of its financial situation, the International Committee is obliged to request the governments to have the kindness to make good, without delay, the sums which it has been compelled to advance for the construction of the international prototypes and for the manufacture of the standards which are to accompany them as auxiliary means of control and comparison.

We have caused to be prepared a special account of the expenses thus incurred, and it appears, from a statement made by our commission of accounts, that the payments thus far made for the construction of the standards and test-copies which are to accompany the prototypes amount to 40,725 francs, and that the engagements contracted for the same purpose amount to 16,000 francs, so that the total expense thus occasioned is 56,725 francs.

The repayment of this sum, by an extraordinary contribution during the year 1880, would enable the committee not only to meet all the expenses already contracted for in the way of getting the Bureau in working order, which amount to 16,920 francs, but also to order and to pay in great part for one of the principal instruments, the geodesic comparator, which, according to the terms of the convention, is to be procured for the International Bureau. The remainder of the expense for this instrument can be met in 1881 by the arrears, which already amount to 21,880 francs, and the payment of which will, we hope, be definitely settled before the close of 1881.

In this manner the committee would be enabled to close the account of the first establishment and to regulate an abnormal situation which it has thus far been able to support, thanks to the privilege which it has had of transferring appropriations from one object to another, but which would seriously compromise the management of the International Bureau, since it is no longer possible to effect savings in the annual budget in order to appropriate them to the purchase of necessary articles.

Thus, the extraordinary contribution is justified, on the one hand, by the letter and spirit of the convention, and, on the other, rendered imperative by the financial situation and by the need of a regular management of the International Bureau, so that the committee in its session of October 11 unanimously resolved to request the governments of the high contracting parties, in virtue of Article 21 of the regulations of the convention, to reimburse the amount of the expense incurred (56,725 francs) for the international prototypes and the test-standards which are to accompany them.

In conformity with these resolutions, we have calculated, according to the scale provided in Article 20 of the regulations, the annexed table of the contributions, both annual and extraordinary, for the year 1880.

Madrid and Neuchâtel, October 26, 1879.
The president:
General IBAÑEZ.
The secretary:
Dr. AD. HIRSCH.

Table of the quotas of the contracting States for the International Bureau of Weights and Measures for the year 1880.

Contracting States. Factor of distribution Annual contribution, 100,00 francs; unit, 124 francs 53 centimes. Extraordinary contribution, 56,725 francs; unit, 70 francs 64 centimes. Total of quotes, 156,725 francs; unit 195, francs 17 centimes.

Francs. Francs. Francs.

1. Germany 123 15,318 8,689 24,007

2a. Austria 60 7,472 4,238 11,710

2b. Hungary 47 5,853 3,320 9,173

3. Belgium 16 1,992 1,130 3,122

4. Argentine Confederation 4 498 283 781

5. Denmark 2 249 141 390

6. Spain 73 9,091 5,157 14,248

7. United States of America 78 9,714 5,510 15,224

8. France 123 15,318 8,689 24,007

9. Italy 80 9,963 5,651 15,614

10. Peru 8 996 565 1,561

11. Portugal 16 1,992 1,130 3,122

12. Russia 77 9,589 5,439 15,028

13a. Sweden 4 498 283 781

13b. Norway 4 498 283 781

14. Switzerland 5 623 353 976

15. Turkey 78 9,714 5,510 15,224

16. Venezuela 5 623 353 976

803 100,003 56,724 156,725

No. 226. Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts. No. 226.
Mr. Hitt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States.
Paris, November 28, 1879. (Received December 10.) No. 289.]

Sir: Public attention in this city, and indeed throughout France, is chiefly drawn at this moment to the removal of the capital from Versailles to Paris, which was consummated and crowned yesterday by the meeting of the two chambers here for the first time for over nine years.

Timid and conservative people have been apprehensive of disturbance if the Parliament came back to Paris, and the reactionary journals have made the most of this feeling, prophesying all kinds of trouble. But all passed in perfect calm. There was talk of an illumination, but it was abandoned. The city is delighted to receive back the deliberative assemblies, and a large crowd gathered near the doors as the hour of meeting approached—a well behaved and orderly crowd—making no demonstration beyond a respectful recognition from time to time of some well-known statesman as he passed in. The chief interest was at the Chamber of Deputies, always the favorite of the people, and now the principal seat of political power, and the largest throng was there.

The Senate returns to its old chamber in the Luxembourg Palace, surrounded by a magnificent garden, which will recall Versailles. The deputies meet in the Bourbon Palace, where formerly sat the corps legislatif. As we watched the opening proceedings from the diplomatic tribune, Dr. Kern, the Swiss minister, who has been here more than twenty years, described to me the scenes of the last session held within these Avails, and contrasted their wild storm with the quiet of to-day. It was on the memorable 4th of September, 1870, the birthday of the Republic, the day the empire crumbled away and a mob, vast beyond the possibility of count, surged over the bridge in front of this chamber from the Place de la Concorde, and broke up the legislature.

The session of the Senate was brief. It is a grave body, though there are 300 members. There was the usual decorum and routine. Mr. Martel, the president of the Senate, being sick, his place was filled by Count Rampon, one of the vice-presidents, who delivered short eulogies upon the senators who had died during the vacation. The most notable of these was Valentin, the brave governor of besieged Strasburg, who penetrated the German lines by stratagem, and then swam the icy river under shot and shell until he reached his city. He was a warm friend of our country, a sturdy republican, of few words and high ability. He was well known at the legation and to American society here.

At the Chamber of Deputies there was great animation without and within; the crowd, gathered about the entrances and upon the quay, watched and chatted and laughed: the members, as they collected in the hall, exchanged greetings after their summer vacation. At precisely 2 o’clock, Mr. Gambetta, the president of the chamber, appeared, preceded by two sergeants-at-arms and followed by six secretaries, and ascended to the chair. The house was pretty well filled, and the galleries were thronged with distinguished personages and beautiful toilettes.

Mr. Gambetta said: Gentlemen of the Chamber of Deputies: The second National Congress, in bringing back to Paris the public powers, has restored to our incomparable capital the legal title of which it had too long been deprived, without, however, diminishing its importance. The sovereign assembly by this act of reparation has drawn closer the ties of national unity; it has placed the seat of government and the chambers at the only point of our territory where the state can govern with authority. It wished, at length, to testify to the world the confidence of the nation in the patriotic population of Paris, which still, after so many trials, remains the head and the heart of France.

Released hereafter from fatiguing and daily journeys, we can now devote to the business of the country the hours which were thus wasted during former sessions. The great task of educational, financial, economic, military and political reforms which you have undertaken will receive a new impulse from your residence in this prodigious laboratory of Paris, where all intellectual resources are accumulated, into which pour all the living forces of society, all the means of knowledge in regard to internal and external policy, quickened into fecundity by a public spirit whose vivacity does not impair its just judgment and good sense.

Gentlemen, you have gathered together and prepared abundant material for reconstruction; you have elaborated many projects. They must be carried out. I adjure your committees to redouble their efforts to lay before us at the proper moment, which I trust will be soon, the results of their discussions in committee.

In the light of this great tribune, just ideas, ripe and practical reforms, will of themselves prevail, and the country, enlightened daily in regard to its affairs, will at last see its constancy rewarded. In the accomplishment of this work, while confining myself strictly to the special duties with which you have charged me, gentlemen, believe me, I will do my utmost to bring to their performance all the impartiality, all the activity, and all of the zeal of which I am capable.

Let us, then, all go resolutely to our work; let us rise above private interests and avoid fruitless or passionate incidents; let us concentrate all our faculties upon one supreme aim—the greatness of our country and the strengthening of the republic.

He was applauded again and again, and then the house proceeded at once to business in the most practical manner. The ministers introduced a large number of bills which they had prepared during the recess. A debate sprang up on a question put to the minister of agriculture, Mr. Tirard, by Mr. Haenuens, a Bonapartist deputy, but the house put his proposition aside by voting to proceed with the regular order 5 and after a session of two hours adjourned until Saturday. So the work of legislation is now once more begun and definitely fixed at Paris.

The change from Versailles has been made with difficulty and gradually. The constitution of 1875, which was framed by a timid, conservative assembly that disliked Paris, and remembered the Commune with horror, contained an express provision that the seat of the executive and the two chambers should be Versailles. The very first amendment that has since been made, and the only one so far, was to strike out this provision, leaving the Parliament free to sit where it deems best. At the last session a law was passed providing that it shall meet hereafter at Paris.

As a matter of fact, Versailles had long ceased to be the seat of the Executive, though the forms were still observed. There was a nominal residence of the President there, but he actually lived at Paris, in the Elysée Palace. There were rooms in the immense Versailles Palace bearing in great gilt letters over the doors the names of the different departments or cabinet ministers, but they were all in Paris, with the thousands of government clerks, comfortably installed in the old ministry buildings which had always been devoted to the interior, navy, war, and other departments. The two chambers remained in obedience to the constitution, but most of the members had their residences in Paris, and went, day after day, fourteen miles by rail, to Versailles to attend the sessions. These incessant journeys consumed many hours of time that were valuable, and they were wearisome and painful to the aged and infirm, of whom there are many among the 835 Senators and Deputies. It was found difficult to get the committee-work done. Committees usually meet in the morning; the chambers at two o’clock. A member did not always feel disposed to hurry from home at an early hour in order to reach the committee-room in Versailles at ten o’clock, where the business pending, perhaps, did not interest him. Willing members were loaded unduly with dry work, which was discharged from a sense of duty. I have repeatedly heard it remarked by members that the irksomeness of the journey from Paris and back increased the difficulty of getting through legislative work and furnished an excuse to those who did not care to attend the committee meetings.

The many reasons of public interest and personal convenience at last overcame the dread of Paris, and even the conservative Senate consented to the change.

Both branches of the assembly are now better and more conveniently housed than they were at Versailles, except in the one fact that they are now a mile apart, while at Versailles they were close together and connected by a gallery, which made communication almost as easy as it is between the two wings of the Capitol at Washington. The Senate used to sit in the old theater of the palace, which was inconvenient, badly adapted for hearing, and did not give sufficient room. The Deputies sat in a building which had been erected for them at the other end of the palace, but it did not give much better satisfaction.

The Senate chamber at Paris is an imposing and elegant structure, which was erected, as an extension of the Luxembourg Palace, by Louis Philippe. There are abundant rooms tor committees and other legislative purposes. This is an excellent utilization of part of an immense, costly building, most of which has long been idle.

The Deputies sit in the Bourbon Palace—a vast and splendid pile, facing streets on three sides and a garden on the fourth. The north front is a majestic Greek portico, of twelve columns, looking across the river upon the Place de la Concorde. It is one of the first objects that strikes a stranger, forming part of the matchless architectural effect of palaces, temples, and arches as seen from the obelisk of Luxor, in the center of the Place. The palace was erected 170 years ago by one of Louis XIV’s bastard children, the duchess of Bourbon. She also constructed in the garden a fine residence for her lover, De Lassay. Over $3,000,000 were expended in this way by these profligates when money was more valuable than it is now. During the revolution it was confiscated, the prince to whom it belonged having “emigrated,” joined the enemy. It was made the place of meeting of the Council of Five Hundred in 1798, when a hall was constructed in it for that purpose. Since then it has been used most of the time for the French deliberative assemblies, which have borne various names. The Greek facade was erected by Napoleon in 1807.

The whole cost of the building, with the successive additions and changes, has been over $8,000,000. The House wing of our Capitol, which is vastly superior in beauty, compares favorably in cost, and has not such unsavory souvenirs of its beginning. The committee rooms are commodious, and there is a good legislative library of 120,000 volumes. The mansion erected for De Lassay is now the official residence of the president of the chamber, and is connected with the main building by a fine glazed gallery. It is a more sumptuous mansion than the White House. From 1815 until the 2d of December, 1851, this chamber was the center of political interest in France. It was the scene of the parliamentary glories of Casimir Perier, Guizot, Lamartine, Thiers, Berryer, Ledru Rollin, Victor Hugo, and the beginnings of Gambetta. For nine years it has been entirely deserted and silent.

The chamber itself, as it now exists, was constructed in 1832, the old one having fallen into a sad condition. It is semicircular, lofty, and elegant, lighted from above by an immense fan-shaped window in the ceiling, just over the chair of the presiding officer. The seats in concentric rows rise rapidly in amphitheatre. The central or front row is assigned to the ten ministers. The different political parties and groups derive their names from their positions as to the president, beginning on his left with the members of the Extreme Left and Independents, about 60 strong, including such men as Louis Blanc, Clemenceau, Floquet, Raspail. Then comes the Republican Union, 132 in number, among them Gambetta and Girardin; further on, the Republican Left, 158, the largest of the groups, and, last of the Republicans, the Left Center, now only 41, a body of able, moderate men, who count among them Leon Renault, De Marcére, Ribot. The Right Center numbers 15, the Legitimists 34, the Bonapartists 93, and there are a few on both sides who are uncertain. The groups of the left, or Republicans, it will be seen, far outnumber the Monarchists of all the groups on the right combined. Including the advanced radicals on the extreme left, and going round to the Left Center, there are in all about 385 Republicans, while the whole Right only amounts to, say, 145. The rapid increase of the Republicans of late years has so altered places that names are no longer accurate; and the Left Center has pushed far over to the right of the president, or of the orator who speaks from the tribune in front of and below the president’s chair.

At first glance the hall seems small for its requirements; to the eye it does not produce near the effect of size of the House of Representatives, yet 535 members are comfortably seated. A handsome range of 20 Ionic columns, of Carrara marble, runs around the chamber; between and behind these columns are the galleries, in two tiers, divided into sections or tribunes. The diplomatic tribune is directly in front of the speaker, and well placed for hearing, but there are only 28 places in it, at the utmost, and there are 35 missions at Paris.

The gallery allotted to the press is high up, in the second tier, and those gentlemen complain that they have not room enough, and cannot hear nor see to write. Their task is not an easy one. French Deputies do not speak in as clearly articulated and sonorous phrase as is heard in America. They have not had the experience of large public meetings where speakers must make themselves heard and understood by the whole crowd.

French oratory partakes much of the nature of excited conversation; the voice rises and falls rapidly; the gestures are short, quick, and feeble; the ideas and expressions often brilliant—rarely along-sustained argument. I have heard it said that there is a change in the manner of speaking now gradually going on, owing to the enlarging freedom and greater frequency of public meetings, especially in the cities.

The debates are generally practical. The ministers take a prominent and authoritative part in almost every discussion; they have the privilege of the floor in preference to members, and are listened to when nobody else receives attention. This deference to authority is still more evident when we turn to the presiding officer. He governs every detail of the proceedings, reproving or encouraging, expostulating, protesting, explaining difficulties; he watches every step and directs it. The personal greatness of Mr. Gambetta, who is not only the presiding officer bat the foremost man in France, adds immensely to the authority of the post he fills. And admirably he fills it. He is the child of the chamber, and he is its master. His voice will dominate disorder; his quick rebuke or repartee is always dreaded; his good sense and long experience enable him to cut through a cloud of words to the pith of the question and bring it to a solution.

The assembly thus resumes its sessions in Paris. The friends of republicanism will for some time regard the change with apprehension, remembering the many revolutions in which this population has always taken the foremost part, but with greater hope than ever before that the republic will stand, knowing the rapid extension of political education that has lately taken place, the increasing capacity of self-restraint in the French people, and the growing disposition to await the result of inquiry and discussion instead of resorting to violence.

I have, &c.,

R. E. HITT.

No. 227. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hitt. No. 227.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hitt.

Department of State,
Washington, February 10, 1880. No. 208.]

Sir: With reference to the correspondence had with Mr. Washburne near the close of his mission, in relation to the unfavorable position occupied by American life insurance companies in France as compared with similar foreign corporations, I inclose herewith a copy of a recent letter, dated the 17th of December, 1879, upon the subject, from Mr. George Merrill, the attorney of the New York Life Insurance Company. Whenever the company shall communicate to the legation such information as will enable it to resume the correspondence where it was left by Mr. Washburne, you will reopen a discussion of the question with the French authorities.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in No. 208.]

Mr. Merrill to Mr. Evarts.

New York, December 17, 1879.

Dear Sir: Mr. Homans, the European director of the New York Life Insurance Company, has telegraphed and written me from Paris, requesting me to go to Washington and ask you to instruct General Noyes to press the demand made by the Hon. E. B. Washburne in June, 1876, for the legislation by the French Government of the status of American companies in France.

* * * * * * *

The facts of the case are briefly these, viz, that, as a general rule, a foreign corporation has no legal status in France, at least not such as to enable it to protect its own interests. In other words, it can claim no standing as plaintiff, while it may be held responsible in suits brought against it by Frenchmen.

2d. The disability of many foreign corporations is removed either by treaty stipulations or by executive decrees, covering certain specified corporations or classes of corporations, the general principle upon which the action of the French Government is based being that of reciprocity.

3d. This last fact constitutes a practical difficulty in our efforts to secure treaty protection for American companies in France, owing to the absence of a general United States law and the diversity of State laws on the subject of operations.

4th. But it is manifestly a hard state of things that American companies presenting the highest guarantees of solvability in law and fact, as does the New York Life Insurance Company, should find themselves at a great disadvantage as regards their operations in France when compared with English, Belgian, German, Italian, and other foreign companies, and also when compared with French companies, which latter are not only permitted by the laws of most, if not all of our States, to carry on their operations within their borders, but receive the same protection under those laws as do their own native companies.

I would take the liberty, therefore, of suggesting that a treaty should, if possible, be made, whereby the French Government should accord full legal protection to any American company which shall claim it, and shall deposit with the proper French bureau a duly authenticated copy of the charter or general laws under which said company was organized, unless such charter or laws should not, in the opinion of such bureau, present sufficient guarantees for the protection of parties dealing with the company, in which case the reasons for refusing the application shall be set forth in writing by the said bureau, the president agreeing to recommend to the States to remove all disabilities under which French companies may be placed by their laws, and the French Government reserving to itself the right to govern its action as regards the corporations of any State by the rule of reciprocity, this clause being in fact similar to the one relating to real estate in the treaty of 1848 (if my memory serves me).

The interests of both countries seem to me to require that something should be done in this matter through the medium of a treaty. At all events, some very important American interests would doubtless be placed in a much more just and satisfactory position if our government would urge upon the French the issuing of executive decrees according a perfect legal status to any American company which shall present reasonable guarantees for the protection of French citizens doing business with the same.

Yours, &c.,

GEORGE MERRILL,
Attorney and Counsellor.

No. 228. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hitt. No. 228.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hitt.

Department of State,
Washington, March 3, 1880. No. 217.]

Sir: This Department was informed by a note from the legation of France in this city, dated the 29th of September last, that that republic had just adopted regulations in regard to the right of sailing under the flag of the French protectorate among the Society Islands, allowing foreign captains of all nationalities to command vessels fitted out under that flag, upon certain conditions as to the character and capacity of the officers in question, and imposing submission to the laws of France, so far as regards their conduct and acts while commanding vessels under the protectorate.

It now appears from a dispatch from Mr. At water, the consul of the United States at Tahiti, No. 145, dated the 31st of December last, that foreigners are required to pay one hundred dollars per annum while navigating under the protectorate flag, which is not required of French or natives. In view of this discrimination, which does not seem to be warranted by anything contained in the French minister’s note above mentioned, you are hereby instructed to apply in the proper quarter for a copy of the regulations in question, for the use of this Department, in order that it may be determined whether any action is necessary upon the part of this government for the protection of the rights of American citizens in the Society Islands.

I inclose herewith, for your information, a copy of Mr. Outrey’s note of the 29th of September last* , and also of Mr. At water’s dispatch No. 145.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in No. 217.]

Mr. Atwater to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate,
Tahiti, December 31, 1879. (Received February 28.) No. 145.]

Sir: Dispatch No. 79 has been received.

In reply I have to state that the permission from the French Government allowing foreigners to navigate under the protectorate flag was promulgated here some time ago.

Foreigners are required to pay $100 per annum while navigating under the protectorate flag, which is not required of French nor natives. This seems unjust, when it is taken into consideration that there is but one vessel owned by French subjects, and that nine-tenths of all the commerce here is and always has been transacted by others than the French.

I am, &c.,

DORENCE ATWATER.

* See correspondence with the French Legation in Washington, post, p. 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243].

No. 229. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 229.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, March 12, 1880. (Received March 26.) No. 316.]

Sir: Referring to your instruction No. 212, of date February 24, 1880, to inform the State Department whether any Commune or German war claims on behalf of American citizens had been adjusted with the official knowledge or intervention of this legation, and Suggesting that inquiry might be made of the minister of foreign affairs on the subject, I have the honor to report that, after search through the records of the legation, I find only one application of a claimant made through the American minister, Mr. Washburne, which was by a Mr. Miltz, for property damaged by the Garde Mobile during the siege of Paris, to which Count de Remusat, then minister of foreign affairs, replied, September 25, 1872, that the laws according such indemnities made no distinction between foreigners and French citizens, and that if Mr. Miltz had presented proof of his claim before the proper authority in due time he would have received compensation like all others, but that it was then too late.

Upon causing personal inquiry to be made at the foreign office, I learn that they have no document showing the nationality of the persons to whom compensation was allowed for such damages, no proof of nationality having been required of applicants, and that to make such a research as was suggested through the records of the foreign office and other departments would be a long task, involving much labor, and would probably be fruitless. Mr. Billot, sub-director of the department of claims, remarked that it was a fact notorious at the time that no distinction was made between French and foreigners, and he pointed out a circular of the minister of the interior, addressed to the prefects, dated December 12, 1871 (see Bulletin Official du Ministére de l’Intérieur, 1871, pages 644–652), explaining and applying the law of September 6, 1871, which provided for the payment of damages to all those who had suffered by the acts of the French or German armies. Commissions were organized in the cantons throughout France, and it was before these commissions that claims were everywhere presented to be adjudged. They were not presented through the legations or embassies.

I inclose copies of the dispatch of Mr. Remusat referred to and translation thereof

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure in No. 316.—Translation.]

Mr. Remusat to Mr. Washburne.

Versailles, September 25, 1872.

Sir: You did me the honor to write in regard to Mr. Miltz, whose property was damaged by the Garde Mobile during the siege of Paris.

The National Assembly passed two laws in relation to the indemnity to be granted to the victims of the war; one of date June 15, 1871, relates to requisitions made upon private individuals and payments in kind, which they were constrained to furnish to the French troops. The second law, of September 6 of the same year, appropriated the sum of 100,000,000 francs to be distributed among those who suffered damages resulting from the war.

Mr. Miltz ought to have presented his claim in due time before the competent authority in order to have it included, if there was just reason therefor, in the category of indemnities recognized by the law. In fact, no distinction was established between natives and foreigners, the latter having no other formalities to comply with than those which were required from Frenchmen, and Mr. Miltz has only himself to blame for having allowed delays to run after the expiration of which such claims incurred forfeiture.

Accept, &c.,

REMUSAT.

No. 230. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 230.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, March 26, 1880. (Received April 8.) No. 322.]

Sir: Referring to State Department confidential dispatch No. 163, of date July 17, 1879, and my answer thereto, No. 256, dated August 20, 1879, and subsequent State Department dispatch No. 201, of date January 26, 1880, with inclosures, I beg leave to reaffirm all I said in my communication of August 20, 1879.

I have made careful inquiry, of the only persons connected with the French Government in a position to know the facts, and find that there is absolutely nothing in the reports which have gained currency, as to the French protectorate over Liberia. No proposition has been received from any responsible source, and none has been made by the French Government to that of Liberia.

I feel great confidence in saying that no such project would be favorably considered by the French minister for foreign affairs or the cabinet, even if it were suggested by competent authority.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

No. 231. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 231.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, April 29, 1880. (Received May 13.) No. 341.]

Sir: On the 26th of March last, in pursuance of your instruction No. 217, of date March 3, 1880, I addressed a communication to Mr. de Freycinet, requesting a copy of the regulations recently adopted by the minister of the marine and the colonies in regard to the right of sailing under the flag of the French protectorate among the Society Islands, and allowing foreign captains of all nationalities to command vessels fitted out under the flag of the protectorate.

I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy and translation of the reply of Mr. de Freycinet, from which it appears that the prescriptions alluded to have not been clothed with the form of an administrative regulation, and there is no text of them outside of the instructions sent, “to this effect,” to the French commandant in Oceanica. The tenor of these instructions, he says, was communicated to the Government of the United States in Mr. Outrey’s letter of September 29, 1879.

* * * * * * *

Shall I inquire of the minister of foreign affairs, specifically, whether the discrimination against foreign captains is authorized or not?

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure in No. 341.—Translation.]

Mr. de Freycinet to Mr. Noyes.

Paris, April 28, 1880.

General: I did not fail to make known to Admiral Jauréguiberry the desire you were pleased to express to me by your letter of the 26th of March last, to obtain communication of the text of the new regulations adopted by his department governing the exercise of the right of navigation under the flag of the protectorate of the Archipelago of Society Islands.

It appears from the information furnished by the minister of the marine that the prescriptions to which you allude have not been clothed with the form of an administrative regulation. There is no text of them, therefore, whatever, outside of the instructions which have been sent to this effect to the commandant of our establishments in Oceanica, and the tenor of which was brought to the knowledge of the Government of the United States September 29, 1879, through the medium of our representative at Washington.

Accept, &c.,

C. DE FREYCINET.

No. 232. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 232.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, May 7, 1880. (Received May 19.) No. 346.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith, for the information of the State Department, copies of a communication recently addressed by me to the French minister for foreign affairs, and his answer thereto, regarding the rights of the United States consul-general to take possession of and administer upon the effects of American citizens dying in France.

It will be observed that the French Government holds that in principle all such estates must be administered in the courts of the country, and that the United States consul-general has of right no authority in the premises.

This decision is at variance with the custom heretofore prevailing, and is based, as will be seen, upon the absence of a treaty stipulation upon the subject between the two countries and upon the failure of reciprocity under the method of administration adopted in the United States regarding the estates of Frenchmen dying there.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 346.]

Mr. Noyes to Mr. de Freycinet.

Paris, April 26, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a communication from Mr. George Walker, consul-general of the United States at Paris, with reference to the estate, or that portion of the estate which is in France, of Theodore Gentil, deceased, an American citizen at the time of his death.

Your excellency will observe that the property of Mr. Gentil was taken possession of by the United States consul-general, and the seals of the consulate were affixed in accordance with the custom heretofore prevailing.

The effects have been advertised for sale on the 29th of the present month. But it seems that the juge de paix of the eighth arrondissement has intervened, and that French seals have been placed over those of the United States consulate-general, for what reason the United States consul-general is not informed.

Feeling that the obstructions above stated are unwarranted, I send this communication calling attention thereto, requesting that the French Government will inquire into the same, and that if possible a solution may be reached in season for the sale to proceed as advertised and fixed, namely, on the 29th instant.

There are many wealthy Americans residing in Paris, and it is of course important for them to know whether, in case of death, their estates are to be administered in accordance with the precedents heretofore existing, or whether another rule will be established. I have entertained no doubt but that the French Government will consider the subject in a friendly spirit when its attention is called thereto.

Mr. Gentil was clearly an American citizen. He left, so far as known, no heirs in France. There are no debts which the consul-general of the United States is not prepared to discharge. I cannot think that the interference of the juge de paix is warranted or that it will be approved by the French authorities under the circumstances.

I beg leave respectfully to urge your excellency to have the matter inquired into as soon as possible, as the case is pressing, and delaying the sale will bring serious loss to the estate, for the reasons pointed out by Consul-General Walker, and as the principle involved is an important one to United States citizens residing in Paris.

I avail, &c.,

EDWAED F. NOYES.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 346.—Translation.]

Mr. de Freycinet to Mr. Noyes.

Paris, April 28, 1880.

Sir: By the letter which you did me the honor to write me the 26th of this month, you called my attention to a difficulty which had arisen between Mr. George Walker, consul-general of the United States, and the justice of the peace of the eighth arrondissement in regard to placing the seals, done concurrently by these two authorities, upon the domicile of Mr. Theodore Gentil, an American citizen, deceased at Paris, 9 rue Lincoln, the 3d of April last.

You express to me on this subject the opinion that the intervention of our magistrate was not justified under the circumstances in question, and you ask that measures be taken in order that Mr. Walker may, from this time, and in analogous cases that may arise in the future, be permitted to exercise those functions which the consular regulations of the United States confer upon him upon the death of American citizens in France.

I regret that I am not able to give you as complete a satisfaction upon this point as you might have desired.

In the absence of formal conventional stipulations concerning the regulation of the estates of citizens of the United States dying in France, the American consuls do not possess, by any title, the right of placing seals upon the domicile of one of their deceased countrymen, nor even that of crossing their seals, under such circumstances, with those of the French authorities, this right constituting a privilege accorded only to the consular representatives of nations with which we are bound by special arrangements.

The principle of reciprocity on which this privilege is founded cannot even be invoked, since the estates of Frenchmen dying in the United States are, in the actual state of our relations, regulated exclusively by the American authorities.

The justice of the peace of the eighth arrondissement does not, therefore, appear to me to have exceeded his powers in regard to the Gentil estate, and I cannot in the name of principle have him instructed to modify his conduct in analogous cases in future.

However, and in order to prove to you as far as possible the friendly sentiments which animate us in regard to the United States and their official representatives, I shall confer with the keeper of the seals in order to see if it be not possible to establish a sort of understanding between the justice of the peace and the consul-general of the United States, so that the effects constituting the Gentil estate may be put into the possession of those who have a right to the same without having recourse to the judiciary.

Accept, &c.,

C. DE FREYCINET.

No. 233. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 233.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, May 10, 1880. (Received May 26.) No. 347.]

Sir: At the request of the International Committee of Weights and Measures, I have the honor to forward herewith, for the consideration of the proper authorities, a lithographed report in relation to the new mode of figuring weights and measures in the metric system, adopted by the committee.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure in No. 347.—Translation.]

International Committee of Weights and Measures,
Madrid and Neuckdtel, April 24, 1880.

Mr. Minister: The International Committee of Weights and Measures having been requested by the Government of the Swiss Confederation to cause an examination to be made of the question of the unification of the abbreviations used in the metric system, and recognizing the practical utility of such unification, instructed a special commission to examine this question. In pursuance of the report of that commission, and after discussion, the committee adopted, in its session of October 2, 1879, the following resolutions: 1st. The International Committee of Weights and Measures hereby adopts, for its publications and its official use, the following system (see list) of abbreviations for metric weights and measures.

2d. The International Committee hereby instructs its bureau to bring, by circular, this system of abbreviations for metric weights and measures to the notice of the governments of the high contracting parties, and to recommend them to favor, by appropriate measures, its general introduction into the different countries.

We have deferred the performance of this duty until the reports of the proceedings of the session of 1879 were printed and distributed, in order that the governments might be informed as to the details of the discussion held by the committee on this subject.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

The president:
Gen. IBAÑEZ.
The secretary:
Dr. AD. HIRSCH.

His excellency General Noyes,
United States Minister at Paris.

List of abbreviated metrical symbols.

A.—Measures of length:

Abbrev-

Kilometer km

Meter m

Decimeter dm

Centimeter cm

Millimeter mm

Mikron u

B.—Superficial measures:

Abbrev.

Square kilometer km2

Hectare ha

Are a

Square meter m2

Square decimeter dm2

Square centimeter cm2

Square millimeter mm2

C.—Measures of bulk:

Cubic meter m3

Stère s

Cubic decimeter dm3

Cubic centimeter cm3

Cubic millimeter mm3

D.—Measures of capacity:

Hectoliter hl

Decaliter dal

Liter l

Deciliter dl

Centiliter cl

E.—Weights:

Ton t

Metric quintal q

Kilogram kg

Gram g

Decigram dg

Centigram cg

Milligram mg

No. 234. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 234.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, May 13, 1880. (Received May 26.) No. 350.]

Sir: * * * As to the general subject of a French protectorate over Liberia, I am able to communicate to the Department very emphatic and satisfactory assurances. My dispatch No. 256, of date August 20, 1879, was based upon information obtained in the French foreign office, from the official having such matters in charge. From him we learned that Mr. Carrance, the consul-general, had pressed upon the foreign office the desirability of establishing a French protectorate over Liberia (during the existence of the Waddington cabinet), but that he had met with no encouragement whatever; that he had been informed that any such movement would be attended with many embarrassments, not only in relation to the Government of the United States, whose susceptibilities the French Government would always desire to respect, but also with the Government of Great Britain. Mr. Carrance was told distinctly that his proposition could not be entertained.

About one week since, having occasion to see the minister of foreign affairs upon other matters, I incidentally suggested that I had recently seen in one of the French papers, and also in the New York Herald, statements that negotiations were pending between the French and Liberian Governments for the establishment of a protectorate over Liberia. I said to him that I had no confidence in such reports, but had thought it not improper to suggest the matter to him. The minister said he had never heard of the proposition, and that there was positively no foundation for the report. He called in the chef de cabinet, and in my presence inquired of him if any papers had been filed, or if any proposition had been made. This official asserted decidedly that there was nothing of the kind; that the only possible basis for the reports alluded to was the fact that the jurisdiction of the French vice-consul at Whydah Dahomey had been extended to Liberia and other points on the African coast, his residence, however, still remaining at Whydah.

Subsequently to this interview with the minister of foreign affairs, Mr. Consul-General Carrance called on me at the legation and requested that in the absence of any diplomatic representative of Liberia at Paris I would forward to the minister of foreign affairs two commissions of Liberian consuls appointed for Bordeaux and Paris. I readily consented to do so, and transmitted them accordingly, with request that exequatur be granted. This afforded me an opportunity to have a full conversation with Mr. Carrance as to what had actually been done with regard to the protectorate. He informed me that he had never been authorized by the Liberian Government to make any proposition on this subject to the French authorities, but that everything which he had done and said had been upon his own personal responsibility. He said that the Liberian Government had greatly desired to have a small war vessel, mounting two or three guns, to be used in connection with the collection of customs dues; that the government had no funds at command with which to purchase such a vessel, with its armament, and so the consul-general urged the French Government to furnish it, and in return to avail itself of a sort of protectorate over Liberia, which would be greatly to the commercial advantage of France.

The consul-general, however, said that he had received no encouragement whatever from the French authorities, but on the contrary had been met with many objections, and, at last, with a positive refusal; and that he had not communicated his action to the Liberian Government.

* * * * * * *

I informed him that the Government of the United States could not look with favor or complacency upon such a movement as he had proposed, and I expressed my surprise that he should have taken the responsibility of such action without positive authority. He assured me frankly that he was not aware of the interest taken by the United States Government in the colony of Liberia, and that he would never mention the subject to the French Government again, but would abandon the proposition forever. He assured me that I could rely upon this implicitly, and expressed a desire that I should so inform the State Department at Washington.

* * * * * * *

I therefore feel at liberty to reaffirm the substance of my former dispatches to the Department upon this subject. In the mean time I shall lose no opportunity to keep myself advised of any new facts relating to affairs in Liberia and on the African coast in that vicinity.

I have, &c.,

EDWAED F. NOYES.

No. 235. Mr. Hay to Mr. Noyes. No. 235.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State,
Washington, June 17, 1880. No. 248.]

Sir: Your No. 346, reporting the correspondence had by you with the minister of foreign affairs respecting the asserted right of the United States consulate-general to take possession of and administer upon the effects of American citizens dying in France, has received the careful consideration of the Department.

The conclusion reached in the particular matter of Mr. Gentil’s estate, and to some extent on the whole question involved, will be found expressed in the instruction sent to Mr. Consul-General Walker on the 15th instant, in reply to the several dispatches and telegrams on the subject received from him. A copy of that instruction is herewith inclosed for your information.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

[Inclosure in No. 248.]

Mr. Hay to Consul-General Walker.

Department of State,
Washington, June 15, 1880. No. 12.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch of the 9th of April last, No. 8, in relation to the death of Theodore Gentil, an American citizen, and the disposition of his effects, I have now to acknowledge your telegrams of the 29th of the same month and the 9th instant, and dispatches Nos. 9 and 12 of the 22d and 30th of April, upon the same subject. A dispatch has also been received from the minister of the United States at Paris, submitting a correspondence with the French Government.

In reply to your telegram of the 9th instant, the following dispatch was sent to you on the 11th instant, viz:

“It is the opinion of the Department that the Gentil case must be decided by French law. If there is any doubt what the French law is, and you need counsel, you may employ it.”

* * * * * * *

In the absence of treaty stipulations with France in reference to the estates of American decedents in that country, it is obvious that no claim can be maintained to the right of consular officers to take charge of or to administer upon such estates. The laws of the United States or the consular regulations can have no operation in this respect within the territory of France, except as this may be conceded in a spirit of comity. It is regarded, however, as the duty of a consular officer, even in the absence of a treaty, to do what he properly can towards securing the estate of a decedent from loss at the time of the death, and to co-operate, if this be permitted, with the local authorities to this end, but he is not entitled to intervene as against the authority of the competent local officials. He should, however, carefully observe the proceedings taken in the settlement of an estate, and it is his duty to report to the Department any acts of administration which he believes to be likely to defeat a just distribution of the property. The desirability of providing for the custody and administration by consular officers of such estates in France is recognized by the Department, and it is hoped that an opportunity may soon be given for the negotiation of a convention to that effect.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Assistant Secretary.

No. 236. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 236.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, June 18, 1880. (Received June 30.) No. 359.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose for the information of the Department, a slip from Galignani’s Messenger of this day, June 18, referring to the action of the French Government with regard to the Trans-Sahara Railway.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure in No. 359.—From Galignani’s Messenger, June 18, 1880.]

the trans-sahara railway.

A meeting of the committee on the proposed Trans-Sahara Railway was held at the ministry of public works on Wednesday, M. Varroy being in the chair. In his opening address, the minister gave a brief sketch of the results of the labors of MM. Soleillet, Choisy, Pouillane, and Flatters, and pointed out that these explorers had rendered great services to France. After having laid stress on the pacific nature of their missions, Mr. Varroy explained that the credit of 20,000 francs voted by the chamber having already been exceeded, he intended asking for a further credit of 60,000 francs without delay, but that he had not wished to actually take that step without having previously consulted the committee. Mr. Choisy, the engineer, was the next speaker, his observations being chiefly confined to the consideration of the two lines of railway from Biskra to El-Goléa, and from El-Goléa to Laghouat, which, he said, would present no difficulty. He further advocated the immediate establishment of telegraphs as a means of opening up the country.

Colonel Flatters and M. Soleillet subsequently addressed the meeting, the former reading a paper on his expedition. His force, it seems, consisted of 105 men—22 of them Europeans—and he expressed belief in his complete success on a future occasion when in possession of greater resources. M. Soleillet remarked that having received the special mission of studying the country, from a technical point of view, between Timbuctoo and In-Salah, he had not been able to enter on his task, owing to having been robbed in the Udrar. He gave some information in regard to his expedition, and supported M. Choisy’s recommendations of the telegraph.

After a short speech in the same sense by M. de Lesseps, it was decided that the first and third subcommittees should meet to-day to hear M. Soleillet.

No. 237. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 237.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, June 26, 1880. (Received July 14.) No. 361.]

Sir: Referring to State Department dispatch No. 239, of date June 2, 1880, I have the honor to inform you that on the 17th of June I addressed a communication to the French minister for foreign affairs, embodying the substance of my instructions as set out in said dispatch No. 239.

I have received the reply of Mr. de Freycinet, a copy of which, together with a translation of the same, I have the honor to inclose herewith.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure in No. 361.—Translation.]

Mr. de Freycinet to Mr. Noyes.

Paris, June 24, 1880.

General: By your letter of the 19th of this month, referring to my communication of the 28th of April, in relation to the exercise of the right of navigation under the flag of the protectorate of the Society Islands, you were pleased to express to me, in the name of your government, the desire to know if the regulation actually in force maintained the obligation on the part of foreign captains soliciting authority to navigate under the colors of the protectorate, to pay a tax of $100 (500 francs). I hasten to announce to you that, since last year, the minister of the marine, in order to put the new regulation in complete harmony with the liberal thought which had inspired it, prescribed the suppression of the fiscal provision in question.

Accept, &c.,

C. de FREYCINET.

No. 238. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 238.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, July 15, 1880. (Received July 29.) No. 368.]

Sir: I have the honor to submit herewith a box containing a document elegantly engrossed and signed by the members of the Franco-American Union at Paris, which is an official notification to their American friends of the fact that the success of the work undertaken by the Franco-American Union is now assured, and that the colossal statue of liberty offered by France to be erected in the harbor of New York will be terminated in 1883. It is accompanied by a letter addressed to yourself as president of the Franco-American committee in New York by Mr. Edouard Laboulaye, president of the committee here, and also signed by several other gentlemen, including Senator Bozerian, Henry Martin, and Oscar de Lafayette, giving an account of the progress and success of the enterprise, and requesting that it be communicated to the committee in New York, of which you are president, and Mr. Richard Butler, secretary.

The inclosed pamphlet, “Notice sur l’Union Franco-Américaine,” gives on pages 1, 2, and 3 the organization of the French and American committees.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

No. 239. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes. No. 239.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State,
Washington, July 28, 1880. No. 261.]

Sir: Referring to instruction No. 208, of the 10th of February last, to Mr. Hitt, relative to the unfavorable position occupied by American life insurance companies in France as compared with similar foreign corporations of other countries, I have now to state for your information that Mr. William H. Beers, the vice-president of the New York Life Insurance Company, in a letter dated the 10th instant, writes that his company has received a cablegram from Paris stating that the council of state, to whom the matter in question was referred, finding no objection to the granting of the concession, had referred it again to the minister of foreign affairs for his favorable action in case he should see no objection to such a course.

In view of the foregoing statement, it is thought by the Department that you may already have received a reply from the French Government in relation to this matter. If such should not be the case, however, you are instructed to lose no time in asking the minister of foreign affairs whether his government has yet reached any conclusion upon the subject. You may add that this Department is exceedingly anxious to have this matter disposed of as soon as possible, on account of the serious losses which American interests are suffering in consequence of the delay in settling the question which has been so long pending.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 240. Mr. Hay to Mr. Noyes. No. 240.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State,
Washington, August 14, 1880. No. 267.]

Sir: I have to state for your information that on the 20th of June last Mr. Outrey, the minister of the French Republic at this capital, communicated to this Department an invitation from the minister of war of France to this government to designate any officers of its Army to witness various maneuvers on a large scale of the French troops which are to take place this autumn within the several commands of the French army.

This invitation having been duly communicated to the War Department, the Secretary of War, in a letter dated the 10th instant, informs this Department that he has detailed the following officers to witness the maneuvers in question, viz: Maj. A. P. Morrow, of the Ninth Cavalry; First Lieut. William H. Bixby, of the Engineer Corps; and First Lieut. Rogers Birnie, jr., of the Ordnance Department. Mr. Outrey, the minister of France, has been requested by this Department to notify his government of the designation of the above-named gentlemen for the service indicated.

I will thank you to extend to the officers above named such courtesies as may be in your power not inconsistent with the performance of your official duties.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 241. Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts. No. 241.
Mr. Noyes to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Paris, September 3, 1880. (Received September 16.) No. 388.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a translation of the constitution of the French Republic, with a preface embodying an account of the manner of its adoption, and foot-notes of explanation, all the work of Mr. E. E. Hitt, first secretary of this legation.

This constitution has never been printed in English, but would, I think, be interesting to the people of the United States, I have the honor to forward it for such disposition as may seem best to the Department of State.

I have, &c.,

EDWARD F. NOYES.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 388.]

preliminary note.

The French constitution was framed and adopted by a national assembly which met February 13, 1871, and sat for nearly five years, adjourning December 30, 1875. The assembly had been elected by the people for the purpose of ratifying the peace with Germany, and not as a constitutional convention; but before the German troops had moved out of France the assembly assumed to itself the powers of a constitutional convention, and proceeded, very slowly and with many interruptions, to frame a government for France.

An immense majority of the members when this assembly began were in favor of a monarchy of one kind or another. The republicans of all shades only numbered about 150, while there were 500 royalists, Orleanists, or imperialists. But they disliked each other, and disagreed as to the dynasty, and so did nothing until it was too late for a monarchy of any kind.

A republic had been proclaimed in a revolutionary fashion on the 4th of September, 1870, when the empire crumbled away at Sedan, and it was still the form of government. It was allowed to continue provisionally, and M. Thiers was chosen chief of the executive power, but they expressly declared that this was only provisional, while they should deliberate upon and determine the institutions of France, which they fully intended should be a monarchy.

How came they to adopt a republican constitution? What brought about so great a change? Time, debate, the growth of public sentiment among the best classes of the French people reacting on the assembly, the disagreement of its opponents, the statesmanship and patriotism of its friends.

Thiers was then at the height of popularity. He had opposed the disastrous war, and had saved all that was possible in making peace. Twenty-six different districts elected him to the assembly by over two millions of votes. He had always been a friend of constitutional monarchy. He now began to show a strong leaning toward a republic in moderate, conservative hands, as the permanent government of France. He was a persuasive orator, of clear judgment, vast knowledge, a consummate master of parliamentary tactics. Though President, he took part as a member in all the deliberations of the assembly. Moderate common sense leaders among the republicans came to the front. That party could no longer be called a faction of extremists, radicals, impracticables, theorists. It grew all over France, and while the assembly wore out the months in delays, the country was advancing in republican sentiment.

In the spring of 1873 a great effort was made by the different sections of the majority to unite and settle the whole question at once and finally. M. Thiers was driven from the Presidency by “a vote of blame.” Marshal MacMahon elected, and a combination immediately attempted of the two branches of the house of Bourbon; the Count de Chambord, who was the head of the legitimists, to be crowned as Henry V, and to adopt as his heir the Count de Paris, the head of the Orleanists. But Count de Chambord, a true Bourbon, refused to abandon the white flag, the emblem of the ancient despotic régime, and the whole scheme failed.

The majority controlling the assembly then (November 20, 1873) prolonged Marshal MacMahon’s powers for seven years, knowing him to be in sympathy with them, believing he would resign whenever they could agree upon a restoration, and hoping to carry out their ideas long before the expiration of his time.

But the country was getting weary of these endless delays in determining the form of government. Year after year passed, audit was still provisional. All the interests of the nation demanded a decision. The new President himself felt constrained to ask them, in a message, to proceed to the work of the constitution.

A committee of thirty was appointed to examine and report upon constitutional laws. The majority of this commission were averse to a republic; they protracted proceedings from month to month through the whole winter and down to the end of the session in July, 1874, without any result. Public opinion in its advance had passed he assembly, and that body now felt its influence. At the partial elections frequently held to fill vacancies when members died or resigned, the popular majorities were republican.

The word had ceased to alarm. Many of the Orleanists of the center, who had been in favor of a constitutional monarchy, began voting with the republicans, who now counted twice their original number.

In January, 1875, the final debate began. Each vote showed the increasing tendency until at last, on the 30th of January, an amendment establishing the Presidency “of the republic,” and consequently the republic itself as the definitive government of France, was carried by 353 votes against 352, a majority of one vote. This was decisive.

In the midst of the uncertainties among the groups of that assembly a majority, though of only one vote, that was guided by a distinct great idea, was sufficient to determine the wavering. More of the Orleanists went over; the majority rose with every vote until February 25, 1875, the birthday of the constitution, the great law organizing the public powers, and which cast permanently the character of a parliamentary republic, was adopted by 425 to 254 votes.

The law constituting the Senate had been passed the day before by 435 to 234. It was not until the 16th of July following that the third great constitutional law, that on the relations of the public powers, was finally passed.

In a constitution thus adopted piecemeal, through long struggles, with many compromises, there are imperfections and uncertainties. Some of those who voted for it were not sincere republicans, but felt constrained to vote for some definite form of government, and hoped this one would soon be changed or bent to suit their purposes. They preferred ambiguity. They wished the powers of the Executive left vague and elastic. They intended the Senate to be conservative and a check to the Chamber of Deputies. The friends of free government made a good fight and a winning one. The faults in their work are more in form than in fact. There is no declaration of the rights of the citizen, but these had been so often proclaimed in republican constitutions that they might be regarded as uncontested public law.

No mention is made of the judiciary. That was already organized. This constitution contains nothing superfluous. Every line is practical and full of vitality and strength, as the shocks of experience have since shown. The powers of the Executive seemed to be left iii uncertainty, but the sharp lessons of trial soon taught the President the limits of his authority.

This constitution is not a symmetrical document; it grew out of events, the wants and wishes of a nation. It is an adjustment of political machinery to do the work of the people in governing themselves. They have watched its operation with incessant vigilance, and by their votes at successive elections they have commanded the interpretation of every uncertain phrase, in the sense of free representative government.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 388.]

constitution of the french republic.

Constitutional law* in relation to the organization of the public powers.

Passed by the National Assembly February 25, 1875.

Article 1. The legislative power is exercised by two assemblies, the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate. The Chamber of Deputies is chosen by universal suffrage, under the conditions prescribed by the electoral law. The composition, mode of election, and powers of the Senate will be regulated by a special law.

Art. 2. The President of the Republic is elected by an absolute majority of votes of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies united in national assembly. He is named for seven years. He is re-eligible,†

Art. 3. The President of the Republic has the initiative of laws, concurrently with the members of the two chambers. He promulgates the laws when they have been voted by the two chambers; he watches over and assures their execution. He has the right to grant pardons amnesties can only be accorded by a law. He disposes of the armed forces. He appoints to all the civil and military employments. He presides at the national solemnities. Envoys and embassadors from foreign powers are accredited to him. Every act of the President of the Republic must be countersigned by a minister.

Art. 4, The President of the Republic shall appoint, in cabinet council, the members of the council of state in ordinary service as fast as vacancies shall occur, after the promulgation of the present law.

The councillors of state so appointed can only be removed by decree rendered in cabinet council.

The members of the council of state appointed by virtue of the law of May 24, 1872, cannot be removed until the expiration of their powers, except in the manner determined by law. After the separation of the national assembly, the removal can only be pronounced by a resolution of the Senate.

Art. 5. The President of the Republic may, in conformity with the advice of the Senate, dissolve the Chamber of Deputies before the legal expiration of its term. In that case, the electoral colleges are to be convoked for new elections within a delay of three months.

Art. 6. The ministers are jointly responsible to the chambers for the general policy of the government, and individually for their personal acts. The President of the Republic is only responsible in case of high treason.*

Art. 7. In case of a vacancy, on account of death or any other cause, the two chambers united shall proceed immediately to the election of a new President. In the interval, the council of the ministers is invested with the executive power.

Art. 8. The chambers, deliberating separately, shall have the right to declare, by an absolute majority of the votes in each, either spontaneously or upon the request of the President of the Republic, that the constitutional laws shall be revised.

After each of the two chambers has adopted this resolution, they shall meet in national assembly to proceed to the revision. The proceedings, in revising the constitutional laws, in whole or in part, must be adopted by an absolute majority of the members composing the national assembly. Nevertheless, during the continuance of the powers conferred upon Marshal MacMahon by the law of November 20, 1873, this revision can only take place upon the proposition of the President of the Republic.

Art. 9. The seat of the executive power and of the two chambers, is at Versailles.†

Constitutional law in relation to the organization of the Senate.

Passed February 24, 1875.

Article 1. The Senate is composed of three hundred members, two hundred and twenty-five elected by the departments, and seventy-five by the national assembly.

Art. 2. The Departments of the Seine and of the North will each elect five senators; the Departments of Seine-Inférieure, Pas-de-Calais, Gironde, Rhône, Finistère, Côtes-du-Nord, each four senators; the Loire-Inférieure, Saône-et-Loire, Ille-et-Vilaine, Seine-et-Oise, Isère, Puy-du-Dôme, Somme, Bouches-du-Rhône, Aisne, Loire, Manche, Maine-et-Loire, Morbihan, Dordogne, Haute-Garonne, Charente-Inférieure, Calvados, Sarthe, Hérault, Basses-Pyrénées, Gard, Aveyron, Vendée, Orne, Oise, Vos-ges, Allier, each three senators; all the other departments each two senators; the territory of Belfort, the three departments of Algiers, the four colonies—Martinique, Guadaloupe, Réunion, and French India—will each elect one senator.

Art. 3. No one shall be elected senator unless he is a Frenchman, not less than forty years of age, and in the enjoyment of his civil and political rights.

Art. 4. The senators of the departments and colonies are elected by an absolute majority, and when there is occasion, by balloting for a list.*

In an electoral college, assembled at the seat of the department, or of the colony, and composed of (1) the deputies, (2) the members of the general council (of the deparement), (3) the members of the council of the arrondissement, (4) delegates elected, one by each municipal council (of a commune), from among the electors of the commune.†

In French India, the members of the colonial council or of the local councils are substituted for the councillors of the department, councillors of the arrondissement, and the delegates from the municipal councils, the vote at the seat of the colonial establishment.

Art. 5. The senators chosen by the assembly (life senators) are elected by balloting for a list and by an absolute majority of suffrages.

Art. 6. The senators from the departments and colonies are elected for nine years, and are renewable, one-third at a time, every three years. At the beginning of the first session, the departments shall be divided into three series, each containing an equal number of senators. The designation by lot, of the series which shall be renewed at the expiration of the first and of the second triennial period, will then he proceeded with.

Art. 7. The senators elected by the assembly are irremovable. In case of a vacancy, by death, resignation, or other cause, the senate will itself fill it within two months.‡

Art. 8. The Senate has, concurrently with the Chamber of Deputies, the right of initiating and framing laws. Financial laws must, however, in the first place, he presented and adopted in the Chamber of Deputies.

Art. 9. The Senate may be constituted a court of justice to try either the President of the Republic or the ministers, or to take cognizance of crimes attempted against the safety of the state.

Constitutional law in regard to the relations of the public powers to each other.

Passed by National Assembly July 16, 1875.

Article 1. The Senate and Chamber of Deputies meet every year on the second Tuesday of January, unless sooner called together by the President of the Republic.

The two chambers shall be in session at least five months every year. The session of one commences and ends at the same time as that of the other.

On the Sunday following the reopening, public prayers shall be offered up to God in the churches to call down his aid upon the labors of the assembly.

Art. 2. The President of the Republic declares the closing of the session. He has the right to call the chambers together in extraordinary session. He shall call them together in the interval of the sessions, if it is demanded by an absolute majority of the members composing each chamber.

The President may adjourn the chambers. The adjournment, however, cannot exceed the term of one month, nor take place more than twice in the same session.

Art. 3. At least one month before the legal termination of the powers of the President of the Republic, the chambers shall meet together in National Assembly to proceed to the election of the new President. In default of being called together this meeting will take place of right on the fifteenth day before the expiration of those powers. In case of the death or resignation of the President of the Republic, the two chambers will assemble immediately and of right.

In case the Chamber of Deputies shall have been dissolved, pursuant to article 5 of the law of February 25, 1875, at the time when the Presidency of the Republic becomes vacant, the electoral colleges shall be called together immediately and the Senate shall assemble of right.

Art. 4. Any meeting of one of the two chambers held outside of the time of the common session is illegal and absolutely null, except in the case contemplated by the preceding article, and that where the Senate sits as a court of justice, and in this last case it can only exercise judicial functions.

Art. 5. The sittings of the senate and Chamber of Deputies are public. Nevertheless each chamber may resolve itself into secret committee, upon the request of a certain number of its members, fixed by the rules. It shall decide afterwards by an absolute majority whether the sitting shall be resumed in public on the same subject.

Art. 6. The President of the Republic communicates with the chambers by messages, which are read at the tribune by a minister. The ministers have admission to the two chambers and must be heard when they ask it. They may be assisted by commissioners designated by decree of the President of the Republic, for the discussion of a special bill.

Art. 7. The President of the Republic promulgates the laws within the month which follows the transmission to the government of the law definitively adopted. He shall, within three days, promulgate laws, the promulgation of which shall have been declared urgent by an express vote of both chambers. The President of the Republic may, within the delay fixed for the promulgation, ask of the two chambers a new deliberation, in a message giving his reasons therefor, which cannot be refused.

Art. 8. The President of the Republic negotiates and ratifies treaties. He communicates them to the chambers as soon as the interest and safety of the state permit. Treaties of peace, of commerce, treaties which engage the finances of the state, those which relate to the personal condition and rights of property of French citizens in foreign countries, are not definitive until they have been voted by the two chambers.

No cession, nor exchange, nor addition of territory can take place except in virtue of a law.

Art. 9. The President of the Republic cannot declare war without the previous assent of the two chambers.

Art. 10. Each chamber is the judge of the eligibility of its members and of the regularity of their election; it alone can accept their resignations.

Art. 11. The officers of each chamber are elected every year for the duration of the session, and for any extraordinary session which may take place before the ordinary session of the following year. When the two chambers meet in National Assembly their officers shall be composed of the president, vice-president, and secretaries of the Senate.

Art. 12. The President of the Republic can be impeached by the Chamber of Deputies only, and can be tried by the Senate only. The ministers may be impeached by the Chamber of Deputies for crimes committed in the exercise of their functions. In that case they are tried by the Senate.

The Senate may be constituted a court of justice by decree of the President of the Republic, rendered in cabinet council, to try any person arraigned for crime attempted against the safety of the state.

If proceedings have been commenced in the ordinary courts of justice, the decree for the convocation of the Senate may be issued up to the time when the case is ordered to trial. The mode of procedure for the impeachment, the examination, and the judgment will he determined by a law.

Art. 13. No member of either chamber shall be prosecuted or called to account for opinions or votes given by him in the exercise of his functions.

Art. 14. No member of either chamber shall, during the continuance of the session, be prosecuted or arrested without the authorization of the chamber to which he belongs, or a charge of crime or misdemeanor, unless it be a case where he is taken in the act.

The imprisonment or prosecution of a member of either chamber is suspended during the session or during its whole continuance, if the chamber requires it.

Organic law in relation to the election of Senators.

Passed by the National Assembly August 2, 1875.

Article 1. A decree of the President of the Republic, issued at least six weeks in advance, fixes the day of elections for the Senate, and at the same time that of choosing the delegates from the municipal councils. There shall be an interval of not less than one month between the choice of delegates and the election of Senators.

Art. 2. Each municipal council elects one delegate. The election is held without debate, in secret ballot, by an absolute majority of suffrages. After two ballots a relative majority is sufficient, and in case of a tie, the oldest is elected.

It the mayor does not form part of the municipal council, he shall preside, but he shall take no part in the vote.

On the same day, and in the same manner, a substitute shall be elected to fill the place of the delegate in case he resigns or is prevented from serving. No one shall be chosen by the municipal councils who is a deputy member of the general council of the department, or member of the council of arrondissement. Any elector in the commune may be chosen, including the municipal councillors, without distinction.

Art. 3. In communes where there is a municipal commission, the delegate and the substitute shall be chosen by the former council.*

Art. 4. If the delegate has not been present at the election, the mayor shall take care to notify him of it within twenty-four hours. He must send to the prefect, within five days, notice of his acceptance. In case he declines or is silent, the substitute takes his place and is then entered on the list as the delegate from the commune.

Art. 5. The report of the election of the delegate and of the substitute is transmitted immediately to the prefect; it mentions the acceptance or the refusal of the delegates and substitutes, as well as protests made by one or more members of the municipal council against the regularity of the election. A copy of this report is posted on the door of the mayor’s office.

Art. 6. A table of the results of the election of delegates and substitutes is prepared by the prefect within eight eight days; this table is communicated to any one applying for it; it may be copied and published. Every elector may, in like manner, examine and copy, in the offices of the prefecture, the list, by communes, of the municipal councilors in the department, and, in the offices of the subprefectures, the list by communes of the municipal councillors of the arrondissement.

Art. 7. Every elector of the commune may, within three days, send directly to the prefect a protest against the regularity of the election. If the prefect is of opinion that the proceedings have been irregular, he has the right to demand that they be annulled.

Art. 8. Protests in relation to the election of delegates or substitutes are passed upon, reserving appeal to the council of state by the council of the prefecture, and in the colonies by the privy council.

The delegate whose election is annulled because he does not fulfill one of the conditions required by the law, or because of a defect of form, is replaced by the substitute.

In case the election of the delegate and that of the substitute are annulled, or in case both decline, or die after accepting, the municipal council will proceed to a new election on the day fixed by an order of the prefect.

Art. 9. Eight days, at the latest, before the election of Senators, the prefect, and in the colonies the director of the interior, shall prepare the list of the electors of the department in alphabetical order. This list is communicated to any one applying for it, and may be copied and published.

No elector can have more than one vote.

Art. 10. The deputies, the members of the general council, or of the councils of the arrondissement, who have been proclaimed by the committee on returns, but whose powers have not been verified, shall he inscribed on the list of electors, and may take part in the vote.

Art. 11. In each of the three departments of Algiers, the electoral college is composed of, first, the deputies; second, the members of the general councils who are French citizens; third, delegates elected by the members of each municipal council who are French citizens, from among the electors of the commune who are French citizens.

Art. 12. The electoral college is presided over by the presiding judge of the civil tribunal of the chief town of the department or colony. He is assisted by the two oldest and the two youngest electors present at the opening of the session. The officers thus composed will choose a secretary among the electors.

If the president is prevented from serving, he is replaced by the vice-president, and in his absence by the oldest judge.

Art. 13. The officers will divide the electors, in alphabetical order, into voting sections comprising at least one hundred electors; will name the president and scrutators of each section; will decide all difficulties and contests which may arise in the course of the election, due regard being had, however, to the decisions rendered by virtue of article 8 of the present law.

Art. 14. The first ballot commences at eight o’clock in the morning and closes at noon. The second commences at two and closes at four o’clock. The third, if there is occasion for it, commences at six and closes at eight. The results of the ballots are verified by the officers, and proclaimed the same day by the president of the electoral college.

Art. 15. No one is elected senator at either of the first two ballots, unless he receives, first, an absolute majority of the votes cast; second, a number of votes equal to one-fourth of the electors registered. At the third ballot a relative majority suffices, and in case of a tie the oldest is elected.

Art. 16. Electoral meetings for the nomination of senators may be held in conformity with the regulations laid down in the law of June 6, 1868, with the following modifications: 1. These meetings may be held from the day of the nomination of the delegates to the day of the vote, inclusively.

2. They must be preceded by a declaration made, not later than the evening before, by seven senatorial electors of the arrondissement, indicating the place, day, and hour of the meeting, and the names, professions, and residences of the candidates who will present themselves.

3. The municipal authorities will take care that no one enters the meeting unless he is a deputy, councillor general, councillor of the arrondissement, delegate or candidate. A delegate will prove his title by a certificate from the mayor of his commune; a candidate by a certificate from the functionary who shall have received the declaration mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

Art. 17. Delegates, who shall have taken part at all the ballots shall, if they apply for it, receive from the public funds, upon the presentation of their letters of convocation, endorsed by the president of the electoral college, allowance for mileage, which will be paid to them on the same base and in the same manner as that accorded to jurors by articles 33, 90 et seq., of the decree of June 18, 1811.

A regulation of the public administration will determine the mode of taxing and paying this compensation.*

Art. 18. Every delegate who, without legitimate cause, fails to take part in all the ballots, or who, being hindered therefrom, has not notified the substitute in proper time, shall be fined 50 francs by the civil tribunal of the chief town of the department, upon the application of the public prosecutor.

The same penalty may be applied to the substitute delegate, who, after having been apprised by letter, telegraphic dispatch, or notice delivered to him personally, in sufficent time fails to take part in the electoral proceedings.

Art. 19. Every attempt at corruption by the employment of the means set forth in Articles 1” et seq. of the penal code, to influence the vote of an elector, or to induce him to abstain from voting, shall be punished by imprisonment for from three months to two years and a fine of from 50 to 500 francs, or by one of these penalties only. Article 463 of the penal code is applicable to the penalties inflicted by the present article.†

Art. 20. The functions of senator are incompatible with those of councillor of state, and maitre des requites.‡

Prefect and sub-prefect (except prefect of Seine and prefect of police), law officers of the state in the courts of appeal and tribunals of first instance (except the prosecutor-general of the court of Paris), the treasurer-paymaster of the department, receiver of taxes of arrondissement, and functionary or employé in the central administrations of the ministries.

Art. 21. The following-described persons cannot be elected (senators) by the department or by the colony comprised in whole or in part in their jurisdiction, during the exercise of their functions, and for six months which follow the cessation of their functions by resignation, dismissal, change of residence, or in any other manner, viz: (1) the first presidents, the presidents, and the officers of public prosecution of the courts of appeal; (2) the presidents, vice-presidents, examining judges, and officers of public prosecution of the tribunals of first instance; (3) the prefect of police, the prefects and sub-prefects, and the secretaries-general of the prefectures; the governors, directors of the interior, and secretaries-general of the colonies; (4) the engineers-in-chief (of departments) and of arrondissement, the road trustees in chief and of department; (5) the rectors and inspectors of academies; (6) inspectors of primary schools; (7) archbishops, bishops, and vicars-general; (8) officers of all grades in the army by land and sea; (9) the commissaries of stores of divisions and the sub-commissaries; (10) the paymasters-general and the receivers in the finance department; (11) the directors of taxes, direct and indirect, of registry, of the domaines, and of the post-office; (12) the conservators and inspectors of forests.

Art. 22. A senator who is elected in several departments shall make known his choice to the president of the Senate within ten days after the declaration of the validity of these elections. In default of choice within that time, the question is to be decided by lot and in public session.

The vacancy shall be filled within one month and by the same electoral body. It is the same in the case of an election which is declared void.

Art. 23. If by death or resignation the number of senators from a department is reduced one-half, the vacancies shall be filled within three months, unless they occur within the twelve months which precede the triennial renewal. At the time fixed for the triennial renewal all vacancies which shall have occurred shall be filled, whatever their number or date.

Art. 24. The election for the senators to be chosen by the national assembly shall be held in public session, balloting for a list of persons, by an absolute majority of those voting, whatever the number of trials.

Art. 25. When there is occasion to provide for replacing senators elected by virtue of article 7 of the law of February 24, 1875 (life Senators), the senate will proceed according to the forms indicated in the preceding article.

Art. 26. The members of the Senate receive the same compensation as those of the Chamber of Deputies (9,000 francs per annum).

Art. 27. All the provisions of the electoral law in relation to (1) unworththiness and incapacity; (2) misdemeanors, prosecutions, and penalties; and (3) the formalities of elections, in so far as they are not contrary to the provisions of the present law, are applicable to the election of the Senate.

Organic law jugulating the election of deputies.

Passed November 30, 1875.

Article 1. The deputies shall be elected by electors inscribed (1) on the lists prepared in execution of the law of July 7th, 1874 (which, among others, provides for the registration of voters for municipal or local elections, and includes French citizens twenty-one years of age living two years in the commune where they vote); (2) on the complemental list, comprising those who have resided in the commune for six months. Inscription on the complemental list shall be made in conformity with the laws and regulations which now govern the political electoral lists, by the commissions and according to the forms established in articles 1, 2, 3, and 4 of the law of July 7, 1874. Petitions of appeal in relation to both lists shall be carried directly before the civil chamber of the court of appeals.*

Art. 2. No part shall he taken in any vote by those in the military service of all grades, and all arms of the land and sea forces when they are present with their corps at their posts or in the exercise of their functions. Those who, at the time of the election, are free as to residence, in non-activity, or in possession of a regular furlough, may vote in the commune where they are regularly inscribed on the lists. This last provision applies also to officers and those assimilated to them (as army surgeons, paymasters, &c.) who are unattached or on the reserved list.

Art. 3. During the continuance of the electoral period (the twenty days preceding the election) the circulars and professions of faith signed by the candidates, the placards and manifestos signed by one or many electors, may, after being deposited at the office of the prosecuting attorney of the republic be posted and distributed without preliminary authorization.

The distribution of tickets is not subject to the formality of deposit at the office of the prosecuting attorney.

Every agent of public or municipal authority is forbidden to distribute tickets, professions of faith, and circulars of candidates. The provisions of article 19 of the organic law of August 2, 1875, in regard to the election of senators (punishing attempts at corruption of voters by fine and imprisonment) shall be applicable to the election of deputies.

Art. 4. The ballot shall only continue a single day. The vote takes place at the chief town of the commune; nevertheless, each commune may be divided by an order of the prefect into as many sections as the local circumstances and the number of electors require. The second ballot will continue to take place on the second Sunday following the proclamation of the result of the first ballot, in conformity with the provisions of article 65 of the law of March 15, 1849, which provides that, if at the first ballot no candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, a second election shall take place on the second Sunday after the proclamation of the result, when a relative majority or plurality shall elect.

Art. 5. The operations of the vote shall take place in conformity with the provisions of the organic and regulating decrees of February 2, 1852.*

The vote is secret.

The lists marginally noted of each section, signed by the presiding officer and clerk of election, shall remain eight days deposited at the office of the mayor (of the commune), where they shall be shown to any elector requiring it.

Art. 6. Every elector above twenty-five years of age is eligible, without regard to the amount of tax he pays.

Art. 7. No soldier or sailor forming part of the active armies by land or sea, whatever be his grade or his functions, can be elected a member of the Chamber of Deputies. This provision applies to soldiers and sailors unattached, or in non-activity, but it does not extend to officers placed on the second section of the list of the general staff, nor to those who, while maintained in the first section as having commanded in chief before the enemy, have ceased to be actively employed, nor to officers who, having acquired the right to be retired, are sent to or kept at their homes awaiting the settlement of their pensions.

The decision by which the officer shall have been admitted to make good his right to be retired will, in this case, become irrevocable.

The provision contained in the first paragraph of this article does not apply to the reserve of the active army, nor to the territorial army (militia).

Art. 8. The exercise of public functions for which remuneration is paid from the funds of the State is incompatible with the commission of deputy. Every functionary, therefore, who is elected deputy will be replaced by another person in his functions if within eight days following the verification of his powers he has not given notice that he does not accept the commission of deputy.

From the foregoing provisions exception is made of the functions of minister, under secretary of state, ambassador, minister plenipotentiary, prefect of the Seine, prefect of police, first president of the court of cassation (supreme court), first president of the court of audits (comptes), first president of the court of appeals of Paris, prosecuting attorney of the court of appeals, prosecuting attorney of the court of audits, prosecuting attorney at the court of appeals, archbishop and bishop, the presiding pastor of the consistory in the consistorial circumscriptions of which the chief town counts two or more pastors, the grand rabbi of the central consistory, and the grand rabbi of the consistory of Paris.

Art. 9. The following are also excepted from the provisions of Article 8: (1) the titular professors of chairs, which are filled upon competition, or on presentation by the corps in which the vacancy occurs; (2) persons who have been charged with a temporary mission. Every mission which has lasted more than six months ceases to be temporary, and is governed by article 8 above given.

Art. 10. The functionary preserves the rights he has acquired to a retiring pension, and can, after the expiration of his commission (as deputy) be returned to activity.

The civil functionary, who, having passed twenty-eight years in service at the time of acceptance of his commission as deputy, shall show that he is fifty years of age at the time of the cessation of that commission, may make good his right to an exceptional pension of retirement. This pension will be regulated in conformity with the third paragraph of article 12 of the law of June 9, 1853 (which provides that the pension shall be at the rate of the 60th or 50th, depending on the case of the aggregate of the mean salary for each year of civil service).

If the functionary is returned to activity after the cessation of his commission, the provisions set forth in articles 3 (section 2) and 23 of the law of June 9, 1853, are applicable to him (regulating his right to a pension upon ultimate retirement).

In functions where the grade is distinct from the employment, the functionary, by accepting the commission of deputy, renounces the employment and only preserves the grade.

Art. 11. Every deputy appointed or promoted to a salaried public function, by the act of accepting it ceases to belong to the chamber; but he can be re-elected if the functions which he fulfills is compatible with the commission of deputy.

Deputies who are appointed ministers or under-secretaries of state are not required to be re-elected.

Art. 12. The following functionaries cannot be elected by an arrondissement or colony comprised, whole or in part, in their jurisdiction during the exercise of their functions, and during the six months which follow the cessation of their functions, by resignation, removal, change of residence, or in any other manner: (1) The first presidents, presidents, and prosecuting officers of courts of appeal; (2) presidents, vice-presidents, titular judges, examining judges, and prosecuting officers of courts of first instance; (3) the prefect of police, prefects and secretaries, general of the prefectures, the governors, directors of the interior, and secretaries general of the colonies; (4) chief engineers (departmental) and those of arrondissement, chief road surveyors and those of arrondissement; (5) rectors and inspectors of academies; (6) inspectors of primary schools; (7) archbishops, bishops, and vicars-general; (8) treasurers, paymasters-general, and receivers of finances (of arrondissement); directors of taxes, direct and indirect, of registration and of domains, and of the post-office; (10) conservators and inspectors of forests.

Subprefects cannot be elected in any of the arrondissements of the department where they are exercising their functions.

Art. 13. Every imperative instruction is null and of no effect.

Art. 14. The members of the Chamber of Deputies are elected by balloting for one individual only.

Every administrative arrondissement will name one deputy. Arrondissements having a population exceeding one hundred thousand inhabitants shall name one deputy more for every hundred thousand or fraction of a hundred thousand inhabitants. Arrondissements, in these cases, will be divided into circumscriptions, a table of which shall be established by a law and may only be modified by a law (the apportionment law referred to was passed soon after, on the 24th of December, 1875. There are 535 deputies).

Art. 15. The deputies are elected for four years. The chamber is renewed as a whole (all the deputies being elected at one time).

Art. 16. In case of a vacancy by death, resignation, or otherwise, the election shall be held within three months from the day when the vacancy occurs.

In case of option the vacancy shall be filled within one month.*

Art. 17. The deputies receive an indemnity. This indemnity is regulated by articles 96 and 97 of the law of March 15, 1849, and by the provisions of the law of February 16, 1872.†

Art. 18. No one is elected at the first ballot unless he receives: (1) an absolute majority of all the votes cast; (2) a number of suffrages equal to one-fourth of the electors registered. At the second ballot, a relative majority is sufficient. In case of a tie the eldest is elected.

Art. 19. Each department of Algiers elects one deputy.

Art. 20. Electors in Algiers residing in a locality which has not been erected into a commune shall be inscribed on the electoral list of the nearest commune.

When there is occasion to establish electoral sections, either to group mixed communes in each of which the number of electors would be insufficient, or to unite the electors residing in localities not erected into communes, the decrees to fix the seats (voting places) of these sections shall be issued by the governor-general, on the report of the prefect, or of the general commanding the division.

Art. 21. The four colonies (Martinique, Guadaloupe, Réunion, and French India) to which senators have been accorded by the law of February 24, 1875, in relation to the organization of the senate, shall each elect a deputy.

Art. 22. Every violation of the prohibitive provisions of article 3, paragraph 3, of the present law (prohibiting functionaries from distributing tickets) shall be punished by a fine of from 16 to 300 francs; but the police court of misdemeanors may apply article 463 of the penal code.*

The provisions of article 6 of the law of July 7, 1874 (punishing fraudulent registration of municipal voters), shall be applicable to political electoral lists.

The decree of January 29, 1870, and the laws of April 10, and May 2, 1871, and February 18, 1873, are abrogated; also the 11th section of article 15 of the organic decree of February 2, 1852, in so far as it refers to the law of May 21, 1838, in regard to lotteries, reserving to the tribunals to apply to the condemned article 42 of the penal code.

The provisions of the laws and decrees in force and not repealed by the present law, shall continue to be applied.

* The provisions of this law, which was adopted after a memorable parliamentary struggle, are of such cardinal importance, and have determined so positively fche frame of the government, that French polititical writers who have a fondness for describing by dates, generally refer to the present constitution as “The constitution of February twenty-fifth.”

† Marshal MacMahon had been elected President six months before May 24, 1873, by the national assembly, in place of M. Thiers, resigned. The law of the Septennate was promulgated November 23, 1873, so that Marshal MacMahon’s term would expire November 23, 1880. He resigned, however, January 30, 1879, and the same day M. Jules Grévy was elected President. His term will expire January 30, 1886.

* The cabinet being responsible to the assembly, and not to the President, the government is a parliamentary republic. He appoints his ministers, but they must be chosen from and have the confidence of the political majority in the chambers, where rests the ultimate seat of power in the French Republic.

Marshal MacMahon attempted, but vainly, to carry on a government with a cabinet in opposition to the political majority. M. Grey, a sincere Republican, has faithfully observed the constitution in letter and spirit.

† This provision, adopted in fear of the disorders of Paris, then fresh in mind, held the chambers at Versailles, and the President kept a residence there; but he actually resided in Paris; all the ministries, with their numberless employés, were at Paris; even the important committees of the chambers, notably the Committee on the Budget, sat at Paris, which gradually became the real seat of government. Finally, in 1879, the constitution was amended by striking out Article 9, and immediately a law was passed changing the seat of government to Paris.

* That is, when there is more than one senator to be elected by a department, the elector will vote a list or ticket containing as many names as there are senators to be elected.

† To appreciate the effects of this clause, it will be remembered that there are 36,826 communes in France, every one of which sends a delegate to the senatorial electoral college. They far outnumber all the other three classes of delegates, and in fact control the election of senators. The commune is the lowest political subdivision, and generally contains less than 1,000 inhabitants. France is divided into 87 departments, and these into 362 arrondissements, which are not far from our Congressional districts in population; these, again, are divided into 2,863 cantons, which are subdivided into 36,826 communes.

The councils of the arrondissement contain as many members, not less than 9, as there are cantons in the arrondissement. The councils of the departments, which are called “general councils,” contain as many members, not exceeding 30, as there are cantons in the department. There are generally two deputies from each arrondissement. From these elements it will be seen that the electoral college which elects a senator is generally composed of eight or ten deputies, 25 to 35 general councillors of the department, as many more councillors of the arrondissement, and 400 or 500 delegates from communes. These electoral colleges have acted with dignity, moderation, and good sense, and Frenchmen are satisfied with the system generally, though some think that the electoral colleges are more conservative than the people, owing to the personal influences of the councillors, who are often large landed proprietors, over the delegates from the communes.

‡ This provision has gradually developed some important political results. Among the 75 life senators, originally elected by the national assembly which framed the constitution, deaths occur from time to time.

These vacancies are filled by the vote of the whole senate, not only the 75 life senators, but the 225 chosen by the electoral colleges for nine years.

Of course the political party which has a majority of all the senators fills vacancies with senators belonging to it. In this way when a life senator belonging to the minority party dies he is replaced by one belonging to the majority party, which thus increases its own majority by two votes. For a time parties were almost exactly balanced in the Senate; by successive vacancies caused by death and replaced in this way, the Senate has become “conservative” and remains so, while the Chamber of Deputies, reflecting the popular sentiment of France, is in the hands of an immense Republican majority, which is steadily increasing.

* The government sometimes suspends the municipal council of a commune, and appoints in its place temporarily a commission.

* The regulation herein contemplated was issued a few months later, December 26, 1875, and fixes the mileage of senatorial electors at 2½ francs (50 cents) per myriametre (61/5 miles) going and returning.

† By this article, 463, the penalty is slightly softened, if the jury find extenuating circumstances.

‡ A maître des requites is a member of the council of state, next in rank to a councillor.

* The reason for requiring two years’ residence in those voting in municipal or local elections is to assure a real interest in the local affairs of the commune. Six months’ residence of a citizen is deemed sufficient for those voting for deputies where the interest in view is that of all France. The practical difference is found to be less than was expected.

In 1874 there were only 382,097 more political than municipal electors. On the 31st March, of that year, at the political or general election there were 9,911,737 votes cast; on the 17th September, at the municipal elections for local officers, there were 9,549,640.

* These decrees provide minutely for the preparation and revision of the registers or lists of voters, for punishing offenses connected with elections, for the officers conducting the elections, for the calling up of the voters in alphabetical order, each one bringing his ticket previously prepared, to be deposited in the ballot-box, while the officer of election signs his name or initials on the margin of the list opposite the name of the voter, for the counting of the votes, and for making up the record of the whole proceeding.

* By article 7, of the decree of February 7, 1852, “a deputy elected in several electoral circumscriptions must give notice of his option to the president of the chamber within the ten days which follow the declaration of the validity of the elections.”

† Article 96 says “The indemnity prescribed by article 38 of the constitution is fixed at 9,000 francs per annum.”

* Article 463 allows the court to slightly reduce the legal penalty where there are extenuating circumstances.

No. 242. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes. No. 242.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Noyes.

Department of State,
Washington, October 30, 1880. No. 298.]

Sir: I sent you a telegram to-day in answer to yours of yesterday, and acquainted you with the designation of yourself and Mr. Putnam as delegates of the United States to take part in the conferences and discussions of the International Industrial Property Congress, which is to be held in Paris, commencing on the 4th proximo. It now becomes necessary to supplement that telegram with brief instructions for your guidance in the matter.

The aims had in view in summoning this congress are explained very clearly and fully in the note which the French minister at this capital addressed to me on the 9th of January last, and of which a copy is herewith transmitted to you.† The subjects proposed for discussion are in a marked degree important to all countries whose trade and manufacturing industries have attained high development, and this country cannot but feel the liveliest interest in any conclusions which may advance and benefit its commerce and manufactures. Nevertheless, as I replied to Mr. Outrey’s note of January 9, the internal regulation of those matters by the legislation of this country is so much a matter for domestic consideration and control, especially with reference to the question of trade-marks and their Federal protection under existing treaties, that this Department cannot agree to submit such questions to the proposed congress, so far as the share of the United States therein is concerned, without the reservation that the conclusions of the conference on the subject must be considered as absolutely subordinate to such legislative provisions as may hereafter be made by this country.

This reservation was made in full consonance with the proposal in Mr. Outrey’s note, and particularly with its concluding clause, which looks upon the protocolized results of the contemplated congress as advisory merely, and referable to the several powers concerned, with a view to being subsequently completed, if approved by them, in the formal manner usual with international conventions.

It is believed that the familiarity of yourself and Mr. Putnam with the industrial interests of this country, and the questions of law and legislation therewith connected, will obviate the necessity for any detailed instructions on the points proposed for discussion. Much is, perforce, left to your discretion, and it is conceived that, even in advance of the receipt of this instruction, your own good judgment will have counseled the avoidence of any commitment of this government to plans of reform which may not consult or comport with the entire legislative freedom which, as the French Government is already aware, is reserved by us.

As you are a salaried officer of this government, your participation in the congress is merely honorary, and carries no special emoluments with it.

* * * * * * *

As the congress is expected to open before this instruction reaches you, it is not deemed necessary to give you formal powers. The telegram sent to you to-day, and the notification of your designation which I have conveyed to Mr. Outrey, will doubtless serve as ample warrant for your participation in the congress.

I transmit for your information, and as bearing upon the reservation herein expressed, a copy of a recent important decision of the Supreme Court of the United States,* covering, in principle, the Federal protection of trade-marks under treaty stipulations.

Your report of the proceedings of the congress, with copies in duplicate, if possible, of the protocol of its sessions, will be awaited with interest.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

† For the text of Mr. Outrey’s note of January 9, 1880, referred to, see correspondence with the French legation in Washington, post, p. 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246].

* Vide supra, page 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 30].

Correspondence with the French Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the French Legation in Washington.

[243] . Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of France, Washington, September 29, 1879.

[244] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State, Washington, October 3, 1879.

[245] . Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of France in the United States, Washington, November 26, 1879.

[246] . Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of France in the United States, Washington, January 9, 1880.

[247] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State, Washington, January 16, 1880.

[248] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State, Washington, March 19, 1880.

[249] . Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of France, Washington, March 22, 1880. (Received March 23.)

[250] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State, Washington, March 25, 1880.

[251] . Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of France, Washington, June 20, 1880.

[252] . Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of France in the United States, Profile Rouse, August 10, 1880. (Received August 12.)

[253] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State, Washington, August 14, 1880.

[254] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State, Washington, October 30, 1880.

No. 243. Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts. No. 243.
Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of France,
Washington, September 29, 1879.

Mr. Secretary of State: New measures have just been adopted by order of the minister of the marine, with a view to regulating the exercise of the right of sailing under the flag of the French protectorate among the Society Islands. Hitherto this right has been the exclusive privilege of vessels commanded by French or native captains. According to the regulations recently adopted, foreign captains of all nationalities will also be allowed to command vessels fitted out under the flag of the protectorate, and a special authorization may be issued to them for this purpose on the following conditions: They must be presented by the consul of their country, who will answer for their moral character and their capacity; they will, moreover, promise to submit entirely to the jurisdiction and laws of France, so far as regards their conduct and acts while commanding vessels under the protectorate.

I hasten, in obedience to the instructions of my government, to bring these measures to your knowledge. You will doubtless think proper, Mr. Secretary of State, to communicate this information to the consul of the United States at Tahiti, so that the benefit of the aforesaid measures may be secured, without delay, to such American citizens as may desire to avail themselves thereof.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

MAX OUTREY.

No. 244. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Outrey. No. 244.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State,
Washington, October 3, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 29th ultimo, informing this government of the new measures which have just been adopted, by order of the minister of marine of the Republic, with a view to regulating the exercise of the right of sailing under the flag of the French protectorate among the Society Islands.

I shall not fail to make known in quarters where the information may be of utility, and especially through the consul of the United States at Tahiti, as suggested by you, the gratifying modification whereby the privilege of commanding vessels fitted out under the flag of the protectorate is extended, under certain conditions, to reputable and capable foreigners, instead of being confined, as heretofore, to French citizens or to natives of that region.

Accept, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

No. 245. Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts. No. 245.
Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of France in the United States,
Washington, November 26, 1879.

Mr. Secretary of State: A number of importers of French goods, doing business in the city of New York, have just called my attention to the decision pronounced on the 17th instant by the Supreme Court of the United States, on the subject of trade-marks, which they consider prejudicial to their interests. Not having as yet received an authentic copy of the decision referred to, it is impossible for me to determine to what extent it is at variance with the stipulations of the treaty of April 16, 1869. The question, however, seems to me to be one of such importance that I do not hesitate to transmit to you their original communication.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

MAX OUTREY.

[Inclosure.]

Messrs. Osborn, Son & Co. to Mr. Outrey.

John Osborn, Son & Co.,
New York, November 24, 1879.

Sir: The undersigned importers of merchandise from France desire to call the attention of your excellency to the decision of the Supreme Court of the United States, filed on the 17th of November, 1879,* in the cases of the United States vs. Witteman and others, declaring unconstitutional the acts of Congress on the subject of trademarks.

The opinion delivered contains this reservation: “The court wishes, however, to be understood as leaving the whole question of the treaty-making power of the general government over trade-marks, and the duty of Congress to pass any laws necessary to carry such treaties into effect, untouched.”

Relying upon the security offered by the treaty passed between France and the United States, and by the laws passed to carry it into effect, the undersigned have gone to great trouble and expense for the purpose of protecting trade-marks of French citizens whose goods they import in large quantities. By the decision above referred to, large interests are jeopardized, and the time and expense devoted to their protection in the past go for naught.

A timely compliance by Congress with the suggestion made by the Supreme Court as to the protection of rights pledged to French citizens by the treaty of 1869 may avert great loss. Each day’s delay is of importance. Until Congress takes action, the owners of foreign brands and trade-marks are at the mercy of the criminals emboldened by the knowledge that the Federal courts have been stripped of the power of punishing them.

Under these circumstances we do not hesitate to call upon your excellency to use your influence for the protection of the French interests thus endangered, and to pray your intervention with the Department of State, in order that the President of the United States may in his message to Congress, which meets on the first Monday of December, 1879, be induced to urge upon that body the immediate passage of a law to carry into effect the treaty with France.

In the confidence that this request will receive from your excellency that consideration which the importance of the subject demands, and which the interests of French citizens have never failed to obtain from you, the undersigned beg to subscribe themselves,

Your humble and obedient servants,

JOHN OSBORN, SON & CO.,
45 Beaver Street.
CAZA DE, CROOKS & REYNAUD,
26 South William Street.
E. LA MONTAGUE,
53 Beaver Street.
CHARLES GRAEF,
65 Broad Street.
[An illegible signature.]
FRED. DE BARY & CO.,
41 & 43 Warren Street.
[An illegible signature],
51 Warren Street.
RENAULD, FRANCOIS & CO.,
23 Beaver Street.
EDWARD BLACKBURN & CO.,
10 Beaver Street.
ARGUIMBAU, WALLIS & CO.,
29 South William.
ALFRED PACONTOT,
6 South William.
IVES, BEECHER & CO.,
98 Front Street.
[An illegible signature],
35 Beaver Street.
JOHN DUNCAN’S SONS,
1 Union Square.
E. HAZARD & CO.,
192–198 Chambers Street.
H. K. & F. B. THURBER & CO.,
West Broadway, Reade, and Hudson Streets.
ACKER, MERRALL & CONDIT,
130 and 132 Chambers Street,
Broadway and Forty-second Street.
C. HEERDT & CO.,
93 Water Street.
J. H. SMITH’S SONS,
25 and 27 Peck Slip.
[An illegible signature],
12 Vesey Street.
[An illegible signature],
9 Whitehall Street.
HENRY G. SCHMIDT & CO.,
38 Beaver Street.
[An illegible signature.]
JOS. RIFFLARD’S SONS.
PARK & TILFORD.

* Vide supra, p. 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 30].

No. 246. Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts. No. 246.
Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of France in the United States,
Washington, January 9, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: You are aware that a congress met at Paris, during the Universal Exposition of 1878, for the purpose of considering questions relating to industrial property. The Government of the United States was represented by three delegates at this congress, which was under the honorary presidency of the minister of agriculture and commerce. Its special object was the examination of questions having reference to patents, designs, industrial models, and trade-marks.

Before adjourning, the congress appointed a permanent commission, the members of which were divided into national sections, and which was charged with the execution of the resolutions which had been adopted, and especially with bringing about the meeting of an international conference, having for its mission the adoption of the measures necessary to secure, as far as possible, the unification of the different systems of legislation relative to industrial property.

This permanent commission, of which the delegates of the foreign governments represented at the congress were members, prepared a draft of a treaty to be concluded by the different adhering powers, the object of said treaty being to form, of the contracting countries, a “union for the protection of industrial property,” and to fix the general principles which should, by common consent, be rendered uniformly applicable to the matter.

This draft of a treaty was transmitted by the executive committee to the minister of agriculture and commerce, with a request that he would take the necessary steps to induce the Government of the Republic to take the initiative in bringing about the assembling of an international conference to carry out the work undertaken by the congress. Mr. Teisserene de Bort thought that it was proper to submit at first to the deliberations of an international conference only drafts of resolutions rather of an executive (administratif) than of a legislative character, easy of application, and whose adoption would not require serious modifications of the laws, which are based, in various countries, on different principles. He consequently requested the French section, acting as an executive committee, and representing the commission of the congress, to extract from the draft of the treaty, to be recommended to the governments for their adhesion, those provisions which seemed to it to enter more particularly into this order of ideas. That section performed the task intrusted to it, and the result of its special work was transmitted to the minister of agriculture and commerce, who, appreciating the importance of the resolutions adopted by the congress, at once recognized that they were in all respects worthy of the solicitous attention of the French Government.

His excellency the minister of foreign affairs instructs me to transmit to you a volume containing the reports of the sessions of the congress, together with a pamphlet* relative to the plan presented by the executive committee, and to commend them to your most serious attention.

As you will observe, the commission has divided its work into five parts. The first comprises those questions which are common to all branches of industrial property 5 the second is devoted to patents; the third to industrial designs and models; the fourth to trade-marks; and the fifth to the commercial name. It has, moreover, taken care to distinguish in each one of these parts the provisions which it has thought could be immediately inserted in an international convention, from those which, as they involve the modification of the laws of each country, must, for the present, be considered only in the light of recommendations to the various governments.

The minister of foreign affairs instructs me, in addressing this communication to you, to beg you to inform me whether the Government of the United States is disposed to send special delegates to an international conference having for its object the examination and discussion of the conclusions of the commission. He expresses the hope that the Government of the United States, sharing the views of the congress, and feeling convinced, as we are, of the high importance of the questions which have reference to industrial property, will receive these overtures with favor.

In case the labors of the conference should result in the adoption of a number of provisions suitable for incorporation in an international convention, the draft prepared by the special delegates, might subsequently be invested with the signatures of the representatives of all the adhering governments, being clothed with the necessary powers for that purpose.

My government would be glad to be informed, with as little delay as possible, of your intentions in this matter.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

MAX OUTREY.

* Not printed herewith, owhig to their length.

No. 247. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey. No. 247.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State,
Washington, January 16, 1880.

Sir: At the instance of the officers of the New York Life Insurance Company I have the honor to invite your attention to the consideration of the subject of the unequal footing upon which that company and similar American corporations stand in France, as compared with like incorporated bodies of other nations. It is understood that, as a general rule, a foreign corporation has no legal status in France, so far, at least, as the protection of its own interests are concerned. It can be held responsible in suits brought against it by Frenchmen, but cannot itself become a plaintiff in the courts of the republic. It is understood, furthermore, that so far as a number of countries are concerned, the disabilities of their coporations in France have been removed by treaty or otherwise, while the restrictions in question still subsist in full force so far as American incorporated companies are concerned, whereby great hardships have been inflicted upon the latter.

In view of the representations which have been made to this Department on this subject, and in view of the privileges accorded to French corporations in the United States, I beg you to do me the favor of furnishing this Department with information as to the precise legal status of American corporations in France as compared with those of other nations, and at the same time to favor me with an expression of your views as to the best method, by treaty or otherwise, of placing the United States, in respect to the matter in question, upon such a footing that the corporations of France and the United States may reciprocally enjoy the same privileges in either country.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 248. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey. No. 248.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State,
Washington, March 19, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 9th of January last, referring to the proceedings of the congress which was held at Paris during the Universal Exposition of 1878, for the purpose of considering questions relating to industrial property, and stating that the permanent commission appointed by that congress has requested the Government of France to take the initiative in bringing about the assembling of an international conference to carry out the work undertaken by the congress above mentioned, and accordingly, as instructed by the minister of foreign affairs of France, you inquire whether the Government of the United States is disposed to send special delegates to an international conference, having for its object the examination and discussion of the conclusions of the commission.

Your note, moreover, states that the permanent commission above mentioned has prepared a draft of a treaty to be concluded by the different adhering powers, the object of the proposed treaty being to form of the contracting countries a “Union for the protection of industrial property.” You furthermore refer to the fact that it is proposed for the present to limit the international agreement in question to the making of such regulations as would not require serious modifications of the laws which are based in various countries on different principles, the proposed regulations being embodied in a report which has been made to the French Government, a printed copy of which accompanies your note.

I observe, as you state in your note, that the subjects to be presented for the consideration of the proposed conference are five in number, viz: 1st. Questions common to all branches of industrial property.

2d. Patents.

3d. Industrial designs and models.

4th. Trade-marks.

5th. The commercial name.

In reply to your note, I must, in the first place, observe that the condition of the legislation of this country with regard to trade-marks is such at this time that this Department cannot agree to submit that matter to the proposed conference without the reservation that the conclusions of the conference on the subject must be considered as absolutely subordinate to such legislative provisions as may hereafter be made by this country in relation to trade-marks.

With this reservation just mentioned, this government is willing to designate some suitable person as a special delegate to represent the United States in the proposed international conference.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 249. Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts. No. 249.
Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of France,
Washington, March 22, 1880. (Received March 23.)

Mr. Secretary of State: Since the time when it was proposed to form a company for the construction of a canal through the Isthmus of Panama, I have several times had occasion in our interviews to communicate to you the views of my government with regard to this project. I have informed you that the French cabinet had from the outset expressed its firm purpose to allow the character of the enterprise inaugurated by Mr. de Lesseps to remain an essentially private one, and that it did not propose to deviate from this course. Although we have for the conceptions of our eminent compatriot the sympathy which it is impossible not to feel for projects whose accomplishment would be an honor to civilization and to the age in which we live, the French Government, as I have already had the honor to assure you, is in no way concerned in that enterprise, and in no wise proposes to interfere therein, or to give it any support, either direct or indirect.

I am happy to be authorized to comply with the desire which you have expressed to me by now renewing, in writing, assurances which I do not doubt will put an end to all uncertainty as to the nature of the purposes entertained by my government.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

MAX OUTREY.

No. 250. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey. No. 250.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State,
Washington, March 25, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 22d instant, wherein you recur to the statements you had previously made to me, and now repeat, that the French Government had from the outset expressed the firm purpose to leave to the enterprise inaugurated by Mr. de Lesseps for the construction of a canal through the Isthmus of Panama its entirely private character.

I notice also that you observe that even if you have sympathies for the conceptions of your distinguished fellow-citizen, the French Government, as you have heretofore said to me, is absolutely a stranger to the enterprise, and does not intend to participate therein in any manner, nor to give it any support, direct or indirect.

In reply, I have the honor to assure you that I have at all times received these statements with an entire confidence in the open sincerity and absolute good faith of the Government of France in making them, and am happy to find in this renewed and more formal representation now made a complete conformity with the repeated assurances heretofore given me in the name and by the authority of your government. Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 251. Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts. No. 251.
Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of France,
Washington, June 20, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: The minister of war has just decided that various maneuvers on a large scale shall take place this autumn within several commands, and, in accordance with the precedents established by usage, he will willingly authorize a certain number of foreign officers to be present thereat.

The minister of foreign affairs, in notifying me of this, instructs me to inquire whether it would be agreeable to the Government of the United States to designate any officers of its Army to witness these maneuvers, and if so, to be pleased to give their names before the 31st of July next. As soon as the minister of war shall have received the replies of the governments to which this communication has been addressed, he will make known to what army corps each military mission can be attached, and will announce the date of the commencement of the maneuvers.

I will thank you to enable me to reply to M. de Freycinet as speedily as possible.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

MAX OUTREY.

No. 252. Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts. No. 252.
Mr. Outrey to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of France in the United States,
Profile Rouse, August 10, 1880. (Received August 12.)

Mr. Secretary of State: In the note which you did me the honor to write to me on the 19th of March last, in response to my communication of the 9th of January preceding, you were pleased to inform me that under a certain reserve the Government of the United States was disposed to accept the proposition for the meeting at Paris of the international conference to be charged with examining and discussing questions connected with the protection of industrial property. On the other hand, England, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Italy, Russia, and Switzerland have likewise made known their assent to the project of the meeting, and have announced their intention to be represented thereat.

The realization of the hope expressed by the international congress of 1878 being thus assured by these adhesions, the French Government has deemed that it is now proper to arrange for the meeting of the conference. In consequence the minister of foreign affairs charges me to invite the Government of the United States to take part in this meeting, the date of which is set for the 4th November next, and to ask it at the same time to be good enough to designate the delegates whom it may have chosen.

In order to facilitate the labors of the conference it has been judged advisable to prepare a programme of the questions which would be the object of its deliberations. I have the honor to send you herewith four copies thereof.

It is however understood, as M. de Freycinet informs me in his communication, that the decisions of the conference cannot in any manner be binding upon the powers which participate therein. The delegates will have no other mission than to study and discuss the questions which shall be submitted to them and endeavor to come to an understanding, if it be possible, upon a scheme of rules of a nature to form part of an international convention which would subsequently, if acceptable, be signed by the diplomatic representatives of all the adhering governments.

I would be obliged to you, Mr. Secretary of State, to let me know if the date proposed for the meeting of the conference is acceptable to the Government of the United States.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

MAX OUTREY.

[Inclosure—Translation.]

Programme of the principal questions to be submitted to the deliberations of the International Conference for the protection of industrial property.

general questions.

1. The adhering governments have agreed to form a Union for the protection of industrial property.

2. The subjects of each one of the states of the Union shall enjoy in all the other states the same rights as the natives thereof, in the matter of patents of inventions, of designs, and industrial models, of trade-marks and any commercial use of firm names.

3. A special service of industrial property shall he established in each country; a central depot of patents of invention of designs and industrial models of trade-marks and commercial names shall be annexed thereto, and be accessible to the public. A periodical official journal shall be published for the service of industrial property. Measures shall be likewise taken for the publication of an international journal common to all the states of the Union.

4. Temporary protection shall be given to patentable inventions, designs, and industrial models, as well as the marks of trade and commerce which shall be represented in international exhibitions either official or officially recognized.

patents of inventions.

5. The act of filing an application for a patent regularly performed in one of the States of the Union, shall carry with it the priority of registration in all the other States during a period of_____.

6. The introduction by patent in the countries where the patent has been issued of articles fabricated in any one of the States of the Union, shall not involve its annulment.

designs and industrial models.

7. Designs or models deposited in any one of the States of the Union shall be guaranteed in all the other States, and the ownership shall be considered as legitimately acquired by those who make usage of it conformably to the legislation of the country of origin.

8. A deposit regularly made in one of the States of the Union shall carry with it the priority of registration in the other States during the term of___.

marks of trade and of commerce.

9. Trade-marks entered in one of the States of the Union shall be guaranteed in all the other States, and property therein shall be considered as legitimately acquired by those who make usage of it conformably to the legislation of the country of origin.

10. Any registration regularly made in one of the States of the Union, shall carry with it priority of registration in the other States during the term of______.

11. All foreign products illicitly or unlawfully bearing the trade-mark of a manufacturer or of a merchant doing business in the country of importation, or any indication of being produced in the said country, shall be denied entry, be excluded from transit and public storage, and liable to be seized in any place whatever.

commercial firm names.

The commercial name of a firm constitutes a property which should be protected without distinction of nationality and without obligation of registry.

No. 253. Mr. Hay to Mr. Outrey. No. 253.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State,
Washington, August 14, 1880.

Sir: Referring to your note of the 20th of June last, communicating the invitation of the minister of war of France to this Government to designate officers of its Army to witness certain maneuvers, on a large scale, of the French troops which are to take place this autumn, and referring also to the reply of the 30th of June last of this Department to your note, I now have the honor to inform you that the Secretary of War, in pursuance of the kind invitation of your government, has detailed Maj. A. P. Morrow, of the Ninth Cavalry, First Lieut. William H. Bixby, of the Engineer Corps, and First Lieut. Rogers Birnie, jr., of the Ordnance Department, to witness the maneuvers in question.

I beg you to do me the favor of conveying this information to your government, and of thanking it, on behalf of the Secretary of War, for its courteous invitation.

Accept, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 254. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey. No. 254.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Outrey.

Department of State,
Washington, October 30, 1880.

Sir: Referring to your note of the 9th of January last, acquainting me with the proposal of your government to convene, at Paris, a congress to consider the international questions concerning industrial property, and to your later note of August 10, announcing the opening of that congress on the 4th proximo, I have now the honor to inform you that, in acceptance of the invitation so tendered to this country to participate in the proposed congress, this government has designated as its delegates thereat, Mr. Edward F. Noyes, the Envoy Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States near the Government of the French Republic, and Mr. James O. Putnam, the Minister Resident of the United States at the Court of Belgium, subject to the reserves in the matter of domestic legislation contained in my note to you of the 19th of March last.

I should be gratified if you could kindly inform your government, by cable, of the appointment of these delegates.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

GermanyGermany

[255] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, October 22, 1879. (Received November 12.)

[256] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, November 17, 1879. (Received December 1.)

[257] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, November 18, 1879. (Received December 10.)

[258] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, January 5, 1880. (Received January 23.)

[259] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, January 12, 1880. (Received January 26.)

[260] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, January 23, 1880. (Received February 11.)

[261] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State, Washington, January 28, 1880.

[262] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, February 2, 1880. (Received February 24.)

[263] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, February 12, 1880. (Received March 1.)

[264] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State, Washington, February 18, 1880.

[265] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State, Washington, March 12, 1880.

[266] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, March 15, 1880. (Received April 1.)

[267] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, March 20, 1880. (Received April 8.)

[268] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, April 12, 1880. (Received April 30.)

[269] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, April 12, 1880. (Received April 30.)

[270] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, April 12, 1880. (Received April 30.)

[271] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State, Washington, April 14, 1880.

[272] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, April 24, 1880. (Received May 13.)

[273] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, April 26, 1880. (Received May 13.)

[274] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, May 3, 1880. (Received May 19.)

[275] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, May 10, 1880. (Received May 26.)

[276] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State, Washington, May 19, 1880.

[277] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, May 22, 1880. (Received June 10.)

[278] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State, Washington, May 25, 1880.

[279] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, May 31, 1880. (Received June 16.)

[280] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, June 22, 1880. (Received July 8.)

[281] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, July 5, 1880. (Received July 22.)

[282] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, September 1, 1880. (Received September 23.)

[283] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, September 21, 1880. (Received October 9.)

[284] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of state, Washington, October 7, 1880.

[285] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, October 15, 1880. (Received Nov. 3.)

[286] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, October 18, 1880. (Received November 3.)

[287] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, October 18, 1880. (Received November 3.)

[288] . Mr. Hay to Mr. White.

Department of State, Washington, October 26, 1880.

[289] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, November 1, 1880. (Received November 19.)

[290] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

[undated]. Received November 5, 1880.

[291] . Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berlin, November 22, 1880. (Received December 10.)

[292] . Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Received November 29, 1880.

Contents

Correspondence with the German Legation in Washington. (Documents 293-296)

No. 255. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 255.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, October 22, 1879. (Received November 12.) No. 62.]

Sir: I regret to convey to you the information, which I received this morning in a note from his excellency Mr. von Philips born, in charge of the foreign office, of the death of his excellency Mr. von Bulow, minister of state, and secretary of state for foreign affairs, which occurred at Frankfort-on-the-Main, at three o’clock on the afternoon of the 20th instant.

Mr. von Bülow had been ill during nearly the entire summer, his disease having taken the form of paralysis; but until recently no such speedy termination was looked for; and at the time of his death he was on his way to Nice, there to take rest.

The death of Mr. von Bülow is not only a loss to his own country, but also to ours. He was always exceedingly courteous and affable, entered heartily into kindly discussion of any points at issue between the two nations, and I have always recognized in him a desire to do us full justice. Nothing could exceed his kindness to me on my arrival here, and at our various interviews since.

The business of the foreign office is now carried on by Mr. von Philipsborn and Count von Limburg-Stirum, who takes the place of Mr. von Radowitz, during his leave of absence.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 256. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 256.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, November 17, 1879. (Received December 1.) No. 67.]

Sir: Although other political matters, especially rumors regarding an alliance between the German Empire and Austria-Hungary, have taken the leading place in the public mind of late, there are frequent evidences of the fact that the monetary policy of the empire is by no means escaping public attention.

The newspapers now report that the Bavarian Government, which, when it presented its budget, had decided to coin only 21,988 marks of gold for the coming year, has stated that the condition of affairs has changed since then; that it has been found impossible to recirculate the silver thaler (3 marks) pieces as was anticipated; and that, therefore, an additional 1,000 pfund of gold must be coined.

Commenting upon this report, a Berlin journal of liberal views in politics expresses the belief that the Prussian Government will have to follow this example of Bavaria.

In the Saxon Landtag, an effort, it is stated, has just been made to pass a resolution asking the German Bundesrath (federal council) to reintroduce the double monetary standard. The supporters of the resolution pointed to the depreciation in the value of silver in mines in consequence of its demonetization, as a reason for the adoption of their motion; and it was stated, as a proof of this, that the yearly produce of the Freiberg mines has fallen off to the extent of about one million marks.

The chamber of commerce for Schweinitz and Waldenburg has petitioned the Landtag in favor of the remonetization of silver, urging as a reason the injustice of paying debts with a depreciated coinage. It is argued by the press that this is virtually a plea for the reintroduction of the old single and silver standard. A report of the Saxon Institute of Engineering (Sachsische Maschinen-bauanstalt) concludes with a request to support the Imperial chancellor in his views regarding the monetary question, and thus to counteract the mischievous effects of the schemes of doctrinaire political economists.

From these utterances it will be seen that the matter has by no means been dropped, but that it continues to elicit much consideration on both sides.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 257. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 257.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, November 18, 1879. (Received December 10.) No. 69.]

Sir: You have doubtless been cognizant of the many reports which have found their way into the public prints regarding a recent remarkable change in European international relations; a change by which alliances, binding together two of the great European powers for more than sixty years, have apparently been suddenly shattered, and intimate relations established between powers which, during one hundred and forty years, have regarded each other always with distrust and sometimes with hatred. The reports of this change have not only awakened deep and general interest in this capital, but in all countries in any way related to Europe.

Now, that the lapse of time has in some measure cleared the air of mere rumor, I send you the following account of the events in which these reports originated, with such conclusions as, from my intercourse with official and diplomatic persons, I judge to be warrantable.

Close as may have been the understanding between the Prussian and Russian Governments since 1812, a feeling of distrust has long been growing between the two peoples. I became aware of this as long ago as 1855–’56, when I was attached to the United States legation at St. Petersburg; for although at that time the friendship between the two governments was so close that abuse was lavished upon the Prussian sovereign by the English and French press, and although the Emperor Alexander, in his first reception of the diplomatic body, took especial pains to dwell upon the warmness of the friendship between himself and the Prussian King, it was not less evident that the thorough Russians greatly disliked Germany and the German element in their government, which, by its thrift and vigor, had taken such a great share of Russian positions of profit and honor. On the other hand, the thorough German, while he had no such personal dislike to Russia, naturally distrusted that Russian influence which, from the days of the Holy Alliance, had opposed the entire forward movement in his own country.

The Berlin treaty of 1878 rendered this chronic trouble acute. The organs of Russian panslavism, in discussing that treaty, declared that it utterly failed to recognize the Russian friendliness toward Prussia in the wars of 1866 and 1870 and the Russian victories over the Turks in 1877. Prince Bismarck, it was said, was to blame for this—he, it was alleged, having at the conference given the support of Germany to Austria and England rather than to Russia. Thus began a series of journalistic attacks upon Germany more vigorous than any hitherto known. As the provisions of the treaty were carried into effect, and Austria, which had remained peaceful, was seen to be receiving fruits of victories which had cost Russia so dear, these utterances became more and more bitter. That they were subdued at intervals, was probably due to the protests of the German Government.

That the old kindly feeling between the heads of the two empires still continued, was evident at the interview between the Emperors at Alexandrowno in the beginning of September; but it is now seen that personal considerations were not to determine the course of events. Last summer, when it was announced that the German chancellor was about to visit Vienna, the panslavistic press was aroused to new activity.

Immediately before the visit was actually paid, political Europe was startled by the report of a conversation between the Russian chancellor, Prince Gortschakoff, then at Baden-Baden, and a correspondent of a French newspaper. In this report, the truth of which has never been really denied, the Russian chancellor is represented as paying compliments to France, as urging her to be strong, as insisting upon the necessity of her maintaining her position in Europe, and as assuring her of the friendship of Russia.

Although the growing ill-feeling of the Russian people, if the tone of their journals maybe taken as a criterion, might have prepared the public mind for some such expressions, these utterances, of the Russian chancellor created great astonisment. People generally began to see in this conversation confirmation of an idea which has for a long time been prevalent, viz, that the German chancellor had been thwarted in his plans for a second war against France in 1875 by the resistance of the Russian chancellor, and that personal ill-will had, in consequence, grown up between these two statesmen.

A fortnight afterward, that is, toward the close of September last. Prince Bismarck went to Vienna. The cordiality with which he was received by the Emperor and Count Andrassy, who was just at that time about to hand over his authority as premier to Baron Haymerle, and the enthusiasm with which the populace greeted him, were eagerly commented upon in every political circle. It soon became understood that an alliance between Germany and Austria-Hungary had been completed. As regards internal affairs, it was hailed with joy by liberals of every shade in Germany as putting an end to that Russian influence which, in their opinion, had been so injurious for many generations. As regards external affairs, it was received by all parties as another great step toward the consolidation of German-speaking peoples against Panslavism, and, therefore, as giving strength to German ideas and a more peaceable development to German civilization. That such an alliance had been concluded, seems to me beyond doubt; and, from very high sources in this capital, I have obtained the following information regarding its general character. The document signed by the German chancellor and the Austro-Hungarian minister insures—first, a union for the execution of the Berlin treaty; secondly, a mutual defensive alliance against attacks from any side; thirdly, the conclusions of a new commercial treaty. It is also understood that a stipulation was agreed to at Vienna that a notification of this alliance should be immediately sent to the Russian Government. To the policy involved in this, however, the German Emperor had very strong objections; and it was not until the German chancellor and his ministers had, with the greatest efforts, satisfied the Emperor of the necessity of the alliance, that his majesty gave his consent. In response, the Russian Government declare, in general terms, that, so far as they are concerned, the alliance is purposeless, since Russia is, and has steadily been, determined to carry the Berlin treaty into execution.

The first result was a cloud of rumors of war. An acknowledged authority assured me at that time that, in his belief, a general European war would begin early next spring. The argument was, war must come sooner or later, and every one feels that, relatively, Germany is stronger now than she may be a few years hence. But opinion rapidly changed, and there now seems a general impression that the new alliance has done much to strengthen the prospects of a continuance of peace. Russia, it is believed, will never attack Germany and Austria, with whom England would then be leagued, without powerful alliances; and to secure these further diplomatic action and the lapse of considerable time are indispensable.

During the past week, however, events have occurred which throw, temporarily at least, some cloud over this opinion. Evidences are not wanting of a lamentable lack of good feeling between the Russian and German frontier authorities. The Russian officials at Kowno have, it appears, for several years past, refused to allow German steamers to ply on that part of the river Memen which flows through Russia, although the German authorities have permitted Russian steamers to ply on the Memen in Germany. The Russian Government has declared that the authorities at Kowno have ignored its instructions; but as the prohibition has continued, the German minister of commerce and industry has, with the sanction of the German Imperial foreign office, given orders that, from the 11th instant, the permission hitherto accorded the Russian steamers to ply on the German Memen should be withdrawn. This action of the frontier officials may be merely the result of local and personal prejudice; but it is none the less significant, and affords by no means the only proof that these events have aroused among some persons, high in authority in this empire, a very deep sense of what is due to the honor of the German nation.

Any one conversant with the history of the relations between Russia and Prussia is well aware that, in days gone by, such treatment of Prussian commerce would not have elicited any such energetic reprisals. Stress also is laid by many upon certain facts regarding the recent visit of the heir apparent to the Russian throne. He arrived in this city on Sunday morning last on his way to St. Petersburg; his approach was well known, and public prints of all shades, almost without exception, contained articles of a friendly character. But there was one marked exception. The “Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung,” generally known as the organ of the chancellor, not only contained not a word of welcome, but had a selected leading article, pointing out the good which would result from the Austro-German alliance against panslavism. In a country where matters of official etiquette and courtesy are so carefully weighed this naturally produces a strong impression.

While no one can doubt that the logical result of this German-Austrian alliance is a league which shall embrace England, the best opinion here just now seems to be that great care is taken by the German Government to avoid any appearances of any such league at present. It is believed here by persons who seemed to me well worthy of confidence that the present English Government has already, in its Turkish policy, presumed too much on an immediate prospect of such an alliance. There seems to be a strong desire on the part of those in power here to have it understood that the alliance made at Vienna is strictly what it claims to be, that is, one between the two German speaking nations with reference to dangers which may beset them, and that it shall not be developed into anything more offensive to Russia than it now is. It is felt that the Emperor of Germany, in view of his close personal connection with the Russian Imperial family, has gone quite as far as he can be expected to go; that his sacrifice of personal feeling is very great, and that he would oppose the idea of pressing this policy any further than is absolutely necessary, or making this change in the time-honored political alliance of Prussia and Russia anymore unpleasant to Russia than it is at present.

It was doubtless this feeling that made the recent reception by him of the heir to the Russian crown especially hearty. The chancellor remained at Varzin, and did not visit Berlin at all; the German Crown Prince remained in Italy; but the Emperor himself, and all immediately about him, took evident pains to remove any impression that anything like coolness had grown up between the chiefs of these two great nations.

These feelings of the honored head of this empire of course do not change the essential nature of the new alliance; at most they can only defer for a time its logical consequences. If persisted in, it cannot fail to draw England eventually within its scope.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 258. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 258.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, January 5, 1880. (Received January 23.) No. 75.]

Sir: A day or two since I received a call from Baron George von Bunsen, member of the Imperial Diet, and a gentleman held in the very highest esteem throughout Germany, during which he pressed me very strongly to urge upon our government the importance of the International Fishery Exposition, to be held in Berlin in April of the present year. He laid before me statements which convince me that it will be an exceedingly interesting and valuable collection, and that a body of men will be brought together whose papers and discussions will considerably increase the practical knowledge of the best means of creating, improving, and maintaining fisheries in various parts of the world.

He said to me that all interested in the subject here were anxious, above all things, that our own country should take part in such an exposition, and that we now rank as the first as regards progress in this department. He thought what we could send from the Smithsonian Institution especially, under charge of Professor Baird, would be highly honorable to the country and of great benefit to the world at large, while we ourselves would receive in return very valuable information.

His main wish was that an effort be made to induce Congress to take the necessary steps to send Professor Baird, or other suitable person or persons, with such parts of our collections as shall be judged most proper to represent us in this respect.

I called his attention to the short time remaining to us, and told him that I feared it was too late to get the required action. He said that if the action were taken by the end of Februrary it would be ample time. To this I answered, that this was a very short time indeed in which to carry through a measure of this sort, but that I would lay the matter before you.

I have also the honor to inclose a letter from Mr. von Bunsen to Mr. Secretary Schurz on this subject, with his request that it be delivered to its proper address.

I should hesitate to bring to your notice a communication of this sort, were it not that Mr. von. Bunsen assures me that the foreign office will shortly forward a dispatch in addition to the one already sent to the German minister at Washington, and that an effort is being made to induce the chancellor, Prince Bismarck, to interest himself earnestly in the matter.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 259. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 259.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, January 12, 1880. (Received January 26.) No. 78.]

Sir: Having been notified through the department of foreign affairs that the vice-chancellor, Count Stolberg-Wernigerode (the Imperial chancellor, Prince Bismarck, being still ill at Varzin), desired to see me, I called upon him this noon, and found him very anxious regarding the representation of the United States at the approaching fishery exposition at Berlin, concerning which I wrote you on the 5th instant (dispatch No. 75). He assured me that the government was exceedingly desirous that the United States be represented at this exposition, and that the Emperor and Crown Prince take a deep personal interest in its success, and regard the representation of our country as of the utmost importance. I stated to him the difficulties in the way, but told him I would telegraph immediately, which I have done, and that I felt authorized to assure him that everything that could be done by the administration would be done. I added that the main difficulty lies in the fact that the exposition opens on the 20th of April next, and that to get any legislation by Congress takes considerable time, but that if anything can be done to surmount these difficulties it will be done.

It is very clear to me that the government here feel very deeply interested in the matter.

The success of the exposition of the Berlin industries last year has, I think, aroused an earnestness here in such matters which has never before been felt.

Moreover, it is now, I believe, beyond question * * * that the United States is not at all likely to be called upon to send any delegation to a universal exposition here for many years to come.

I may add that, in addition to the high personages mentioned by the vice-chancellor to me this noon, a very large number of influential persons in the Imperial Diet, and in various positions of trust and honor throughout the country, take a deep interest in the success of the exposition. I feel, too, apart from all other considerations, that were the United States to take part in such an exposition it would not be without its influence in continuing the present very happy relations between the two countries, and the kindly feeling shown by the present government to the United States in all questions arising between them.

I inclose herewith (with a translation) a memorandum which was handed to me by the vice-chancellor at the interview of to-day.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure in No. 78.—Translation.]

German Fishery Association to Mr. White.

memorial.

The German Piscicultural Society, under the protection of His Imperial and Royal Highness, the Crown Prince, intends holding an international exhibition of fish and fishing appliances.

The undertaking has received the sanction of the protector, and, through the personal influence of His Highness, is in receipt of much aid from the state.

In consequence of the invitations issued by the Fishery Association large exhibits have already been promised, not only by European states, but also from other parts of the world.

According to information received by the association, contrary to former information on the subject, no part will be taken in this exhibition by the United States.

Considering the great importance of the fisheries of the United States, for the promotion of which, both through artificial means as well as fishways, for the erection of which the States give so much assistance, the non-participation in the exhibition would be greatly regretted; besides, the close relations existing between the German Fishery Association and the persons versed in the fish culture in the United States would make it all the more desirable that the necessary means should be provided for a collective exhibition, as has been secured by other states interested in fisheries.

The German Fishery Society has sought to express the great value it lays upon the participation of the United States in this exhibition through its readiness to extend the period for the reception of notices of participation, in order to reserve the necessary spaces.

In view of this, and the fact that the time fixed for the opening of the exhibition (April 20, 1880), it would seem desirable that the steps taken by the Goverment of the United States should be communicated by telegraph.

Berlin, January, 1880.

No. 260. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 260.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, January 23, 1880. (Received February 11.) No. 82.]

Sir: The project of a law laid yesterday before the Bundesrath (Federal Council) of the empire indicates that this government has decided to go still further in the military development of the nation.

Under this proposal, which will doubtless become a law, there will be added to the German army from the 1st of April next, of—

Infantry, eleven new regiments (eight Prussian, one Bavarian, two Saxon), and one additional battalion will be added to the regiment of the Grand Duchy of Hesse;

Field artillery, one regiment (Prussian) of eight batteries, and thirty-two batteries (twenty-four Prussian, four Bavarian, two Saxon, two Würtemberg) which will be added to the regiments already existing;

Lighter artillery, one regiment (Prussian);

Pioneers, one regiment (Prussian).

The German army will thus be strengthened by about 30,000 men and 300 guns; and the number of men under arms during peace will, in future, be about 427,270.

An especially noteworthy feature in the proposal is one under which all men who were exempted from military service and enrolled in the reserve shall be drilled a total number of twenty weeks at four different periods. Thus a large number of men hitherto undrilled will be instructed and prepared to enter actual service in time of need.

The project makes an estimate of the cost of these additions and changes as follows: Immediate outlay, 26,713,166 marks; and the yearly outlay for their maintenance, 17,116,242 marks.

It is evident from this step on the part of the Imperial Government that all hopes of the slightest diminution of the enormous European standing armies must be given up for some years to come, and that Count von Moltke’s famous remark, to the effect that for the next fifty years Germany must make constant exertions to consolidate her power and maintain her recent acquisitions, embodies a truth which all other nations have to bear in mind.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 261. Mr. Evarts to Mr. White. No. 261.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State,
Washington, January 28, 1880. No. 66.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 75, of the 5th instant, in relation to the interview of Baron George von Bunsen, a member of the Imperial Diet, with you, on the subject of the International Fishery Exposition to be held at Berlin in April next, and also the receipt of your telegrams dated the 12th and 24th instant, informing this Department of the anxiety of the German Government to have the United States participate in the exposition in question.

In reply, I have to inform you that this Department has taken active measures to promote the object to which your dispatch and telegrams above mentioned relate, by communications to the appropriate committees of Congress, setting forth the importance of having this country represented at the Berlin Exposition, and recommending the speedy appropriation of a sufficient sum for that purpose, and also recommending that the legislation upon the subject shall provide that the Commissioner of Fish and Fisheries shall have authority to represent the United States at the exposition in person, or by a suitable delegate, to be nominated and appointed by the Secretary of State. I may observe that Professor Baird has expressed the belief that if a sufficient appropriation is made by Congress, available not later than the 12th proximo, it will be practicable to have the United States creditably represented at the approaching International Fishery Exposition at Berlin.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 262. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 262.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, February 2, 1880. (Received February 24.) No. 87.]

Sir: I regret to state that there seems to be a revival here of the sale of diplomas purporting to be issued by an institution of learning in the United States.

Some weeks since a Mr. Pappenheim brought me a diploma, engrossed upon parchment in very handsome style, and issued nominally by “the American University at Philadelphia,” conferring the degree of doctor of medicine upon one Christopher Schütz, living, as I understand it, at Leipzig. It would appear that the diploma was offered to Schütz upon condition of his paying a sum of money for it. It bears the signatures of a number of persons claiming to be professors in the aforesaid university, at the head of them being the signature of “John Buchanan, M. D.” Schütz desired the legation to give him a declaration of its genuineness and value, which I refused to do.

One peculiar feature of the diploma was that, although evidently entirely new and recently issued, it was dated 1872.

About ten days since another and more serious case was brought to my notice. The judicial authorities at Prenzlau forwarded a copy, which I inclose, of a diploma issued by the same alleged institution, to Paul Christopli Erdmann Volland, and signed by a faculty, at the head of which appears the same name of “John Buchanan, M. D.” The authorities at Prenzlau asked the legation regarding the genuineness of the diploma and the standing of the institution, it being with them a question whether Volland could be allowed to practice his profession under such a diploma.

After looking through the correspondence on record in this legation (a memorandum of which is inclosed), and seeking in vain for the name of the institution in the list of colleges and universities published by the Bureau of Education in the Department of the Interior, at Washington, my answer was unfavorable to Volland’s claim.

From the correspondence above referred to, I find that attempts have been made by the legislature of Pennsylvania for the suppression of this nuisance, but that, after all, it is a question whether these attempts have been successful, and whether the institution has not still a legal existence.

This being the case, I would respectfully suggest that the matter be brought to the notice of the Commissioner of Education in the Department of the Interior at Washington, and that he forward me any documents or information in his possession regarding the subject.

* * * * * * *

That such cases as these have brought disgrace upon the American system of advanced education and upon the American name in general is certain. This has been recently revealed to me incidentally in a curious way.

In a very successful play now running at the Royal Theater in this city, a play written, strangely enough, by a judge of one of the highest tribunals in the empire, one of the characters, in casting a reflection upon another, who is dignified with the title of doctor, declares a belief that the latter had simply bought his degree in America; and in a recent novel by a popular author here, the scoundrel of the book, having escaped justice in Germany, goes to America., and is, at last advices, very comfortably settled and practicing medicine with a sham diploma, which he has bought for money. All this, of course, is of no especial significance in this case, save as it shows that the fair fame of our country has been and can be injured in the minds of a large number of people, even by such contemptible transactions as those herein referred to.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Note.—The appendices mentioned are omitted from the present publication.]

No. 263. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 263.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, February 12, 1880. (Received March 1.) No. 89.]

Sir: I had the honor to receive this morning your telegraphic dispatch as follows: Inform Fishery Exposition Commission that United States participates. Appropriation twenty thousand dollars. Three to five hundred meters space desired by us. Telegraph how much will he allowed.

I immediately went to the minister of agriculture and obtained the information desired, and have just telegraphed you as follows: General satisfaction at American participation. Five hundred meters assigned. Government desires greatly, besides other things, samples of fishery products, and fresh fish, living or packed in ice.

To explain the latter part of this telegram, I take the liberty of inclosing a letter to Professor Baird, of the Smithsonian Institution.

I may here also reiterate the statement of the telegram regarding the feeling in government circles here at the decision of the United States Government. At the recent festivities at court, and in private circles, I have had occasion to meet many influential men, and they have invariably expressed very great satisfaction.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure in No. 89.]

Mr. White to Professor Baird.

American Legation,
Berlin, February 12, 1880.

My Dear Sir: Under instructions from Mr. Evarts, just received, I have to-day visited the Department of Agriculture, &c., here, and found that the space allotted to the United States at the International Fishery Exposition here in April is to be up to 500 square meters. There is also space assigned us in a separate pavilion for fishery products “of an unpleasant nature,” such as fish guano, &c.

In talking with the officials here charged with the matter, they express a strong desire to have, in addition to other things, such as fish-ways, models, drawings, &c., “specimens of living fish or fresh fish packed in ice.” They understand, of course, perfectly, that it will be very difficult, if not impossible, to send fresh fish; but I merely mention the matter to you.

It occurs to me that it might be an admirable thing to send you, if there were time, some barrels of the wonderful new preservative fluid invented by the curator of the university collection here, and which is now coming into very general use in Germany. You have doubtless heard of it, possibly have tried it. The German Government has paid a large sum for the use of it, and it is furnished at a low price. There seems to be no mistake as to its great value in preserving zoological specimens in the most perfect condition for demonstration and use. I have seen in the university collection fish, animals of various sizes, serpents, insects, parts of the human system, in large numbers, which, having been a month, three months, six months, and even two years ago injected with this simple preparation, or dipped for a short time in it, are preserved in perfect order, perfectly flexible, looking, indeed, as if killed only an hour ago; not the slightest unpleasant smell, the preparation itself not betraying its composition by any odor whatever. Neither need the substances remain in the fluid; they are simply soaked in it, then laid away on shelves, ready for use when wanted.

Prof. Dubois Reymond informs me that there is no doubt as to the great value of the preparation. I may mention that I saw the skeletons of large animals among them, the articulation perfectly preserved by the use of this fluid—no wiring or springs used. I will consult the minister and some of the professors to-day, if possible, and if, on the whole, it is judged advisable, will send some of it to you. By the way, I may mention, too, that the antennae of delicate insects were preserved by the fluid in such a condition that the insects, perfectly dry, could be taken, and the antennas doubled and handled without the slightest danger of breaking; that the legs and wings could be stretched out and put back just as if the animal had been freshly killed.

The German officials also speak o£ their great desire to have samples of every sort of commercial product which will represent our great exportation in this department.

* * * * * * *

The satisfaction at our decision to take part in the exposition is very great indeed. The commission, and especially yourself, will be most heartily received here; from the Imperial family and the chancellor of the empire down, there is a feeling of very great interest in the whole matter. Preparations are well under way to have the exposition very beautiful as well as useful. Some of the foremost artists in Berlin are employed in painting large views of the most beautiful coast and river scenes of Europe for the great central pavilion. These, as I understand, will surround the interior of this pavilion, and will be seen by the spectator over the ponds, and through grottoes, as it were, in the distance. I need not say to you that it will give me very great pleasure to co-operate with you to the extent of my ability.

Of course the most valuable elements in our exhibit will be the practical things; but I cannot but express an earnest hope that the beautiful collection of models which I saw at Philadelphia may be represented as fully as possible here. I confess to you, my dear sir, that my national pride is considerably aroused in the matter, and it seems to me that we can easily, even at this late day, outstrip the other nations.

I remain, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 264. Mr. Evarts to Mr. White. No. 264.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State,
Washington, February 18, 1880. No. 69.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatches, giving an account of the strong desire manifested by the German Government and by the leading personages at the court and in society that the United States should be represented at the approaching Fishery Exposition. My telegram of the 11th instant advised you of the favorable action taken by Congress in regard to the matter. Your reply by cable, dated the 12th instant, was communicated, at once, to Professor Baird. At his suggestion the President has appointed Mr. George Brown Goode deputy commissioner to the Berlin Fishery Exposition. That gentleman entered upon the duties of his office on the 16th instant, and is engaged in pushing forward the preparations for the United States exhibit as rapidly as possible, and I feel assured that no efforts will be spared to render it useful and instructive and in every respect creditable to this Government. The favorable issue of the exertions made by this Department to secure the participation of the United States in the exposition is very gratifying to me, in view of the fact that our partaking in it will unquestionably do much to strengthen the present good feeling between the two governments.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 265. Mr. Evarts to Mr. White. No. 265.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State,
Washington, March 12, 1880. No. 76.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 87, of the 2d ultimo, in relation to spurious diplomas issued by a so-called “American University at Philadelphia,” and reporting the injury which the practice of issuing such diplomas is doing to the reputation of our country in Germany.

In reply, I have to inform you that I have communicated copies of your dispatch and of its inclosures to the Secretary of the Interior, with an expression of the hope that it may be found practicable to devise measures, through the Bureau of Education, or otherwise, for the effectual suppression of the practice in question.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 266. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 266.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, March 15, 1880. (Received April 1.) No. 97.]

Sir: Supplementing my dispatch (No. 82) of January 23, last, I have the honor to inform you that, on the 9th instant, at the first sitting of the Reichstag committee on the bill extending and modifying the provisions of the Imperial military law of May 2, 1874, a discussion occurred which materially enhances the importance of the measure. The sitting lasted five hours, and was exclusively occupied with the first paragraph of the bill, which fixes the peace strength of the army at 427,274 men instead of at 1 per cent, of the population of Germany in 1874 (as during the last six years), for the seven years from April 1, 1880, to April 1, 1888.

The minister of war, and gentlemen who represent the government, stated that a material point in favor of the German troops at the outbreak of the war in 1870 was their numerical superiority over the French, who, at that time, had only 260,000 combatants: but that since then the French army has become larger than that of Germany. Each army has been increased by about 143,000 men. In the case of France, however, where the period of military service is longer, the army on a war footing outnumbers the German army on a similar footing by at least 200,000 men. To this must be added the advantage France possesses in having fewer large fortresses to garrison, making the total superiority of the French army 250,000 men. In this comparison the possibility of a Franco-Russian alliance is, of course, not taken into account. It was further remarked by the representatives of the war office, that, although there is no imminent danger of war, Germany has no right to suppose the present situation of Europe a normal one; that the strength of Germany’s neighbors is based on the permanency of their military organization, and that it is the duty of the German Government, without any reference to immediate dangers—be they great or small—so to organize its army that the difference in numbers shall, as far as possible, be obliterated.

It was shown that the increase in the percentage of the peace footing which the government now asks for represents an increase of 100,000 men in the war strength; that the calling in for drill of the ersatz or additional reserve represents another such increase; and that a similar number will be obtained from the lengthening of the time of landwehr service; so that, compared with the war strength under the present law, the new bill will give a virtual increase of 300,000 men in the future war strength of the German army. It was insisted that this is the smallest additional burden which, in the face of the present condition of Europe, should be laid upon the German people. It was pointed out, in reply to a remark by one of the representatives of the opposition, that the nominal strength of the regiments in France, as well as the effective strength of the French army, surpasses the German army in time of peace by 30,000 men, and that the German landsturm cannot by any means compare in effectiveness with the French “territorial army.”

On Friday last, paragraph 2 of the bill which increases the nominal strength of the cadres, and paragraph 3, by which the ersatz Reserves are to be called out to drill four times, the first time for twelve weeks, the second for four weeks, and the last two for two weeks each, were adopted.

The ersatz Reserves, I may explain, consist of the young men who, on account of some minor physical defect, and of those who, because they form the surplus created by the paragraph of the law of 1874, which required, as recruits, a percentage of the then population only, have been debarred from entering the regular army. It was stated, among other things, by the military representatives before the committee, on Friday, that the frontier from Verdun to Belfort was, on the French side, at distances of from 6 to 10 kilometers, studded with forts armed with from 35 to 100 cannon of the heaviest caliber.

With the view, doubtless, of giving additional support, if any were needed, to the proposal of the government, the semi-official Nord-deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung published, on the 13th instant, an article instituting a comparison between the military and naval expenditures of the great European powers. This article, which mentions as its authorities various official publications of the countries referred to, contains the following interesting table:

Financial, military, and naval expenditures.

Countries. Years. Marks.

Russia 1879 633,900,000

France 1880 747,300,000

Great Britain 1879–’80 524,600,000

Germany 1879–’80 460,000,000

Italy 1879 243,200,000

1879 224,200 000

In France, the article points out, the taxes to cover the military and naval expenditures amount to 19.9 marks per head of the population$ in Great Britain to 15.3; in Germany to 10.3; in Italy to 8.7; in Russia to 7.9, and in Austria-Hungary to 5.8.

In the above calculation the following items are included under the head of military and naval expenditure: Ordinary and extraordinary expenses; the ordinary including the pension lists, which are in part sometimes included in the national debt estimates.

The whole of the military pensions are not included in the Russian and Austro-Hungarian calculations, and as regards Great Britain, it should be remarked that the Indian military budget, which amounts to nearly as much as that for the home country, is not included. The German military and naval budget for 1879–’80 was made up of the following items:

Marks.

Army 331,184,910

Navy 25,122,780

Pensions 16,987,502

Invalid fund 33,015,879

Total ordinary 396,311,071

Extraordinary 63,728,259

Total 460,039,320

After pointing out that the calculations above given are modified somewhat by the variations in the purchasing power of money in the countries referred to, which is lowest in England and highest in Russia, the article expresses its conclusions as follows: Taking into consideration these facts, and remembering also that Germany’s military position, surrounded as she is by five other great powers, is one of particular difficulty and danger, it must be admitted that our military budget is not by any means extravagant, and that, while we regret with all lovers of peace that it cannot be reduced, measures must be taken to add to our military efficiency.

I send these official figures in connection with the recent utterances in the Reichstag committee as giving new proof that the emulation between the great European powers in piling up military armaments shows no sign of cessation. It continues, and doubtless will increase. “The end is not yet.” An end can be made in one of two ways: either by great statesmanlike measures for the general disarmament of Europe (and this, judging from the tone of society here, enters into the thoughts of no leading minds at present), or by a war which shall settle the main international questions now at issue and give Europe a chance to rest for a time, with diminished armies.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 267. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 267.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, March 20, 1880. (Received April 8.) No. 100.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose a report relating to unclaimed estates in Germany and the laws affecting them, made at my request by Mr. Chapman Coleman, the second secretary of this legation. We have yearly a large number of applications from various parts of the United States, for information or aid regarding great estates in Germany supposed to be waiting for heirs. They are all more or less indefinite, many sad, and some ludicrous.

Mr. Coleman appears to have studied the matter very thoroughly, and it occurs to me that, were his report printed, it might save the Department and this legation considerable correspondence and many of our fellow-citizens the heart sickness which comes from hope long deferred.

I have, &c.,

AND, D. WHITE

[Inclosure in No. 100.]

Mr. Coleman to Mr. White.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, March 20, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor, pursuant to your instructions, to submit the following report upon the applications made to this legation by persons in the United States for assistance in obtaining possession of interests in estates in Germany to which they suppose themselves entitled, and upon the German laws bearing upon the subject of inheritance.

An investigation of the archives of this legation shows that there have been many hundreds of such applications, and that the legation has almost invariably written to the applicants advising them as seemed best, and giving its personal attention to their business when it conveniently could, and when the data furnished made it possible to do so. In many instances a circular, which had been prepared for the purpose, was sent in reply to these communications, informing the writers where the locality of the supposed estate could be made out; that the nearest consul of the United States would be permitted by his instructions to attend to private business when he could do so without detriment to his official duties, and advising them to apply to him, making proper provision for expenses.

In the great majority of eases, however, it was apparent that the claim, if it ever had been good, was long since barred by limitation. In most instance the dates, localities, names of testators or others from whom the estates were supposed to be derived, if given at all, were so imperfectly stated that any effort to ascertain even that such estates existed or had existed seemed hopeless. Names as common here as Smith, Brown, and Jones are in the United States were often given, without baptismal names, as those of persons under whom estates valued at from one hundred and sixteen millions down to as many hundreds of thousands of dollars, and accruing as far back as fifty, eighty, one hundred or two hundred years, were claimed. These communications often disclose the fact that the hopeful claimants are generally very poor, and, misled no doubt frequently by designing persons seeking employment as agents or attorneys, had repeatedly expended considerable sums of money to prosecute their extravagant claims. In all the cases, at all of the nature described, which have been investigated by the legation at Berlin, it has been, it is believed invariably, ascertained that the claims were utterly without foundation.

While with us an administration with its full inventories of personal and real estate, its accounts of sales of both classes of property, its lists of debts due to and by the estate of the deceased, its preliminary and final accountings before the probate court, its releases, &c., all recorded at length, and readily accessible to the public at large gratis or upon payment of a small fee, is the almost universal rule, here it is the great exception. This constitutes a serious embarrassment to the investigator at the outset, although the vast saving of labor and expense which is accomplished by allowing those interested in the estate to settle the inheritance among themselves amicably, as they do in the vast majority of cases, may perhaps be regarded as a more than adequate compensation for such inconvenience. Perhaps the only resort to a court that is absolutely necessary is when the heir desires to obtain the transfer to his name on the land register (Grund-Buch) of the real estate he inherits, which is accomplished by presenting the certificate of heirship obtained from the court to the custodian of the register.

Among the living the title to land is conveyed absolutely when grantor and grantee appear together before the official in charge of the appropriate land register, and the former consenting to the transfer to the latter, the entry of the transfer is actually made. (See Prussian “Gesetz über Eigentliums-Erwerb” of May 5, 1872, § 2; for full information on this subject, see Alex. Achilles’ Prussian “Gesetz uber Grund Eigenthum und Hypotheken-Recht” of May 5, 1872, published by Gutentag, Berlin.)

As regards wills, a will to be valid according to Prussian law must have been deposited with a court during the lifetime of the testator. There is, however, an exception as regards the Rhenish province; there a will written entirely in the testator’s handwriting, and subscribed by him (holographic will), is valid without having been so deposited. Certified copies of the will are furnished on demand to all persons materially interested, and to all lawyers acting in a professional capacity. The will may pass the entire estate with the exception of the duty portion (Pflichttheil), a portion of the estate due to the children; in the absence of such, to parents; and always to husband or wife, the proportion due to each varying according to the number thus inheriting. A child cannot be disinherited except for certain grave offenses against the testator. (See Märcher’s Nachlassregalirung [Regulation of Inheritance] for Prussia, published by R. von Decker, Berlin 1879.)

The will is opened by the court upon the motion, supported by a certificate of the death of the testator, of any interested person, and its contents are made known to all who are named in it as heirs or legatees. If no motion to open the will is made, and the fact of the testator’s death be notorious to the court, it opens the will six weeks after the testator’s death, ex officio.

When fifty-six years since the deposit of the will have elapsed, and the death of the testator has not been brought to the knowledge of the court, the supposed heirs are solicited by public advertisement to apply for publication. This step is taken upon the legal theory that the testator is dead, the fourteen years at which maturity for making a will is reached, together with the fifty-six, making “three score and ten,” the assumed limit of life. If publication is not applied for, the court opens the will six months later to see if charitable institutions are mentioned as heirs or legatees. If found, these are then called upon to ascertain whether the testator be dead or living; the will is then closed again for the time being, with the seal of the court.

When the fact of the testator’s death has been established, or when he has been declared dead after public summons by the court (the Amst-court), which can be done upon the motion of any interested person when the testator has not been heard of for a period of ten years, the will is reopened and published.

In case there is no will, the husband or wife and relations by blood must submit their claims to the court of the district in which the death occurred. A claim to the inheritance must be substantiated in accordance with the provisions of the Prussian statute of March 13, 1869 (Gesetzsammlung No. 25, page 473).

A certificate of heirship must be issued by the court to the person whose title to the inheritance appears to the court to be made out. The claimant must furnish adequate proof of death; lie must solemnly make declaration, in lieu of oath, that heirs as near as or nearer in blood than himself are unknown to him, and that he is not aware of the existence of a will. If there be several heirs, this proof may, in the discretion of the court, be demanded of one or more or all of them. If the court deem further information necessary, an advertisement galling upon unknown heirs to submit their claims by a certain day, at least three months distant, and warning them that a certificate of heirship will be issued thereupon, may be, and in case no heirs come forward must be, inserted by the court in several newspapers and always in the Imperial Gazette at Berlin (Reichsanzeiger), a file of which should therefore be sought and consulted in case of need. If there is no response to this appeal, the state is entitled to regard the estate as derelict, and to enter into possession (§§ 4 and 25, Part II, Title 16, of the Prussian Landreeht).

If a rightful heir asserts his claims within the next thirty years, his title is acknowledged, but he must recognize as binding all transactions between the state or between a relative who may have lawfully taken possession in the mean while, and third persons (§ 27, ibid., and § 459, Part I, Title 9, of the Prussian Landrecht, and § 6 of the law of March 13, 1859, before referred to).

Possession by the state for thirty years under these circumstances, and also undisturbed possession by another for this period, gives a valid title. Sometimes in contested cases, or pending the search for an heir who cannot be found, an estate remains in the custody of a curator (Pfleger), appointed by the court; and during such period, which does not exceed a few years, the statute of limitation does not run. Consequently, this brief period, added to the thirty years, constitutes the entire period during which in any case the person in possession could be ousted by a new claimant, however good the claim of the latter may once have been.

Any inquiry into the existence even of an estate is useless unless the locality can be given with such particularity as to enable the investigator to apply to the appropriate probate or Amts-court, of both of which species of courts there are several hundreds in Prussia.

As regards those parts of Germany in which the French and Roman laws prevail, the law on the subject of this report is not essentially different.

It is remarked in this connection that all existing differences in the law on the subject of this report in the various parts of the German Empire will in all probability have disappeared within three or four years, as it is confidently expected that a general German civil code now being prepared will by that time have been completed and have attained the force of law.

It is stated, in conclusion, that so far as the legation has been able to ascertain, there are in Germany no large estates that for thirty or more years have been awaiting distribution to unknown heirs in the hands of the government or of anybody, and that all efforts to discover such estates that the legation has ever made or ever heard of have proved fruitless.

Wherever a court is mentioned herein, the probate court of the particular district is meant, unless the word is otherwise qualified.

Hoping that in the foregoing abstract of the law of inheritance in this country a sufficient test of the advisability of prosecuting a particular claim may have been furnished, and material afforded that may prove a useful guide to persons prosecuting well-founded claims, and referring for more detailed information to the laws and authorities hereinbefore cited,

I have, &c.,

CHAPMAN COLEMAN,
Second Secretary of Legation.

No. 268. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 268.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, April 12, 1880. (Received April 30.) No. 107.]

Sir: The news has doubtless reached you that on Tuesday last Prince Bismarck officially tendered to the Emperor his resignation of the chancellorship. As everything concerning the chancellor is of general interest, I hasten to inform you of the circumstances which, according to official communications to the newspapers, have led him to take this step.

At the sitting of the federal council on the 3d instant, the question of imposing a tax in the form of a stamp on post-office orders and remittances came up for discussion. A considerable number of the delegates, it appears, were absent$ but the representatives of Prussia, Saxony, and Bavaria, holding twenty-eight votes and representing thirty-three millions of the population of the empire, were present, and voted for the proposed tax. Opposed to it were the representatives of all the remaining states, possessing thirty votes, which, however, represented but seven and a half millions of the population. When, therefore, the question came to a vote, Prussia, Saxony, and Bavaria were outvoted by a majority of two, and the proposal was, for the time, lost.

This occurrence is quite within the letter of the constitution. The small states and principalities can, in the federal council, outvote the representatives of the large and powerful kingdoms of Prussia, Saxony, and Bavaria, though this is the first instance of such a vote being given, at least on a matter of importance. It now seems the wish of the chancellor to have it understood that in seizing this occasion to send in his resignation he desired to call public attention to what he considers a very grave fault in the constitution and one which needs speedy remedy.

The semi-official journals also complain of the unparliamentary system of voting which the members of the federal council have adopted. These have the right to delegate their votes to others, and thus a system of absenteeism has arisen extremely unfavorable to adequate consideration of the measures which the council is called to discuss. At the sitting of the 3d instant no fewer than thirteen states of the twenty-five forming the empire were represented by proxy, so that two of the representatives present possessed sixteen of the total of fifty-eight votes.

* * * * * * *

There is a very general expression throughout the German press in favor of some reform to prevent the recurrence of such a complication as that of the 3d instant. This is greatly strengthened by the Emperor’s reply to the chancellor, which appeared on Friday, and of which I inclose a copy with translation, declining to accept the resignation, and leaving it to the chancellor to propose such constitutional measures as may be necessary.

So far as relates to the immediate measure concerned, that of taxing post-office orders, there is no doubt that the vote will be modified to meet the chancellor’s views. A solution of the difficulties arising from voting by proxy is also easily possible; but the remaining question is a serious one, for it involves the breaking down of safeguards in the existing constitution which have been thought essential to the proper independence of the lesser states.

There is very little doubt that the German people, as a whole, would, by an immense majority, be willing to allow the representation in the federal council to be based upon population; but such a decision would hardly be acquiesced in by the ruling classes in the smaller states without very great pressure. This difficulty is already foreshadowed in the newspapers, no two of which seem to agree upon a remedy.

But there seems no doubt that matters will be so arranged that the chancellor may retain his office.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure in No. 107—Translation.]

Extract from National Zeitung, Berlin, April 9, 1880.

Berlin, April 7, 1880.

To your request of the 6th instant, I reply that I certainly do not ignore the difficulties which, by a conflict of your duties and responsibilities under the Imperial constitution, are imposed upon you; but I do not feel myself called upon to release you from your office because you believe that you are unable, in a certain case, to solve the problem presented to you by Articles 16 and 17 of the constitution. I must rather leave it to you to lay before me and the federal council proposals which shall be calculated to insure a constitutional solution of the conflicting duties referred to.

WILHELM.

To the Imperial Chancellor, Prince Bismarck.

No. 269. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 269.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, April 12, 1880. (Received April 30.) No. 109.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that by a bill, modifying Article IV of the coinage law of July 9, 1873, which Prince Bismarck, as chancellor of the empire, has just laid before the federal council, and which will doubtless soon become law, the total amount of silver coinage in Germany is to be increased from 10 marks per head of the population to 12 marks.

In the introduction to the bill, it is stated that the provisions of the article referred to were meant to be but temporary, and that it has now become apparent that the silver coined under the act of 1873 is insufficient for the needs of the people. It is further stated that, on December 31, 1878, and December 31, 1879, the amount of silver coin circulating in the German Empire was as follows:

1878. 1879.

Marks. Marks.

Prussia 226,017,302.10 230,200,060.10

Saxony 21,247,093.40 22,554,093.40

Bavaria, Wurttemberg, Baden, Hesse, Elsass-Lothringen 148,536,310.00 141,493,552.00

Total 395,800,705.50 394,247,705.50

Statistics are then given to show that the amount of silver coin now in circulation in Germany is not adequate to the demand, and England, where the silver in circulation amounts to 12s. per head, is referred to as a proof that Germany must add to her silver currency. The bill then calls attention to the safeguards against too large a supply of silver coinage, and adds that the proposed increase in the currency would give the washed-for opportunity to recoin the silver which has accumulated in the hands of the government since the suspension of the silver sales in May last, and which now amounts to 339,000 pounds (fine), and is valued at 31,000,000 marks.

In conclusion, it is remarked that as the 5-mark notes do not seem to be appreciated by the public, it is proposed to reduce their circulation from 46,122,210 marks, at which amount it stood in the middle of last February, to 40,000,000 marks.

From all this it appears that the German Government is gradually reverting to an extensive use of the silver which in 1873 it was supposed to have permanently discarded.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 270. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 270.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, April 12, 1880. (Received April 30.) No. 110.]

Sir: The subject of state railway management has attracted probably more attention in Germany within the last few years than any other, haying reference to purely internal administration. It is also naturally a subject which interests large numbers of thoughtful men in our own country; and this being the case, I have taken the liberty of sending a report made to me at my request by Dr. R. T. Ely, a fellow of Columbia College, New York, who for three years past has been making special studies in the principles of political economy as applied to the internal administration of Germany. Similar reports on other subjects have already been published by him, but it occurred to me to inclose this to the Department, that it may be within reach of any persons connected with our government who may wish a careful exhibit on the whole subject.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

a brief sketch of the railway history of germany.

introductory.

In some European countries railways were built according to a well-conceived plan to join and give a unity to the different parts of the state. This was the case in Belgium, where the government, early recognizing the importance of this new means of communication, decided, in 1834, to build a network of railways connecting the Scheldt with the Rhine and the Meuse. George Stephenson drew up the plan. Mechlin was the central point from which lines were to run in every direction. Work was immediately begun, and in 1835 the first Belgian railway was open for public use. The government continued the work until 1843, when 560 kilometers* had been completed, and lines ran from Mechlin to Antwerp, to the French frontier via Brussels, to the Russian boundary, and to Ostend. The effect of these new highways connecting the north, and the south, the east and the west of the kingdom was wonderful. In 1830, when Belgium rebelled against Holland and gained its independence, it was inferior to the latter as regards means of communication, and as a natural consequence as regards commerce. When the projected railway lines were completed, Belgium left Holland far behind, notwithstanding the excellent harbors and numerous canals of the Dutch. The young dynasty, by the energy and insight with which it had availed itself of this new source of power, consolidated its kingdom, which was threatening to fall apart, more lastingly than any mere jealousy of Holland could have done.

The development of the railway system of Germany was quite different. When the first railway was built, and for a long time afterward, there was no Germany, in the sense in which we use that word to-day. The Germans themselves say of their country—to be sure, with some exaggeration—that it was then but a geographical expression. This Germany, however, included real states—Prussia, Bavaria, Würtemberg, Saxony, Hanover, and many others of less importance. Each of these had its own plan, or sometimes no plan, of railway building, and were as regardless of what the other German states were doing as they were of the railway policies of foreign countries. Till the time of the formation of the North German Confederation, we have, therefore, to examine the railway question solely in individual states; but its history since 1867 must be looked at from three points of view: first, from that of the individual states; secondly, from that of the federation, and then, later on, of the empire; thirdly, from that which results from the relation of the individual states to the imperial power. As the railway history of the German states, except Prussia, is comparatively simple, it may be examined incidentally in our sketch of the railway history of Prussia. We will, finally, devote a few words to the influence of the empire upon the railway problem.

prussia.

The first German railway was built in 1835. It extended from Nuremberg to Fürth, and had a length of 6 kilometers. It was built, owned, and worked by a joint-stock company, as was also the the second German railway, the Leipzig and Dresden, of which 15 kilometers were finished in 1837. The first of these two railways lay wholly in Bavaria, the second in Saxony. The first concessions granted to railway companies by Prussia bear the date of 1837, and we may properly consider her railway history as beginning in that year. As early as 1833, however, concessions were sought for in vain. The government was again petitioned in 1835 for concessions, but again refused to grant them, under the plea that time was necessary to investigate the significance of a concession in all its bearings. The time required for reflection was so long that in 1837 Germany still had only its 21 kilometers of railway, whereas England had already 184 miles (English), more than ten times as much; Belgium, small as the country is, had 142 kilometers in running order; and the United States 1,843 miles, or nearly 3,000 kilometers. But if the Germans are rarely ahead in the beginning, they are not so seldom the winners of the race: lacking the swiftness of the hare, they do not want the plodding perseverance of the tortoise.

Between the 21st of August and the 13th of November, 1837, concessions were granted for four short railways, viz, the Berlin and Potsdam, the Magdeburg and Leipzig, the Düsseldorf and Elberfeld, and a part of the Rhenish Railway. In the following year, when only-one of the above-mentioned railways (the Berlin and Potsdam, 26.4 kilometers) was finished, the celebrated law of November 3, 1838, was enacted. This law, which is still valid, except in so far as certain parts have been rendered of no effect by subsequent legislation, formed the basis of all later Prussian railway laws, and is in many respects a model.

Its main points are as follows:

§§ 1 to 5. Every company having the intention of building a railway must apply to the ministry of commerce for a concession. The application must contain an exact statement of the principal points through which the road is to pass, and of the capital stock to be divided into shares. It must be accompanied by a plan of the road, stating clearly the manner in which the road is to be built, the materials to be used, the wagons, coaches, locomotives to be employed, &c.

If no objections on the score of safety, public interest, &c., are found against the plan after it has been carefully examined, the concession is granted and a time is fixed within which it must be shown that shares have been taken to the full amount of the capital stock, and the shareholders have met and framed the statutes of the company. The statutes are not valid unless approved of by the government. All those who subscribe for shares are unconditionally responsible for 40 percent, of the full amount. If afterwards the regular payments for the remaining 60 per cent. cease, the company has the choice either to prosecute the subscribers and force them to fulfill their obligations or to release them from the same under loss of the 40 per cent. already paid in. No share may be given out before the full nominal value for which it reads has been paid.

§ 6. Additional shares may not be emitted without the consent of the government. No loan may be contracted without the approval of the ministry of commerce, which has the right to oblige the company to establish a satisfactory sinking fund for the payment of capital and interest.

§ 8. The company has the right of expropriating such property as is necessary to render the road capable of fulfilling its functions as a public highway.

This paragraph is of importance (1) because it establishes the character of railways as essentially public and not private undertakings; (2) because it justifies expropriation only upon grounds of public welfare.

§ 24. The company is obliged to keep the road and all appurtenances in a condition which insures, as far as possible, safety in the transport of goods and passengers.

§ 25. The company is responsible for all damage to persons and goods, unless it can prove that the damage was in no wise the fault of the company. The weight of proof, it will be observed, lies with the company. The dangers necessarily connected with railways do not free the company from this obligation.

§ 26. The railway tariff must be made known to the government and published. Changes in the tariff are not allowed to be made without notifying the government and the public. In case the change increases the rates, it must be published at least six weeks before it comes into effect. All parties are to be treated alike without partiality.

§ 27. The minister of commerce has the right to allow a second company to use any railway track which has been open three years. For this use the second company must indemnify the first. This provision, which it was thought would effectually protect the public against railway monopolies, has, for obvious reasons, never proved practical.

§ 33. When the profits of any railway exceed 10 per cent, of the capital invested the passenger and goods tariff must be reduced until the annual profits are no longer in excess of 10 per cent.

§ 36. Railways are obliged to carry all postal sendings and to transport postal wagons free of charge.

§§ 38 to 40. All railways must pay a tax in proportion to their receipts. The state is to use the income derived from this tax (1) as indemnification for the loss of the government occasioned by the railways—the government had formerly a monopoly of the transport of passengers in connection with the postal service—(2) for the amortization of the capital employed in building the railway tracks. When this capital is completely amortized in case of any railway track, the receipts derived from said railway track shall not exceed the sum necessary to keep the same in repair and the cost of its administration; that is, that railway track would, in this case, become government property and be administered like a highway, from which the government raises sufficient toll to pay for keeping it in repair and to meet the expenses of administration.

§ 42. At the expiration of thirty years after the opening of any railway, the state has the right of purchasing it. In case the government and the railway can come to no other voluntary agreement, the company receives twenty-five times the average yearly amount of the dividends during the last five years.

§ 44. Before the expiration of thirty years after the opening of a railway, no concession may be granted to a parallel line.

This paragraph was repealed in 1867, by article 41 of the constitution of the North German Confederation. Finally the right is reserved of enacting such further laws as experience shall show to be necessary. Paragraph 33, which fixes the maximum of profits at 10 per cent., has never proved of practical value. Means have always been found of evading this provision of the law, as similar ones in Austria, England, and the United States have been evaded. Dividends of 20 per cent. have been declared in Prussia.

The statutes limit in some cases the number of votes allowed to any one shareholder, e. g., originally no shareholder of the Berlin, Potsdam and Magdeburg Railway was allowed more than twenty votes, although twenty votes represented a capital of only $15,000.

The functions which the above law accords to the minister of commerce have now fallen to the minister of public works, as the ministry of commerce has been recently divided into a ministry of commerce and a ministry of public works.

The law of November 3, 1838, presupposes a system of private railways. We might naturally expect that the prudence with which the Prussian Government weighs mew measures, would have led it to recognize the importance of railways; that this importance being recognized, it, ever jealous of its authority, would be unwilling to trust a rising power, destined soon to become tremendous in its might to private individuals. The wisest and most careful, however, did not have an adequate appreciation of the position which railways were soon to occupy in the world’s economy. But we find here as often elsewhere in political and economic science, an apparent anomaly. Private citizens and science have ever in Germany taken the initiative in urging the government to enlarge its sphere of action, so that it should include consistently all public highways, whether macademized or paved with iron rails. In Baden, Würtemberg, and Bavaria, all of which had a constitution, the railways were built and worked chiefly by the government from the beginning. In Prussia, then an absolute monarchy, the government took no active part in railway building and management, until she also became a constitutional monarchy. It has been hinted that large capitalists and members of the stock exchange, who naturally desired private railways, were able to exert a more effective influence upon the government, when it was obliged to render no account to parliamentary bodies. It may be doubted, however, that the capitalists at Berlin have ever had power enough to direct the policy of government, though it appears undoubted that their brothers at Paris played an important rôle in France in deciding the contest between the state and the private railway system, in favor of the latter. In Prussia, the difficulty which stood in the way of state railways was this: The government had promised to contract no loan without the consent of the estates of the monarchy, and this could not be obtained until they were organized in a parliament. The “constitutional question” yet unsettled, made a loan, the conditio sine qua non, in a state railway system impossible.

The first period of the railway history of Prussia is thus one in which only private railways were built. It extends to the adoption of the constitution in 1850. Private activity alone was soon found to be insufficient. The poorer parts of Prussia, the development of which was dependent upon better means of communication, wanted the requisite capital to build railways. After having consulted with committees appointed by the provincial assemblies, the government decided, in 1842, to assist in the development of the railway system of the country by means of aids, consisting chiefly of guarantees of interest. Certain sums were set apart from the regular income of the state for this purpose. The following railways were built between 1842 and 1847 in this manner: The Niederschlesisch-Märkische, from Berlin to Breslau, 385.2 kilometers (since purchased by the state); the upper Silesian (Oberschlesische), from Breslau to Myslowitz, 192.2 kilometers; the Cologne and Minden, 269.9 kilometers (bought by the state December, 1879); the Posen and Stargard, 170.5 kilometers (forms now a a part of the Upper Silesian Railway); and the railway between Elberfeld and Dortmund, 58.3 kilometers (forms now a part of the Bergisch-Markische Railway).

At the beginning of the year 1850, the close of the first period of the railway history of Prussia according to our division, there existed in that country 2,700 kilometers of railway. The crisis of 1846–’47, and the political events of 1848, hindered the development of the railway net in Prussia. The returns from railway enterprises were not so large as had been expected, and several newly-formed companies were on the point of dissolution.

The Prussian Government desired to have a railway built, running from Berlin in a northeasterly direction to the Russian frontier. Although particular stress was laid upon such a railway, both on economic and military grounds, no private capitalists were ready “to undertake it, even with the assistance which the state offered. The government decided, therefore, to build a road from Berlin to Eydtkuhnen, via Konigsberg (“6.3 kilometers). It was called the Prussian Eastern Railway (Preussisclie Ostbahn), and was opened to traffic, piece-meal, between 1851 and 1867. This railway marks the beginning of a second era in the Prussian railway system, during which nearly all the Prussian state railways were begun.

The leading railway man in this second period, which lasted till 1859, was the minister of commerce, von der Heydt, after whom the government railway policy at this time is called the “von Heydt’sche Eisenbahnpolitik.”

The principal state railways built during this period are the following: the West-phalian Railway (Ham m-Paderborn-War burg, 130.6 kilometers, since largely extended); the Saarbrück Railway, from the Bavarian frontier at Mitt el-Bexbach to that of Lorraine at Forbach, 31.6 kilometers.

The Niederschlesisch-Märkische, nearly 400 kilometers, was bought by the state. The government concluded contracts with the Bergisch-Märkische, the Upper Silesian, and the Cologne and Crefeld Railway Companies, according to which these railways still remaining private property passed into state management. While in 1850 the state neither owned nor managed any railway, it worked nearly 2,500 kilometers of railway in 1859, of which about 1,300 kilometers were state property. Private companies worked 2,600 kilometers.

Von der Heydt was an opponent of private railway companies. His policy was an extension of the Prussian railway net by the state and a gradual but steady purchase of the private railways already existing. The law of November 3, 1838, mentions, as we have already seen, a tax which was to be employed in part to form a fund for the amortization of the capital stock represented by the railway tracks, after which a toll was to be levied for their use, in order to meet the costs of repairs and management; they were afterward to yield no profit on the capital invested. According to§ 6 of the law of 1853, the sinking-fund formed by the tax was to be used in purchasing railway shares, and the interest and dividends yielded by these shares to be employed in turn in purchasing new shares.

It is manifest that this plan would have led in no very long time to state ownership of all the railways. But§ 6 was made null and void by the law of May 21, 1859. This does not seem to have been brought about by unhappy experience, but appears rather to have been the effect of the political economic ideas and of the political events of the time. Besides, whatever evil consequences may be attached to private railways, were not so apparent then as now.* The experience of Great Britain, e. g., is now a favorite argument against private railways; it was then, on the contrary, an encouragement to their friends.

The minister of commerce, Mr. von der Heydt, as the author of Zehn Jahre Preussisch-Deutscher Eisenbahnpolitik tells us, opposed strongly the abrogation of the law of 1853. He warned against dangers which might arise in the future, if Prussia, surrounded on all sides by states in possession of their railways, should be the only country in Central Europe, which did not own its iron-paved streets; nearly all the neighbors had systems which would lead finally to state railways. In reply, Deputy von Carlowitz referred to the example of England, “an example of great weight in such matters,” and Deputy Reichensperger added: “The isolation to which the minister refers is certainly no misfortune. It is, on the contrary, very attractive for me that Prussia should be in Germany a stronghold of freedom.” The minister was defeated and the government yielded the more readily, as it needed money for the war preparations of the spring of 1859. Thus ends the second period of the railway history of Prussia.

The third period may be considered as extending from 1859 until the formation of the North German Confederation. This periodis marked by no fixed and determined railway policy on the part of the government. Prussia, fully occupied with the game which was being played, for the hegemony of Germany, had little time to attend to matters of less importance. The state railways increased some 500 kilometers, the railways under government management over 700 kilometers, the private railways about 1,000 kilometers. Thus, at the close of 1866, there were in Prussia 1,500 kilometers of private railways under state management, 1,800 kilometers owned by the state, together 3,300 kilometers understate management, and 3,600 kilometers of private railways under the management of private companies.

The fourth and last period of their history extends from 1866 up to the present time. The railways in the provinces, annexed after the war of 1866, were for the most part state railways; those of the former kingdom of Hanover were exclusively so. Hanover had 822.3 kilometers of railway at the close of 1866. The length of the state railways in all the annexed provinces amounted to 1,344 kilometers in 1869. The railways of the annexed provinces (formerly states) passed into possession of Prussia in 1868. At the end of 1867, the length of the railways owned by Prussia was less than 2,000 kilometers; at the close of the year 1868, it amounted to 3,250 kilometers; at the close of 1867 the state worked 3,400 kilometers; at the close of 1888, 4,900 kilometers of railway. Private companies owned and worked at the end of 1868, 5,000 kilometers of railway.

The annexations of 1866 virtually decided the railway question for Prussia in favor of state railways. Nevertheless, from 1868 to 1872 private railways gained on state railways. In the beginning of 1873 private companies managed 7,000 kilometers, the state only 5,750 kilometers. A wild speculation followed the Franco-Prussian (German) war. The principle of private competition gained ground. In the opinion of the multitude every new railway was a necessary blessing. But the winter of 1872–’73 brought a change. In the Prussian Parliament, Dr. Lasker entered the lists in favor of state railways, and combated so vigorously and successfully for his cause that the part he then took in the contest will always form a noteworthy epoch in the development of German railways. He began by making serious charges against government, in particular against the minister of commerce, in matters of railway concessions. Early in the session the government demanded of the Parliament a credit of 360,000,000 marks; 150,000,000 for a road from Berlin to Wetzlar, the remainder for other railway undertakings, for rolling stock, &e. The object was to connect the eastern and western parts of the monarchy by state railways. It was during the first reading of the bill that Lasker made his memorable speech of January 14, 1873. He asserted boldly that in matters of concession the point chiefly considered by the minister of commerce, Count Itzenplitz, was not the interests of the people and the state, but personal favor or personal ill-will, that Dr. Strousberg, e. g., was always granted the desired concession; that concessions had been granted to a high official and to members of prominent families, who from the outset had no intention of building railways; that these parties had derived profit by trading with the concessions (so-called Gründergewissen.)

The minister of commerce made an ill showing in his defense. The minister president Count Roon, addressed a letter under date of January 31, 1873, to the president of the House of Deputies. He defended the above mentioned official and attacked Lasker. The letter was read in the house February 7, but the utterances against Lasker were at once taken back. Deputy Lasker used this opportunity to continue his exposures, and produced such substantial proof of his statements that Count Roon, astonished at what had been going forward, withdrew the letter in toto, and promised to assist in every possible way in clearing up the “sad affair.” A royal message, February 14, moved that a special commission be appointed to investigate the matter and to discover “what principles have been employed in granting railway concessions, and the abuses which have grown up in connection with the exploitation (ausantzung) of these concessions, in order that it may be seen (a) whether and in how far the existing laws and the rules of administration are fitted to secure the fulfillment of the intentions of government in granting the concessions and to protect the public against deceits and damages; (b) what changes in the existing legislation and administration are necessary to put a stop to the abuses which have crept in.”

The commission of investigation held fifty-six sittings; the report was contained in three different manuscripts, embracing together 1,000 large quarto pages. The official documents of the ministry of commerce were examined carefully, numberless witnesses were heard, railway experts questioned, &c. The ability and thoroughness with which this so-called Lasker commission conducted the investigation have gained for it celebrity. The most noteworthy parts of the summing up of the report are as follows:

“An exclusive system of state railways is not at present realizable, but economic considerations favor sucb a system as the final goal to be striven for.” “Railways are public highways, means of favoring traffic, resembling in essence and purpose other highways. The only means of justifying the government in relinquishing railways to private industry and speculation is the stringent financial necessity of the time.” “It appears desirable to transfer to the empire a controlling power over all German railways.”

During the proceedings of the commission, it appeared, as the official account has it, that the personal honor of Count Itzenplitz was affected; accordingly he resigned, and Dr. Achenbach was appointed in his place minister of commerce. The bill for a credit of 360,000,000 marks was passed under “his advocacy with a large majority, showing clearly in which direction the sympathy of the house leaned in the struggle between the two systems, private and state railways. No event of special note concerning the railway question took place in the Prussian Parliament after this until the spring of 1876; when, to the surprise of many, the government brought in a bill proposing to authorize the government, in case it should desire to do so, to sell all the Prussian state railways to the empire.

The object of this bill was to give the empire a powerful influence in the development of German railways, and also to render it easier for the imperial railway office (Reichseisenbahnamt), which had been created in 1873, to exercise a control over the German railways within the limits of the railway functions ascribed to the empire by the Imperial constitution.

The opposition against the bill was not strong, either in the upper or lower house. It was defended chiefly by Bismarck, Lasker, * * * Hammacher, and Lowe. Bismarck’s arguments in his speech of April 26, 1876, were essentially as follows:

“The imperial constitution attributes to the empire the duty of a general supervision over all German railways, a certain control over tariffs, &c. An imperial railway office has been called into existence with the view of carrying out the provisions of the constitution. The experience of the office has manifested, however, the impotence of the empire, and the strength of the separate states. The imperial railway office has become a council which gives good advice, and prefaces its requests with ‘if you please.’ It writes a great deal and makes much ado, but no one heeds its behests. I had hoped for an imperial railway law before this, but the opposition of the states, not only that of Saxony, but also that of Prussia, has proved too strong. The fact is, that the royal Prussian ministry of commerce has a much greater influence upon the formation and development of the German railway system than the imperial ministry, notwithstanding the provisions of the constitution to the contrary. The rights of the empire are theoretical, those of Prussia are backed by a strong railway net, the influence of which is felt in all Germany. As imperial chancellor, it is my duty to contend against this state of affairs, to see that all parts of the constitution, even the railway articles, become realities, to fight against the development of Prussia, at the cost of the empire. * * *

“We have in Germany, I believe, sixty-three railway provinces—that is saying perhaps too little, they are more independent than provinces; I should rather say railway territories—of which forty perhaps are in Prussia. Each one of these sovereign territories is fully provided with the feudal rights of the dark ages, the right of staple, the right of levying tolls and taxes on commerce for the benefit of its own private purse; yes, even with the right of carrying on feuds and railway wars, as suits its good pleasure, like the old feudal lords. We see to-day railway directors waging battles, not for the benefit of the railways or shareholders, but as a sort of noble sport. This condition of affairs does not correspond to the ideal of the imperial constitution. Even Prussia has not a railway power strong enough to carry out this ideal within its own boundaries. I think the state should have its own line between all principal points. * * * I do not regard financial competition as the raison d’être of railways. It were foolish to say the state should derive no financial benefit from this property.

“The profits which states derive from their railways are really a tax which they impose upon the circulation of goods. This taxation should not be oppressive, and should be financially just. But profits, as I have said, are not the raison d’être of railways. * * *

“The non-Prussian German railways which are private property—there are few of them—will probably be purchased in a short time by the states within the bounds of which they lie. The non-Prussian state railways are in excellent hands. They serve chiefly the public interests of traffic, of commerce, of the circulation and transport of commodities and passengers; besides, as a secondary consideration, they aid the public treasury, and, in all events, promote only public interests. It is the misfortune of private railways that a privilege granted by the state, and a privilege which could not be made use of without the help of the state—we may say, a monopoly granted by the government—should be legally exploited in behalf of private interests and private pockets. * * *

“The railway question could he solved in Prussia by the state’s purchasing private railways, building new ones, and creating an independent railway ministry.* This would be simple, but we belong also to the union of the empire and are subject to the imperial constitution. It is our duty to strive first to increase the power of the empire and not that of Prussia, the strongest state in the union. We do not desire to increase still further the preponderance of Prussia. We offer the economic power of the railways to the empire. The imperial constitution can, in my opinion, be realized only in this way. * * *

“If the empire does not accept our oiler, this morning-present (Morgengabe), which Prussia brings, we in Prussia can make further arrangement for consolidating and extending our railway possessions. * * *

“The shareholders will be glad to exchange their shares for state bonds with a fixed and sure income. As regards the directors of the private railways, it will be difficult to offer them an equivalent for the brilliant positions they now occupy, especially for their soverign rights, in railway matters. * * * I hope, gentlemen, that you will support this bill, in order that we may thus take the first step on the way leading to a goal which will not be attained in my lifetime—I may, indeed, say, in our lifetime; but, if the devolopment be slow, if it must be fought out in hard battles, let us not be discouraged. Was anything great ever attained without fighting for it? However long and severe the battles may be, with the consciousness of contending for the right, we will pass forward, unterrified, unwearied, because a true idea, having once taken possession of public opinion, will not disappear until it is realized; until, in this case, the imperial constitution, as whose representative I stand before you, becomes, even as regards its railway articles, a truth.”

The bill was accepted in both houses of the Parliament with large majorities† and became the law of June 4, 1876.

The purport of the law was to transfer not simply all Prussian railways but also all railway rights and obligations of Prussia to the empire, which was to extend and consolidate the Prussian railways. With a view to meeting the opposition which the law was sure to encounter outside of Prussia, Bismarck warned the other states in his speech, that, in case the empire should not be favorably disposed toward the project, Prussia would extend her state railway system, and thus increase her preponderating influence over the smaller and middle states. This threat did not produce the desired effect, for the reason that the German states feared the empire more than Prussia. In the papers at this time there was much talk about the empire’s buying up all the railways in Germany by means of an expropriation law. Now the right of any individual state to expropriate its railways is undoubted.

Inasmuch as the railways owe their very existence to an expropriation law made in public interest, it is extremely illogical to suppose a second expropriation law could not expropriate the railways in public interest. An expropriation law is a two-edged sword, which can operate as well one way as the other. But the matter in the case of the empire was quite different. The German states had granted the necessary expropriation laws and had been competent in railway matters, except in so far as the imperial constitution had conveyed certain rights, which we will consider hereafter, to the empire; these rights did not include the expropriation of the railways of the separate states. Bismarck in the speech from which we have quoted expressly repudiated the thought of extending the competency of the empire so far. It is, to be sure, impossible to prove that high officials never planned anything of the kind, for experience has already demonstrated that the imperial constitution is something very elastic, but there seems to have been no evidence to support the prevailing apprehensions. The German middle states, nevertheless, became much alarmed and prepared to resist even the transfer of the Prussian railways to the empire.

The “state rights” people, as we would call them, had been more than once frightened by Bismarck’s railway policy. The law, to which the imperial railway office owes its existence, was passed with great difficulty in the federal council, which contains representatives of the governments of the separate states, although it encountered no serious opposition in the Reichstag, consisting of representatives of the people. The German sovereigns objected to the bill, as they feared losing another piece of their declining power. Bismarck called, however, a special evening meeting of the federal council and persuaded the representatives of most of the governments—as he knows so well how to “persuade”—that it was after all for their interests to vote “aye.” The two grand duchies of Mecklenberg and the Kingdom of Würtemberg voted “nay.” If so much opposition was manifested against the creation of a central railway office provided with limited powers to carry out rights already granted to the empire, it may be easily imagined how the states felt about so appreciable an increase of imperial power in railway matters, as proposed by the law of June 4, 1876.

Bavaria took the lead in the opposition. In reply to an interpellation, the Bavarian minister, von Pfretzschner, declared emphatically that he would, if necessary, exhaust all the resources in his power to maintain the integrity of the railway rights of Bavaria, and also that the Bavarian Government would use all means granted by the constitution to prevent a centralization of non-Bavarian railways in the hands of the empire.

All the Bavarian railways (4,225 kilometers), with the exception of those in the Palatinate (585 kilometers), are state railways, and the feeeling of the government was undoubtedly more sensitive than if they had been private property.

The Kingdom of Saxony followed the example set by Bavaria. In fact Saxony has ever had a doubtful reputation among the high imperial officials on account of its advocacy of state rights, or of its particularism, as the Germans say; in English, state-individualism would be, perhaps, a better expression.

Before the bill had been presented to the Prussian Parliament, Herr Adler proposed in the Saxon house of deputies the following resolution:

“The house of deputies urges the Saxon Government (1) to refuse its assent to any proposals addressed to the federal council, aiming at an acquisition of all or a part of the German railways by the empire; (2) in case no such proposal is addressed to the federal council to present to the Imperial chancellor its grave doubts about the advisability of a purchase of the German railways on the part of the empire.”

The second clause carries the principle that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure somewhat far. If the boy does what is forbidden, he is to be severely punished; if he does not, he is likewise to be flogged, lest he should upon some future occasion do the naughty deed. It serves to throw a deal of light on German politics, and to show the fear with which the other German states watch Prussia and the empire.

The resolution was adopted with an almost unanimous vote in both houses.

Saxony began at once buying up private railways. The Leipzig and Dresden was first purchased, and soon after various smaller railways were added to the state railway net. On the 1st of July, 1876, the so-called “mixed system,” i. e., a system composed in part of government and in part of private railways, had practically ceased. Saxony has since then bought the most of what remained. Only 43.86 kilometers of railway were owned and managed by private parties at the close of the year 1878; whereas the state owned 1,901.65 kilometers and rented 92.30 kilometers, working altogether 1,993.95 kilometers.

Several different motives appear to have actuated the government in completing so rapidly the state railway system: (1) the general tendency towards state railways; (2) the desire to increase the influence of Saxony in the empire whenever railways were concerned; and (3) to prevent the empire from buying them. At any rate, the government was so eager in its desire to purchase the Leipzig and Dresden Railway as to accede to demands on the part of the company which it had shortly before refused to grant.

The opposition against the project of transferring the Prussian railways to the empire manifested itself similarly in Würtemberg, where the railways have been state property from the beginning. The feeling of the government and the legislative body was not, however, common to all classes. The commercial union assembled in Ulm expressed itself favorably disposed towards the idea of the empire’s owning the railways. Less anxiety was manifested about the plan in other German states; but the opposition was too strong. The offer of Prussia has never been presented to the Reichstag, and things remain in statu quo as far as the law of June 4, 1876, is concerned.

Prussia has given warning and is continuing to extend and consolidate her railway system. Up to the year 1876 the Prussian railways under private management had always exceeded those worked by the state. In 1863 the length of the private railways exceeded that of the state railways only by 100 kilometers, but in 1876 by 2,000 kilometers.

The development of the private railways reached its climax in the latter year, whereas the state has steadily continued to build, buy, and lease railways. In July, 1879, there were altogether 19,750 kilometers of railway in Prussia, of which 10,000? kilometers were worked by the state and 9,750 kilometers by private companies. Of the 10,000 kilometers worked by the state, 6,000 were state property. If before there could have been any doubt as to the ultimate triumph of the pure and unmixed state railway system, so well in Germany as in Prussia, it has been rendered impossible by the late session of the Prussian Parliament. On the 29th of October, 1879, two bills were laid before that body by the minister of public works, Maybach, and the minister of finance, Bitter. The first “concerned the acquisition by the state of railways owned and worked by several private companies.” These were the lines of (1), the Berlin and Stettin Company, 955.59 kilometers; (2), of the Magdeburg and Halberstadt Company, 1,010.73 kilometers; (3), of the Hanover and Altenbeeken Company, 270.41 kilometers; (4), of the Cologne and Minden Company, 1,145.60 kilometers. The total length of railway which it was proposed to purchase was 3,382.33 kilometers, about one-third of the railways still remaining under private management.

The bill was accepted with a vote of 228 ayes to 155 nays.

The following brief description of the above-mentioned lines will manifest their importance in perfecting the state railway system.

The Berlin and Stettin Railway connects Berlin with Stettin and the Prussian Eastern Railway, which is state property. The state thus obtains possession and management of all the lines along the Baltic from Konigsberg to Stralsund. This is an important military consideration. The Stettin harbor is the most important port on the Baltic, which renders the railway of importance commercially and lends the state no inconsiderable power in regulating railway tariff. It fills an important gap in the state railway system, as it connects the state railways in the northeastern part of the monarchy with those in the southwestern—the Prussian Eastern and Niederschlesisch-Märkische Railways with the Berlin and Dresden and Berlin and Wetzlar.

The termini of the principal lines are Berlin, Stettin, Danzig, Augermünde and Stralsund.

The lines of the Magdeburg and Halberstadt Railway Company connect the eastern state railways with those in the western and northwestern parts of the kingdom, viz, the Hanoverian and Westphalian state railways, by a state railway. The Niederschlesisch-Märkische from the southeast is continued in a northwesterly direction to the two chief harbors of Hamburg and Bremen, which, with the other importing harbors on the North Sea (Harburg, Bremerhafen, and Geesternünde), are thus connected directly with Berlin by means of state railways. The termini of the principal lines are Magdeburg-Leipzig, Magdeburg-Halberstadt, Halle-Vienenburg, Berlin-Lehrte, Stendal-Uelzen-Langwedel, and Magdeburg-Wittenberge.

The purchase of the Hanover and Altenbeeken Railway was an almost necessary consequence of the purchase of the lines of the Magdeburg and Halberstadt Company, inasmuch as the latter company worked the lines of the former on permanent lease. This railway rounds out and completes the state railway net in that part of Germany. The Westphalian state railways from Oberhausen via Dortmund to Altenbeeken are thus continued towards the northeast to Hanover; the Hanover state railway from Rheine to Löhne, and from Bremen via Wunstorf to Hildesheim, is continued via Vienenburg and Aschersleben to Halle and Leipzig. The termini of the road are, as its name indicates, Hanover and Altenbeeken.

One point connected with the purchase of the Magdeburg-Halberstadt and the Hanover-Altenbeeken railways was not mentioned in the papers presented to the landtag by the government, though it has been discussed by the newspapers. The future of the Duchy of Brunswick, as is well known, is uncertain. The present duke has no direct heirs, the nearest being the son of the late king of Hanover, Duke of Cumberland and pretend ant to the throne. It is altogether improbable that Prussia will ever consent to the Duke of Cumberland’s becoming Duke of Brunswick; certain that she will not, unless he renounces all claims to the crown of Hanover, and this he does not appear disposed to do. Besides this, the majority of the citizens of the duchy are said to be opposed to the succession of the house of Hanover, while the present duke and a part of his people protest vehemently against being swallowed up by Prussia. Although the duke is old, matters are still, as far as is known, as unsettled as ever.

Now it will be seen by a glance at an atlas, that the above-mentioned purchases put Prussia in possession of railways leading into Brunswick from every side. She is thus enabled, in case of any future difficulty, to be at hand almost on a moment’s notice.

The lines of the Cologne and Minden Company connect the Hanoverian and Westphalian state railways with Cologne and give the state a second connection with Holland, i. e., via Arnheim. The connection already in possession of the state was via Salzbergen. This is deserving of notice in connection with the rumors and uncertainty about the succession of the Dutch throne. Harburg, a terminus of the Hanoverian Railway, is connected with Hamburg by a state railway.

The termini of the principal lines of the Cologne and Minden are Cologne Minden, Deutz-Giessen, and Venlo-Hamburg.

The second bill presented to the landtag October 29 concerned the extension of the state railway system, and the participation of the state in several private railway undertakings. As accepted by the parliament, the government is authorized to build the following railways:

Marks.

(1.) A railway from Erfurt to Grimmenthal and Ritschenhausen, at a cost of 27,250,000

(2.) A railway from Güldenboden to Mohrungen, at a cost of 2,730,000

And from Mohrungen to Allenstein, at a cost of 2,454,000

(3.) A railway from Marienburg, via Marienwerder and Grandenz to Thorn, with a branch to Culen, at a cost of 9,250,000

(4.) A railway from Schneidemühl to Deutsch-Crone, at a cost of 706,000

(5.) A railway from Herchberg to Schmiedeberg, at a cost of 571,000

(6.) A railway from Walburg to Gross-Almerode, at a cost of 687,000

(7.) A railway from Emden via Norden to the frontier of Oldenburg in the direction of Jever, with a branch from Georgsheil to Aurich, at a cost of 4,000,000

(8.) A railway from Neil to Praben, at a cost of 821,000

(9.) A railway from Wengerohr to Berncastel, at a cost of 950,000

Total 49,420,350

The total length of these proposed railways is 484 kilometers.

No. 1, the railway from Erfurt to Grimmenthal and Ritschenhausen is built as a continuation of the line Magdeburg and Erfurt—not yet entirely completed—and consequently of the Magdeburg and Halberstadt Railway. The Prussian state railway system is thus continued through the Thuringian forest and connected with the Bavarian state railways. It is to be noticed that this railway passes through three states outside of Prussia, Saxe-Meiningen, Saxe-Coburg-Gotha and Schwarzburg-Son-dershausen. It is calculated that it will compete with the state railways of the monarchy of Saxony for traffic to the western part of Bavaria. Thus is Prussia making her influence as a railway power felt all through Germany. The length of this railway is to be 86 kilometers.

The other eight undertakings are railways of secondary importance (secundärbahnen) built with the intention of opening up and developing parts of Prussia not yet provided with satisfactory means of transport. The places directly benefited by these local railways pay for the right of way and otherwise contribute towards defraying the costs of their construction.

The government is also authorized to assist the following railway undertakings in the eastern and northern parts of the monarchy by the purchase of shares to the amount of 2,288,000 marks.

(1.) A railway from Alt-Damm to Colberg, 121 kilometers.

(2.) A railway from Stargard to Cüstrun, 95.8 kilometers.

(3.) A railway from Neustadt to Oldenburg (in Schleswig-Holstein), 21.5 kilometers.

These are also local railways and built from the same motives as the other eight.

The government has, during the last session of Parliament, been authorized to purchase three private railways and a part of a state railway, besides those already mentioned. The three private railways are: (1.) The Homburg.

(2.) The Berlin, Potsdam and Magdeburg.

(3.) The Rhenish (Rheinische).

The state railway is the Main-Weser, of which the Prussian Government has been authorized to purchase the part situated in the Grand Duchy of Hesse. This railway runs from Cassel to Frankfort-on-the-Main via Marburg and Giessen. Its total length is 198.79 kilometers; 133.84 kilometers are in Prussia and owned by the state; the 64.95 kilometers in Hesse, and owned by that state, are to be purchased by Prussia, according to contract between the two governments, ratified by the parliamentary bodies of both states, at a cost of 17,250,000 marks. The government is also authorized to build a short branch railway from Cölbe to Laasphe, at a cost of 1,600,000 marks.

The Homburg railway extends from Frankfort-on-the-Main to Homburg and has a length of 18.1 kilometers. The price agreed to be paid was 1,800,000 marks.

The Berlin, Potsdam and Magdeburg Railway has a length of 269.36 kilometers. The state obtains possession by this purchase of the shortest route to Magdeburg, the most important city of the province of Saxony, to the Hartz and to Brunswick. It comes also into possession of one-half of the shares of the former Brunswick state railway, which have a nominal value of 18,000,000 marks.

The length of the Rhenish Railway is 1,348.64 kilometers. The Rhenish and Berlin, Pottsdam and Magdeburg were two of the most important private railways remaining after the purchase of the first group of four by the law of December 20, 1879 (bill of October 29), and embrace considerably over one-fourth of the railways then remaining under private management. The lines of the Rhenish Railway Company extend from Cologne to Coblentz, Tréves, Aix-la-Chapelle, Düsseldorf, Herbesthal, Bingen, Zevenaar, Crefeld, Dortmund; in fact, to all places of importance in the Rhine Province. They extend to the mining district of the Ruhr and have great importance in that industrial region. In three places they touch the Dutch frontier at Zevenaar, Nijmegen, and Venlo. Germany can therefore pour troops into Holland at five different points on state railways, if she should ever find it necessary to do so. The Rhenish Railway touches the Belgic frontier at Verviers.

The Prussian railway minister becomes thus director-in-chief of some 15,000 kilometers of railway, or three-fourths of all Prussian railways. It was intended to present a bill to the landtag, authorizing the government to purchase one of the most important private railways still remaining, the Berlin-Anhaltische (Berlin, Halle and Leipzig), hut a satisfactory contract could not he concluded. This company, will, however, soon share the fate of the Rhenish Railway Company. Prussia is now so powerful in railroads and Mayhach so skillful a manager, that no Prussian railroad can withstand the government. In fact, before the government entered into negotiations with the railways last year, they were given to understand that it was for their own interest not to make exorbitant demands, as the government in that case would apply to them that “competition principle” which they praised so much.

To prevent an abuse of the immense power of the minister of public works or railway minister, as he is also called, the Landtag made its acceptance of the railway bills dependent upon certain conditions or guarantees. Other guarantees were added to prevent the government from using the railway earnings to meet general government expenses without the consent of Parliament, since that would, of course, make the budget-rights of that body of no avail.

The principal points of the guarantees are as follows:

I. All profits derived from state railways are to be used (1) in meeting obligations arising out of contracts already concluded with private railway companies, or out of any contracts to be concluded in future; (2) to pay the interest on the railway debt; (3) the maximum sum which may be taken from railway earnings to meet a deficit in the state’s budget is 2,200,000 marks. This can happen only in case a loan would otherwise have to be contracted to meet the deficit; (4) a further surplus is to be used in forming a reserve fund of one per cent, of the railway debt. The object of this is to prevent perturbations in the budget. One per cent, of the railway debt is twice as large as the perturbations in the railway profits are likely to be in one year as compared with another. This reserve fund is to be used when necessary, i. e., when the receipts from the railways in any year are not large enough for that purpose to pay the interest on the railway debt. Any surplus above one per cent. is to be used in amortization of the railway debt up to one-half per cent, of said railway debt; any further surplus is also to be used in amortization of the railway debt, unless Parliament consents to its being employed otherwise.

II. For the purpose of making the above reckonings the railway debt is fixed at 1,396,000,000 marks, and the interest at 59,800,000 marks per annum.

The above sum is the entire debt of Prussia on April 1, 1880, according to the budget of 1880–’81. It is, too, the capital value of the Prussian state railways as near as can be calculated. The idea is to show that the state debt of Prussia is covered by her railways.

Every increase of the state debt consequent on the conclusion of contracts before April 1, 1880, for the purchase of private railways is also to be added to the railway debt.

III. The minister of public works presents to the Landtag every year the normal passenger and goods tariff.

IV. A state railway council and provincial railway councils (Landeseisenbahnrath and Bezirkselsenbahnräthe) are to be formed by the representatives of the interests of agriculture, manufacturing industry and commerce, and by railway experts (Spezial-sachverständige.)

These councils are to meet at least once every three months and are to be heard on all important railway matters. Their powers are only advisory.

According to I (4) it would take two hundred years to pay off the railway debt, supposing that the one-half per cent, per annum was always on hand, which is by no means certain. Other provision is made, however, for a yearly amortization of the public debt, which, according to the guarantee is solely railway debt, to the amount of over 12,000,000 marks per annum, about one per cent, of the debt, as fixed by the budget for April, 1880. This debt does not include the money to be paid for the eight railways, which the government was empowered to purchase during the last session of the landtag that must be added to the railway debt. These railways, it is to be noticed, do not become at once state property in the strict sense of that word. The government is obliged to allow the shareholders at least a year to exchange their shares for state consols; they receive in the mean time an annual payment from the government equal to the income from the consols they are ultimately to obtain.

For the shares and obligations of the first group of four private railways, the Berlin and Stettin, the Magdeburg and Halberstadt, the Hanover and Altenbeeken, and Cologne and Minden, the state is to give consols to the amount of 1,092,781,400 marks, bearing a yearly interest of 45,998,778.5 marks. These four purchases will, therefore, nearly double the state debt. The state property increases, however, in proportion. The Rhenish and Berlin-Potsdam and Magdeburg railways cost the state 717,342,900 marks, on which the yearly interest is 30,211,612 marks. The railroad operations of the winter will cost Prussia over 1,800,000,000; and, when completed, she will have a state debt of considerably over 3,000,000,000 of marks. Two years ago, April 1, 1878, the debt amounted to less than 1,100,000,000.

One item in the contracts, as peculiarly characteristic of German ways, is worthy of notice. Provision is made for the directors and other officials who lose their places on account of the transfer of private railways to the state; so the employés of the Berlin and Stettin, the Magdeburg and Halberstadt, the Hanover and Altenbeeken, and the Cologne and Minden are to receive the handsome sum of 3,908,000 marks. This goes chiefly to the directors—the “deposed princes,” as they have been called.

The price paid for the railways seems to have been a fair one, but not too high. The shareholders exchange their shares for enough 4 per cent, consols to yield them the same income, or nearly the same, which they would in the immediate future have probably received from their shares. According to the law of 1838, the state was to give twenty-five times the average dividend of the last five years, when, after the expiration of thirty years from the date of concession, it forced a railway to sell.

The state has made a better bargain by a voluntary agreement with the railways. The sum prescribed by the law in case of forced sales would be too much, as the tendency of railway profits in Prussia is downward. The shareholders of the Rhenish Railway have received since 1860 an average annual dividend of 7½ per cent.; the dividends reached their maximum at 10 per cent; in 1871; since then they have gradually decreased to 7 per cent, in 18 and 1878.

The shareholders receive from the state a rente of 6½ per cent. until the society is dissolved, and then a corresponding amount of consols. The dividends of the Berlin, Potsdam and Magdeburg Railway on the other hand have averaged only a trifle over 3½ per cent, during the last five years, and the state gives 4 per cent.

The shareholders of the Berlin and Stettin received in 1878 a dividend of 3.65 per cent., but the average of the five years, 1874–1878, is a little over 7.70 per cent.; they receive from the state 4¾ per cent. The shares of the railways purchased by the state have risen much in price, however, owing to the superior security of state papers. A few months before the Prussian Parliament opened, in the fall of 1879, the shares of the Cologne and Minden were quoted at about par; in November they stood at 141. In the same manner those of the Rhenish Railway rose from 70 odd to over 90. The state has not, however, made a bad bargain.

The new state railways become feeders of the old. Much money will be saved that was formerly wasted in competition. Fewer buildings, railway stations, &c., are needed. Cars and locomotives can be used wherever they are most required, whereas much waste was occasioned formerly by running empty cars, which was rendered necessary by the different ownership. The whole administration is greatly simplified. The minister of public works reckons the yearly saving in the administration of the Berlin, Potsdam and Magdeburg Railway at 150,000 marks, which represents a capital of 3,750,000 marks; he reckons the yearly saving in administering and working the Berlin and Stettin, the Magdeburg and Halberstadt, the Hanover and Altenbeken, and the Cologne and Minden at 7,000,000 or 8,000,000 marks, representing a capital of 175,000,000 or 200,000,000 marks.

The credit of the state has so far not suffered by the railway operations of the government. The four per cent. Prussian consols are higher now than they were before those operations began. A short time since, they were above par.

I will endeavor to present in a few words the principal motives and considerations which have been influential in leading Prussia to her present railway policy.

economic considerations.

Railway building has called into existence a large industrial class, but the irregularity of railway undertakings is continually plunging those who are dependent upon them into distress. This is an important factor in modern “hard times.” Capital and labor are drawn from other employments to be afterwards condemned to long idleness. The injury caused to general prosperity is undoubtedly great. Agriculture especially has suffered in many places by the loss of laborers who were drawn away by a deceitful but enticing prospect of bettering their condition. The state alone can draw up a plan of railway building to extend through many years and to be executed gradually. The government does not need to restrict its undertakings’ in such a time as the present; on the contrary, a time of crisis is often the most favorable one for state enterprise. The government is able to secure money on favorable terms, and labor and materials are cheap.

The interests of the country, it is said, demand that railways which have taken the place, to a great extent, of ordinary highways, should be managed solely as public streets, in furthering commerce, agriculture, and industry. Railways must be managed as a unity; when one does not pay, the deficit can be made up out of a surplus from another railway. This is, at present, the case with the postal service in all civilized countries, and with the telegraph lines in the majority. The development and opening up of a country often render railways necessary, which will nevertheless not be “paying institutions,” in the ordinary sense of that term, or will not pay for a long series of years to come; such railways the state alone can construct.

Every time an unnecessary railroad is built, national capital is wasted. Hundreds of millions have been sunk in useless railway speculations in the United States which might have been employed otherwise to the benefit of the commonwealth in developing the resources of the country. The waste of capital and labor is not finished when the railway is constructed, and thousands of acres of land have forever been drawn away from the purposes of agriculture. Every time an unnecessary train is run, capital is wasted. But we might endure the loss occasioned by railway competition if it resulted in cheapening tariffs, if it were competition in the ordinary sense of that term, but experience has shown that railway competition usually injures the different railway companies, but does not benefit the public. In Germany the traffic is usually divided among the different companies, and in such a manner that the bulk of it passes over one route one month and another the second. In his celebrated work Englische Eisenbahn-politik (Leipzig 1874–’76) Professor Cohn has shown that in England a new railway between places already provided with one results almost invariably in an understanding between the companies and arise in the tariff.* The end of railway competition is railway monopoly, and this is urged as a ground for state railways. In the first place, there will always be a great part of the country provided with only one railway, in which case there is a monopoly. It is absurd for the owners of a railway to say to farmers and country merchants, “If you don’t like our railway, build one for yourselves.” As matters are, people in and near towns through which only one railway passes are obliged to use that railway, and, unless protected by the government, are quite at its mercy.

The railway under one management seldom exceeded 150 or 200 kilometers in the early history of railway development; but, as railways were extended, the necessity of establishing through trains, of coming to an agreement about the tariff for passengers and goods on such trains, of making arrangements about common institutions and common interests, caused the difficulties connected with the harmonious action of a large number of working factors to become apparent. Experience has demonstrated that long routes and railway complexes can be worked so much more cheaply and efficiently, that short lines running parallel, managed by different companies, are unable to compete. The railway history of England and France is especially instructive. The six large private railway companies in France—(1) Nord, (2) Est, (3) Ouest, (4) Paris á Orléans, (5) Paris-Lyon Méditerranée, (6) Midi—have absorbed 48 different companies; the eleven chief railway companies in England—(1) London and Northwestern, (2) Great Western, (3) Northeastern, (4) Midland, (5) Great Eastern, (6) London and Southwestern, (7) Great Northern, (8) Lancashire and Yorkshire, (9) Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire, (10) London, Brighton and South-coast, (11) Southeastern—262 companies.

Railway monopoly is not only a necessary but also a healthy growth, when railways are owned and managed in public interest, inasmuch as the public is far better and far more cheaply served than is otherwise possible. The benefit to be derived from a steady and simplified railway tariff is a further economic motive. In the “union of German railways” there are 63 local tariffs, numerous exceptions, and tariffs for special articles and goods (Einzeltarifsätze), 184 general tariffs, with 351 special tariffs for separate articles, and 199 general tariffs for traffic with foreign countries, and 314 special tariffs. This is, indeed, a confusion for the public and the railway companies themselves. The government and the best railway authorities advocate a unified railway tariff for the whole country, so simple that even a small business man shall be able to calculate the freight on goods from one place to another as easily as he now calculates on letters and other postal sendings. This rate must also be steady, so as to remove all uncertainty about the results of any given business transaction, so far as it is affected by freight charges. Changes should be made rarely and with previous warning. The present uncertainty and liability to change brings into legitimate business a gambling element similar to that caused by an irredeemable paper currency. The empire has introduced a so-called “natural tariff system” on its railways in Alsace-Lorraine with the best results. All goods are divided into two or three classes, according as they are sent as freight, express, in open or covered freight cars, and are then charged uniform rates, which depend upon weight and volume, at so much a kilometer, with a small fee additional for loading and unloading. The chambers of commerce in different cities of Alsace-Lorraine have expressed in warm terms their satisfaction with this system.

We should not pass over, in this connection, the agitation of Herr F. Perrot, who imagines himself a second Rowland Hill. He advocates the application of the penny postal system to railway passenger and goods traffic. He would retain in Prussia three classes of passenger coaches, with a fare of 6 marks for the first class, 1 mark for the second, ½ for the third, regardless of distance. His ideas are to be found in “die Anwendung des Penny-Porto-Systems auf den Eisenbahntarif und das Packet-Porto” (Rostock, 1872).

Formerly Perrot’s reform projects attracted considerable attention; but at present they seem to have been “tabled” as impracticable. It is doubtful if the reduction would increase the traffic so much as Perrot expects. In traveling, whether for business or pleasure, the railway fare is usually the smallest part of the expense.

The lack of time is the great obstacle with most people to increasing the number of their exeursions by rail, and that would not be affected by Perrot’s reform. For the transport of goods his reform is certainly more practical. Many goods cannot be transported at above a certain low cost. In goods traffic the tariff is of chief moment. For goods Perrot proposes for Prussia three rates. He divides the kingdom into three zones, starting from any given railway station as a center. The first zone or circle is drawn with a radius of 150 kilometers, the second with a radius of 325 kilometers, the third with a radius greater than 325 kilometers. The tariff inside of zone number one is 15 marks per wagon or car; inside of zone number two, 24 marks per car; inside of number three, 36 marks per car.

To compete with foreign countries, a reduction of railway tariffs is likely to be necessary in the future. On this account, as well as on account of the military interests of the land, the railway policy of foreign countries has had weight in determining that of Prussia. Both economic and military considerations have forced Prussia to purchase her railways or to be situated disadvantageously compared with other German states and foreign countries. Nearly all German railways, outside of Prussia, are owned by the different German states within the boundaries of which they lie. The state railways have been managed by the different German governments, as it appears, to general satisfaction and in the interest of the public. I may mention particularly Baden and Würtemberg. The principle of treating railways like other public highways has assisted greatly in the development of those states. The railways in each state have been managed as a unity, so that a deficit in one place could be provided for by a surplus in another. Roads which private capitalists would not have built, but which were of importance to the country as a whole, have been constructed and worked. In both of these states the government took the railways into its own hand from the beginning. Baden began its state railway system in 1838, Würtemberg in 1842.

We see thus that state railways are no new experiment in Germany, but one which has been tried for over forty years. In July, 1879, in all Germany, outside of Prussia, there were but 2,000 kilometers of private railway.

The railway policy of France has been followed with attention in Prussia. Prussia cannot afford to lose ground relatively to France in any source of power. As is well known, no French railway has a concession of over ninety years, and at the expiration of their concessions all French railways fall to the state without compensation. The method of concession adopted by France would put her in possession of all French railways by the middle of the next century, without cost to the state. But the French are to a great extent dissatisfied with their private railways, and desire the state to buy the rights of the companies at once. Among Frenchmen who favor an immediate introduction of an exclusive state railway system may be mentioned Wilson, Waddington, and, above all, de Freycinet. A state railway net has already been formed in France, and is rapidly increasing.

The railway question is being decided in favor of state railways in Holland, Austria-Hungary, Roumania, and Italy. In fact, Russia, Turkey, and Spain are the only important countries on the continent which have not already made important progress in the direction of the “Verstaatlichung” of the railways, and of late even Russia has manifested an intention of following the railway policy of Western Europe. We can therefore conclude that in a near future the railways of Europe, like other highways, will be public property. It is probable that the discontent in England will finally lead her to follow the example of the rest of Europe, and buy up the railways, as she has already the telegraph. It is an almost necessary development. As I have said, commercial as well as military rivalry leads to it. If the French state owned its railways, free from debt, it could injure most seriously German industry and commerce, provided that the German railways were private property; the French railways would not be under the necessity of yielding a profit, nay, they could be run at a loss temporarily or even permanently; other highways are a continual source of expense.

The Belgian state railways have drawn away considerable traffic from the ports of the northwestern part of France by means of cheaper rates.

One of the French deputies referred some time since to the injury which would result to the industrial and commercial life of the nation if France had no control over railway tariffs, so as to enable Havre to compete with Antwerp, and Marseilles with the Italian ports.

The military significance of state railways is so obvious that it does not need to be dwelt upon at length. The minister of war and all military men agree in ascribing great weight to the acquisition of the railways by the state. I will mention only one point in this connection. It is possible to establish at the chief railway stations immense military storehouses, which would increase the present wonderful capability of Germany to make rapid military movements. As one of the Berlin papers expressed it, men will he enabled to march in at one end of the railway as civilians, and ride out at the other clad in uniform as soldiers.

In time of war, it is claimed, state possession of the railways will prove a benefit to commerce and railway traffic in general. Under the private railway system, freight sent to Frankfort-on-the-Main, e. g., via Anhaltische Balm, must wait, in case the government needs the railway for war purposes, until the government is done, or until the Anhaltische Company makes an agreement with another company for sending the goods by a different route.

This difficulty is at once avoided when the railways are state property, as the railway minister is then able to send goods and passengers by a route which may be open. Making contracts between railway companies is a clumsy affair, and requires considerable time; but freight sent at once, without any previous formalities, to Frankfort-on-the-Main, via Cologne, would not necessarily arrive much behind time.

But the motive above all others which seems to have led just at present to the energetic movement of the government in the Verstaatlichung of the railways, is, that it furnishes the government with the means of carrying into effect Bismarck’s recent protective policy (Zollpolitik). Private railways have been in the habit of favoring foreign countries by means of so-called “Differential-tarife,” that is to say, lower rates for foreign than for domestic goods.

The object of this was to avoid the loss of foreign traffic. A railway, the chief business of which, for example, has been to import goods from Belgium, is ready to make considerable concessions to the importers, rather than lose their business. The result is that the higher the protective and the finance duties on the frontier, the lower the railway freights on goods from abroad.

the empire.

It is a gross error to suppose that the empire or union owns the German railways, or has been buying them. The empire owns only the railways in Alsace-Lorraine (1,024 kilometers), which it bought with a part of the war indemnity paid by France to Germany. As we have already shown, these railways have been administered excellently. Bismarck has long cherished a plan for converting all German railways into imperial railways, so as to gain a counterpoise to the centrifugal forces tending to resolve the empire into its original elements.

The empire has, according to the constitution at present, only certain general powers of control, relating chiefly to the tariff, and to measures concerning the safety of the roads, uniform railway-police regulations, &c.

The efforts made to pass a general imperial railway law have failed. As we have seen, in 1876, a law was passed by the Prussian Parliament authorizing the government to sell its railways to the empire. Though the reistance of the separate states has, up to this time, prevented Bismarck from laying the law before the Reichstag, the law is still valid, and will be put into execution in the course of time; that is to say, the proposal of Prussia will be accepted by the federal council and imperial parliament. Prussia favors imperial railways, and her power as a railway owner is becoming irresistible in Germany.

RICHARD T. ELY,
Late Fellow of Columbia College, New York City.

* A kilometer is equal to nearly 3,281 American feet, or somewhat less than two-thirds of an Americam or English mile (5,280 feet).

* No one denies that evils are necessarily connected with private railways. The only difficult question to decide is, whether, on the whole, a given country will fare better with state railways.

* Such a ministry, or rather a ministry of public works, has existed since 1878.

† Lower house 216 to 160; upper house 60 to 31.

* The writer wishes it to be remembered that he is simply recording without criticism the arguments of others.

No. 271. Mr. Evarts to Mr. White. No. 271.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State,
Washington, April 14, 1880. No. 96.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 93 of the 4th ultimo, communicating the request of the committee of the International Fishery Exhibition at Berlin, for the appointment of one or two persons experienced in fishery matters as members of an international jury which will be charged with reporting on the exhibits and awarding the prizes.

In reply I have to inform you that this Department has decided to designate Deputy Commissioner George Brown Goode and Mr. Fred. Mather, of his staff, to serve in the capacity indicated, and you will accordingly notify the proper authorities of the exhibition to that effect, and also inform the gentlemen just named of their designation.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS..

No. 272. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 272.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, April 24, 1880. (Received May 13.) No. 114.]

Sir: This legation receives from time to time letters from consuls calling attention to the hardship involved in charging passport-fees upon American students in straitened circumstances. My experience here leads me to coincide fully in the opinions thus expressed, and I may remark that our country never appears to me in such an unlovely aspect as when she insists upon taking $5 in gold from the pockets of poor young men and women struggling to obtain higher instruction in some branch of knowledge abroad in order to fit themselves for a career of usefulness at home.

A passport is required in the larger German cities by the police as a condition of residence, and at the universities and higher institutions of learning by the faculty as a condition of matriculation; but the fee above mentioned represents to a considerable number of students the difference between comfortable and uncomfortable living for a considerable time. I have taken pains to become acquainted with the American students in various universities and schools in Germany, and especially in Berlin, and I may say that I have never known a more studious and well conducted class of young people; they do us great credit in the eyes of all here who have occasion to know them. As a rule, they are men and women of small means who are deeply interested in some special branch which they are developing as far as possible in Germany in order to fit themselves to become professors or teachers or special investigators in America.

All modern governments have adopted the principle of aiding to some extent efforts of this kind; our own has done so by throwing off the duties on the products of American artists abroad.

The existing system does not exist upon any law. The act of July 14, 1870, abolished the fees on passports which had been fixed at $3 by the act of July 1, 1862 (the act of June 20, 1874, prescribes a fee of $5 for each citizen’s passport issued from the Department of State, and at $5 by the act of June 30, 1864), but on the 2d of October, 1871, Mr. Bancroft, then minister at Berlin, in forwarding his quarterly account of passports (see dispatch No. 272, October 2, 1871), called attention to the large increase in the number of applications for passports and suggested “a slight tax of one or two dollars” be laid on each passport to check this demand.

In accordance apparently with this recommendation was issued the circular instruction No. 13, dated October 14, 1871, inclosing an executive order of the President of October 13, 1871, under authority conferred by the sixteenth section of the act of the 18th of August, 1856, prescribing that in addition to the fees heretofore authorized, the sum of $5 should be charged for issuing passports in a foreign country. I cannot but think that this is a considerably larger sum than Mr. Bancroft had intended to recommend in naming the sum of two or three dollars. He was probably aware that a higher tax than this could not be well imposed upon the purses of poor students.

But it seems to me that our government may now well go further and give authority to ministers abroad to issue passports free of charge to Americans who under oath declare their intentions to become bona fide students of universities or other incorporated institutions. The loss of revenue would be inconsiderable. I have obtained from the consuls in Germany information from which the table inclosed is compiled, and from this it will be seen that only about 1,100 persons are here avowedly as students. I send it to the Department as a matter of interest, but it must not be taken to represent the number of passports issued to students from this legation, which would in ordinary years certainly not reach 100, owing to the fact that many of the institutions of learning do not require passports and also that some young persons furnish themselves with them before leaving America. Inasmuch, therefore, as Germany is the only country where passports are required for educational purposes the trifling sum of five or six hundred dollars would probably represent the difference in revenue to the government caused by such an order.

But while this is so slight a matter to the government, it is of great moment to those directly concerned. There have been excellent young men here in the universities and young women in the conservatories of music, eking out their existence by giving lessons in English, type setting, &c., and the hardship in these cases, I confess, seems to me to outweigh all the advantages accruing to the United States from the Executive order above referred to.

It will be observed that I suggest this immunity for persons showing bona fide intention to become students.

I put the proposal in this form because the requirement of the university authorities to exhibit passports before admission or matriculation precludes delay on the part of the legation.

I therefore respectfully suggest the question whether it may not be well to modify the order of October 14, 1871, so that ministers of the United States abroad may issue passports free from charge to any person giving satisfactory proof that he or she has the bona fide intention to enter as matriculated student any university, conservatory of music, school of design, or other incorporated institutions for instruction in science, literature, or art; and that in the quarterly return of passports to the Department such passports as are issued gratis be indicated.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure in No. 114.]

American students in Germany.

Berlin 100 Wiesbaden 16

Dusseldorf 3 Darmstadt 1

Breslau 1 Munich 125

Geestemude 3 Nuremberg 10

Bremerhaven 2 Heidelberg 30

Leipzig 157 Freiburg 8

Dresden 72 Strasburg 8

Hamburg 3 Carlsruhe 54

Stettin 1 Stuttgart 356

Göttingen 24 Cologne 27

Hanover 40

Brunswick 5 Total 1,088

Frankfort 42

No. 273. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 273.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, April 26, 1880. (Received May 13.) No. 115.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the Fishery Exhibition was opened on the 20th instant by the Crown Prince of the German Empire; the ministers, the diplomatic corps, and a very large number of leading persons in Germany, and the commissioners of other states being present. After the formal ceremonies, which consisted of addresses to the Prince as patron, by the minister of agriculture, Dr. Lucius, and Mr. von Behr, the president of the Fishery Exhibition committee, the Prince declared the exhibition open, and, with the principal personages present, made the tour of the various departments. I had the honor to receive him at the American rooms, and to present to him the deputy commissioner, and to go with them through our part of the exhibition.

The Prince and all present were greatly astonished and pleased at the extent and variety of the American products, and although but little time could be given in such a rapid survey, he declared his intent of coming again and making a more careful study of the exhibition, saying that he had already looked it over with considerable care at a visit before the opening ceremonies. I think it is generally acknowledged that the United States have done themselves great credit.

There is certainly no exhibit which surpasses ours. Indeed, I may say that in very many respects there is none which equals it. It has more than fulfilled the most sanguine expectations.

On Thursday, the 22d instant, the Emperor and Empress, in the course of a visit to the exhibition, expressed their admiration of the American department, and in several instances since, it has come to my knowledge that they, as well as other leading personages, have complimented our country on what it has sent.

On Friday evening, the 23d instant, there was a reception, by the burgomeister and city authorities, of the foreign ministers, the commissioners, and the members of the fishery association, under whose general direction the exhibition has been made. It was a very brilliant gathering, all the great rooms in the city hall, one of the largest and finest edifices in Europe, being thrown open and adorned for the occasion. At the request of the president of the exhibition committee, I responded on behalf of the United States. I inclose a copy of the speech, * * * from the National Zeitung.

I may say in conclusion that all my expectations as to credit to be obtained by our country, and the good feeling which our participation in the exhibition would promote, have been more than realized.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure in No. 115.]

Report of speech of Mr. White.

Mr. President, Mr. Burgomeister, and Gentlemen: In the name of the American commission, permit me to thank yon most sincerely for this kind recognition and reception. At the same time, I would congratulate the entire fishery association upon the beauty and extent of the Fishery Exhibition and upon the great success which has already attended it. That it will be of great value to the German nation I cannot doubt; and I also fully believe that it will stimulate and improve the industry of all nations which shall be represented here. It has been the fashion of late years somewhat to depreciate the value of international exhibitions of various kinds. I believe that this is merely a temporary reaction. In spite of the wise and witty things which have been said against them, I fully believe in their great value. From the first great exhibition, established and carried through at London in 1851 by the lamented Prince Albert, with so much care, energy, and self-devotion, down to this last, I believe that all have resulted in great good, not merely from an industrial but also from a political and social point of view.

What these collections of men from all parts of the world do for industry is easily seen, but I believe that they work not less effectually for good upon the general political relations of the competing nations. Men come together from various races and lands, compare their ideas, form acquaintances, and these ripen into friendships, which really do much to keep the minds of leading men in different states in peaceful channels.

This is no mere theory of mine; I may say it is the practical result of my own experience as commissioner from the United States to the last two great international exhibitions. Of course I cannot pretend that such exhibitions frequently prevent war, but I believe that on the whole they more and more tend to diminish the number of wars, to shorten their duration, and to limit their cruelty.

The president has kindly spoken of the services rendered by the United States at the present exhibition. I take pleasure in acknowledging here that what has been done by the American Government and people is but a very small return for favors received, and indicates in a very slight degree the gratitude of all thinking men in America towards the German Fatherland.

So far as industrial matters are concerned, Germany has given to America a very large number, thousands upon thousands indeed, of our most sturdy and valuable workingmen. In the domain of science and art you have also sent us many noble men and excellent ideas; and I may mention here that, having recently received reports from the various consuls of the United States in Germany upon the subject, I am enabled to say at this moment there are more than a thousand American students in various German universities and conservatories. All this is working powerfully upon our entire American plan of higher education to bring us out of the old semi-monastic colonial system.

In social matters, too, the German-American citizens have exercised an influence which has modified American life for good. You have heard much, doubtless, of the American chase for the “Almighty Dollar.” Of course, in the present phase of American development, great energy in industrial matters is naturally necessary; but I am glad to say that German kindliness and love of art and social enjoyment have done much to modify this too strong material tendency, and I may mention here also that the German influence has wrought with great power against the heaviest social curse of the Anglo-Saxon race. It is by no means a trivial thing that the Germans are teaching the Americans more and more to consume light and good German beer in a sensible way instead of brandy and whisky in the wild manner formerly so common among us.

In political relations, also, the Germans have given us many leading men in thought and action, and I may mention that one of the most honored of all, a leader in American thought for the past twenty years, and to-day one of the most important members of the present ministry, was born in Germany, and studied in the university of Berlin.

And here, at least, I feel that I ought to acknowledge what is, perhaps, the greatest service which Germany has rendered my country. During the last twenty years the United States has passed through three terribly severe periods. The first was the struggle against slavery, and in this the Germans in America, almost without exception, threw their entire influence against the slave power. The second period was that of the civil war for the unity, and even for the very existence of the nation; and here, also, the Germans showed themselves always brave and patriotic for the good cause. The third period, through which we have very recently passed, has been the struggle between common sense and unreason in financial administration, the struggle for an honest and good currency and fair payment of debts, against unlimited issues of paper and the payment of debts in depreciated currency; and here, to the victory which has been won, the Germans have largely contributed; here, too, they have constantly stood up or the honor of their adopted country.

You see, then, gentlemen, that whatever we may have done here, we remain largely your debtors, and it will always be to the Government and people of the United States a pleasure and an honor to stand by the side of the German Empire, and to work for the elevation of industry and for the extension of civilization.

No. 274. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 274.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, May 3, 1880. (Received May 19.) No. 118.]

Sir: The discussions of the last fortnight in the Diet (Reichstag) have been exceedingly interesting to all who watch the constitutional development of this empire; and I may take the liberty of calling your attention to them as a whole in a later dispatch. But my first duty is to inform you as to the debates upon German colonial policy, especially in regard to the plans for maintaining German commercial interests in Samoa.

The discussion arose upon a proposal coming directly from the Bundesrath (Federal Council), but understood to emanate from the chancellor himself, having as its aim the revival of the commercial business formerly carried on by Godeffroy & Co., of Hamburg.

The bill proposed to guarantee a certain amount of interest upon the bonds to be issued by a new company, which was to rescue the business of the Godeffroys from the creditors, maintain and extend it. So little doubt was there of its passing, that months ago advertisements and favorable notices appeared in sundry newspapers, calling attention to the newly formed association, asking for subscriptions, and speaking of the government guarantee as a matter of course.

The proposal being presented to the Diet, an unexpected opposition was developed, confined to no one party, but led by Dr. Bamberger, one of the strongest of the National-Liberals. The measure was advocated on the ground of its necessity for the interests of German trade in the Pacific, and to thwart the plans of England and America, looking to their own commercial superiority in that part of the world. Great stress was also laid on the commercial advantages to those who should take part in the scheme. At a later stage of the debate, pains were taken to suggest the idea that it was a part of a great political policy of the chancellor, which it was not thought best at present fully to reveal.

On the other side it was urged, with very great apparent force, that the scheme had no adequate commercial basis; that it would injure German commerce, by establishing a monopolizing government company in competition with the German houses now engaged in the trade; and that there is no international question involved, America and England showing themselves entirely indifferent to the whole matter. During the earlier stages of the discussion there seemed to be some uncertainty as to the attitude of the government. Pains seemed to be taken, by the men supposed to know, to show that the government did not take any especial and direct interest in it; but as the measure was seen to be in danger, and as the struggle became more earnest, it was asserted, apparently with the consent of the highest political authority, that the bill must be regarded as emanating from the government and as presenting a feature in its political plans.

The chancellor himself did not appear, as indeed he has not appeared at any time during the present session of the Diet; but the measure was intrusted to one of the ministerial subordinates, who was strongly aided by a few leading members of various parties.

A statement was also presented to the Diet by Professor Rouleaux, whose letters from the Philadelphia exhibition gave him such a reputation in Germany two or three years ago, and who having just returned from the exhibition at Sydney, was able to adduce arguments from his experience in Australia. Mr. George von Bunsen, who has been considered on general grounds a strong opponent of the chancellor, argued in favor of this measure for political reasons. Mr. Mosle, who is a recognized authority in commercial matters, and who claimed, as regards the points involved, special knowledge derived from a long residence in the tropics, also gave the bill his support. The debate became very earnest, but the result was that although the government showed, before closing, the greatest desire to pass the bill, its opponents secured its rejection by a decided majority.

Great as was the interest of what was said during the debate, it was still more interesting to observe what, apparently by common consent, was not said. While all who voted against the measure seemed to do so on the ground of financial objections, it became apparent very early that the controlling motive of the opposition was an objection to doing anything which should serve as a beginning, or even as an excuse for the beginning, of a colonial policy and an increase in the German navy.

There was very slight reference to this in the discussion; but there were many signs that it was the point on which the matter turned; and * * * this has become more and more evident. There is a very general feeling that the burdens now imposed upon Germany for the army are as great as she can bear; and that to add to these the money necessary for foreign adventures, and the support of a large fleet, would be crushing. To this conviction is due, I am assured, the rejection of the measure; and it is in view of the significance of this fact that I present the matter thus fully.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 275. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 275.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, May 10, 1880. (Received May 26.) No. 121.]

Sir: In confirmation of the opinion expressed in my dispatch No. 118, regarding the real cause of the defeat of the Samoan bill in the Imperial Diet (Reichstag), I would say that the Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, well known as the semi-offical organ of the prince chancellor, has already published two or three articles from newspapers in various parts of Germany condemning the course of the Reichstag, especially on the ground that with the defeat of the same measure the chance of a colonial development of the German Empire is indefinitely postponed. A leading article also appeared two days since in the semi-official paper above mentioned regarding the emigration to foreign countries, especially to America, giving a careful study of the real number thus emigrating, and winding up with the reminder to its readers and to the country of the vast advantage it would be to Germany if this emigration could be directed to some colony under the German flag rather than to countries entirely foreign.

But perhaps the most striking proof of the correctness of the view I have given is to be found in the reply of Dr. Windhorst to the very remarkable speech—the only speech, in fact, during the session—made by the imperial chancellor on Saturday last. In his speech the chancellor had complained, among other things, in very strong terms of the conduct of certain members regarding the Samoan question, alleging that personal feeling toward himself was at the bottom of the opposition to the measure. To this Dr. Windhorst, the acknowledged leader of the central party, which is composed mainly of the Ultramontane and anti-centralization members, replied that his opposition and the opposition of those who voted with him on the Samoan bill, was entirely due to the dread of beginning a colonial policy. While Germany, he declared, was supporting with such great difficulty the army essential to her existence in Europe, it would be quite impossible to think of developing a colonial system for the support of which a large and powerful navy would be absolutely necessary. Considering the fact that Dr. Windhorst was making an attempt to rally the whole house to his support, and also considering the other indications I have given, it is evident that this opposition to a colonial policy was the cause of the rejection of the Samoan bill. * * *

I think it is certain that any attempt to begin a colonial policy in the Pacific by the German Government, even with the chancellor at its head, will be defeated. It is perfectly clear that the vast majority of the German nation has an unconquerable distrust of it.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 276. Mr. Evarts to Mr. White. No. 276.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State,
Washington, May 19, 1880. No. 102.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 115, of the 26th ultimo, and to inform you in reply that this Department is pleased to learn from your report of the opening of the International Fishery Exhibition that the display made by the American department was so creditable to this country. In this connection I desire to commend the happy spirit of your speech on the occasion of the opening of the exhibition as well calculated to strengthen the friendly relations already existing between the two countries.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 277. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 277.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, May 22, 1880. (Received June 10.) No. 127.]

Sir: The session of the Imperial Diet (Reichstag), opened by the Emperor’s commission at the beginning of last February, was closed on the 10th instant with the usual formalities by the vice-chancellor. Although it has not accomplished work of so extensive and important a character as previous sessions, it has adopted several measures of considerable moment to the internal development of the empire.

The debates, too, on bills which failed to receive its sanction, and the constitutional questions which it has had to discuss, have invested its proceedings with more than passing interest.

Contrary to general expectations, the budget showed a deficit of 6,500,000 marks. The results of the new tariff, although it had been in partial operation since July, were not appreciable, and consequently the contributions from the federal states to the imperial exchequer, (Matriculär Beiträge), which had occasioned so much discussion at the end of the previous session, had to be increased by 7,000,000 marks. The total revenue of the financial year 1880–’81 was estimated at about 570,000,000 marks, and the expenditure at about 580,000,000 marks; 130,000,000 marks of the revenue are anticipated from the new tariff, the tobacco tax, and the excise, the total increase looked for being 22,000,000 marks. On the other hand the expenditure is expected to be 30,000,000 marks more than the last year, and thus, unless the tariff and tobacco tax should realize more than can now be reasonably hoped for, the next financial year will begin with a deficit of about 8,000,000 marks.

That such an increase in the customs duties is hardly expected on the part of the government may be inferred from the fact that it attempted, although unsuccessfully, to obtain parliamentary sanction of new taxes, namely, an additional malt tax and new stamp duties.

Other measures of levying additional taxes, notably, a charge upon all who are for any reason deemed unfit for military service, are still in embryo. The most important item in the budget was the providing funds for an increase of the army, the particulars of which I have already communicated to your Department. After a debate, in which Field Marshal von Moltke took a leading part, the Diet sanctioned this proposal, the practical result of which will be that at a cost of about 17,000,000 marks 30,000 mea will be added to the standing army for seven years, increasing the war strength by 300,000 men, at a total yearly cost of 340,000,000 marks. Extra service is also to be imposed upon those who have passed through the standing army, but it should be remarked that this provision applies to none who, at present, belong to any branch of the reserve.

Much time was spent in the discussion of a bill relating to employers and employed. The semi-official press and some members of the government seemed to favor the compulsory formation of guilds for employers, workmen, journeymen, and apprentices in the smaller branches of trade. These were to be empowered, the suggestion was, to elect representatives to an imperial chamber of industry or handicraft in contradistinction to the chamber of commerce, already existing.

As may readily be perceived, the framing of such a measure was surrounded by difficulties. Ultimately its supporters gave up its full scope, and the formation of guilds was not made compulsory; but certain privileges are to be afforded to such corporations to encourage their future development. A bill relating to usury was also passed. This was undoubtedly called forth by the numerous instances in which officers of the army had been induced to sign away their property for a temporary loan. The law is aimed at those who lend money to any person in distress, or who may be inexperienced or thoughtless, upon the security of their property at more than the usual rates of interest. Such professional money-lenders shall be liable to imprisonment not exceeding three months and to a fine not exceeding 15,000 marks. It is a very widespread opinion that this bill was not drawn up with sufficient definiteness and will, therefore, be practically useless. An effort was made in the committee on the bill, by Count William von Bismarck, to declare null and void all bills of sale, bonds, and similar instruments of the kind above indicated when given by officers of the army or other persons in the service of the empire, but this suggestion was not carried into effect.

Socialism was again the subject of much discussion, the special point being the question whether the anti-Socialists law of October, 1878, should be continued, and it was ultimately resolved that it should remain in force until September 30, 1884.

The state of siege in which Berlin is supposed to be, on account of the Socialists, is also to be continued. But on the other hand it must be noted that the Diet is disposed to relax the stringency of the law as regards the individual members of the Socialists party within the Diet, three of their number having, as the result of its vote, been freed from the police regulations imposed upon them in 1878.

Besides the work above mentioned, the Diet prolonged the commercial treaties in Austria-Hungary, Belgium, and Switzerland until June, 1881, and entered into treaties of friendship with the Hawaiian Islands and Paraguay similar to that concluded last year with the Samoan Islands. These are the chief results of a session which has altogether borne comparatively little legislative fruit.

The measures which came before the Diet only to be rejected or to be classed among those with which there was not time to deal were of more interest from an American point of view than any of those adopted.

Among these was the Samoan bill, which proposed to guarantee, until 1899, interest at the rate of 4½ per cent, on the capital of a South Sea trading company established last January on the ruins of the house of Godeffroy & Co., of Hamburg. The reasons which led to its rejection by the Diet have already been reported upon to you. Another futile bill was one intended to alter clause 1, Article IV, of the coinage act of 1871; that instead of the silver coins in circulation being ten marks per head of the population, they should amount to twelve marks per head. But this bill will doubtless be renewed next year. The coinage question had previously been touched upon by Mr. Scholz, of the treasury, in his speech on the budget, and from the statements made by him it appears that the German Government is determined to continue the policy adopted last June, of selling or recoining the large stock of silver it has on hand. The Federal Council has also had the monetary question before it. Two of its committees were asked to report on the double standard. This was duly done by them, but the substance of their report, which was a verbal one, has not been made public.

Several proposals of new taxes rendered necessary by the increased armaments and the depression of trade affecting the customs and excise revenues were also submitted to the Diet, or had been already prepared by the Federal Council. There were to be, as already mentioned, additions to the malt tax, new stamps duties, and a tax on all who, for any bodily defect or other recognized cause, are released from service in the army. As the financial needs of the country are pressing, these proposals may be expected to reappear next session.

Another important bill rejected by the Diet was that which sought to restrict the sea traffic carried on between German ports to German vessels alone.

The political tendencies of the session have been somewhat startling, although not altogether unexpected. As I pointed out to you in my dispatch No. 40, it was possible that Prince Bismarck might co-operate with the center, i. e., the Ultramontane party, so long as the interests of the nation were not seriously affected. He undoubtedly used the support of the center to enable him to pass the tariff bill of last summer. It was then thought that the chancellor was “on the road to Canossa.” The Liberal and Progressionist journals pictured him arm in arm with the Pope. Dr. Falk resigned and supposed reaction was on foot in the Kultur-Kampf. That was at the end of last year’s session of the Diet. The closing of the session this year witnesses a scene in which the positions are reversed.

The expectation that the agreement between the Conservative parties and the Ultramontanes will be continued has proved ill-founded. When in February last the Pope addressed a letter to the ex-bishop of Cologne, in which he surrendered one of the main points demanded of him by the Prussian Government, the negotiations with the Vatican had apparently reached their most effective point. Since then there has been a change in the attitude of the center. When the military bill was before the Diet, the center opposed it; when the anti-Socialist law was to be prolonged, the center argued for its abolition and when one of the chancellor’s favorite projects, the Samoan bill, came to be discussed, the center defeated it. More than one question of parliamentary privilege had troubled the chancellor towards the close of the session; and when, on the 8th instant, his old co-worker, Dr. Delbrück, supported by the Ultramontanes, the Progressionists, and the National-Liberals, led the attack against him on the Elbe navigation act, the silence he had maintained throughout the session was suddenly broken, and in an impassioned speech he attacked first the center and then the parties, especially the National-Liberals, who, from “the tower,” which, as he said, the center supplied, do their utmost to defeat his efforts to consolidate the German union.

The question before the Diet was a constitutional one. Dr. Delbrück, as a member of the Federal Council committee having charge of the commercial treaty with Austria-Hungary, had maintained that only the Diet could move the customs line on the Elbe from a point above Hamburg to one below that port 5 the government affirmed that the Federal Council was fully empowered to make such a change, and that the privileges of the Diet would not thereby be infringed. It was seen that if the Federal Council could thus deal with the customs line on the Elbe, it would also have the right to include a suburb of Hamburg within the line. The chancellor’s speech dealt very briefly with this constitutional question. * * * The report of the committee, however, was referred back to the Federal Council, and as the Diet closed its sessions for this year on that day, the question of privilege is left in abeyance. With regard to Hamburg, a compromise has been arrived at; certain committees of the Federal Council being left to report on the expediency of including a suburb of that port within the customs union, without any reference to the constitutional question involved.

The chancellor argues that the right of moving the district lines for levying customs duties is one which the Emperor of Germany, as King of Prussia, never made over to the Diet. But the Bavarian minister at the Imperial Court, who is also a member of the council, does not seem to agree with him, and in consequence of some unpleasant words between him and the chancellor on account of this difference of opinion, the Bavarian minister has applied for leave to resign his position.

The chancellor’s appeal for support has thrown much light on the relations of the various parties one to the other. There seems no longer to be any bond between the Conservatives and Ultramontanes, and the chancellor’s suggestion that the Liberals should coalesce with the Conservatives in supporting the government against the demands of the Ultramontanes is not likely to be carried out. From sundry parts of his speech it must be concluded that he despairs of the Liberals ever giving up their own party views in order to assist him in consolidating the empire, unless he recompenses them by concessions in his financial policy. If the Liberals will not come to the Conservatives, the Conservatives must go to the Ultramontanes, was a leading idea of his speech, and it is still to be seen who will make a concession.

* * * * * * *

The proceedings in the Federal Council which led the chancellor to proffer his resignation have resulted in the adoption of a new code of rules, by which the representation of several states through one member is permitted only when authority for this is produced from their respective governments; and this is to remain in force for only one sitting. By this measure it is hoped that the systematic representation by substitutes, which in April last led to such serious anomalies, will be avoided in future.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 278. Mr. Evarts to Mr. White. No. 278.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of State,
Washington, May 25, 1880. No. 104.]

Sir: I have given some consideration to the questions presented in your dispatch No. 114, concerning the hardships which you so earnestly represent as involved in charging passport fees upon American students in straitened circumstances abroad. I cannot but admire, with some little admixture of surprise, the enterprise shown by the large number of students of both sexes, amounting, as you show, in Germany alone, to many hundreds, who gladly meet the burden of a long and often to them expensive journey, to live for years in a foreign land on the slender resources they may be able to draw from their humble American homes, far removed from kindred of speech and blood, and subject to privations and hardships affecting not only themselves, but also their families in not infrequent cases, in pursuit of the educational advantages which the foreign seats of learning are deemed to offer over the many American institutions which freely open their doors to the home student in like circumstances of life and purse.

Unfortunately, however, what relief I would otherwise feel disposed to recommend in the sense you suggest would not, in my judgment, be compatible with that freedom from liability to abuse which the interests of our domestic administration seem to demand. To establish class distinctions in the issue of passports would be an innovation, opening the way to the consideration of other claims to favor, of equal or even greater justice. It is to the interest of our system to have passports procured here by travelers before proceeding abroad, as a check upon the doubtful applications too often presented to our legations. The modifications you propose would soon relieve the Department from nearly all applications of the class in question and increase correspondingly the number of applications at legations; and unless such rigid measures for the prevention of abuse in the issue of free passports thereat were adopted as would entail additional burdens upon our legations and vexations upon the applicants, the estimate of 100 passports you made on the sixth page of your dispatch would probably be materially affected.

I regret, with you, the hardship which may be entailed by the exaction of a passport fee in the few really meritorious cases which doubtless arise from time to time, but I am disposed, nevertheless, to consider this hardship as but a concomitant of the other and greater hardships entailed by the pursuit of knowledge at so great a distance from home.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 279. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 279.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, May 31, 1880. (Received June 16.) No. 129.]

Sir: The grand annual spring parade of the troops of Berlin and its neighborhood, about thirty thousand in all, occurred on Saturday last, the Emperor being present on horseback, and to all appearances vigorous and happy. I spare the details; the only important point to our government appearing to me to be that by general consent among those whose knowledge and experience entitled them to judge, the review shows that the energy of the military authorities of Prussia in training their troops has not been in the slightest degree relaxed, but rather increased. A diplomatist of long experience in various countries in Europe, and who has resided for many years in, and only recently left, Paris, informed me that he had never in France or elsewhere seen at any parade or review so many of the qualities thought desirable in troops as were shown at this parade on Saturday; that it was by far the most perfect thing of the kind he had ever seen. All this goes to show that the German Government, while it is increasing its army, does not intend to allow its efficiency to be in the slightest degree relaxed, but to keep it up to the highest point in every respect.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 280. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 280.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, June 22, 1880. (Received July 8.) No. 132.]

Sir: The jurors’ awards at the International Fishery Exhibition were made known on Thursday last in the presence of the German Crown Prince, the patron of the German Fishery Association, under whose nominal auspices the exhibition has been held. The Crown Prince was accompanied by Prince Hermann, of Saxe-Weimar; and there were also present Dr. Lucius, the Prussian minister of agriculture and honorary president of the exhibition committee; the ministers of finance, education, and the interior; the diplomatic representatives of a large majority of the leading powers; the duke of Ratibor; the governor of Berlin; Mr. von Schlözer, the German minister to the United States; the leading members of the exhibition committee, including its president, Mr. von Behr, its vice-president, Mr. G. von Bunsen, Ministerial Director Marcard, and others.

The minister, Dr. Lucius, having-delivered a brief address, the Crown Prince requested that the prize-list be made known.

To the United States, and to each of the other governments—ten in all—participating in the exhibition, there were accorded an address of thanks and a gold medal. The foremost name on the list for the great prizes of honor was that of Prof. Spencer F. Baird, the official representative of the United States, as the recipient of the first prize, a magnificent table decoration in gold and silver, the gift of the German Emperor. The announcement of this award was received with expressions of hearty approval. The remaining twelve honorary prizes were awarded to the leading pisciculturists of Germany, Italy, Sweden, and Denmark. The gold medals with especial honorary diplomas were awarded to twenty-five exhibitors, and of these, as will be seen from the inclosed official list, the United States took two, one being awarded to the Department of the Treasury, and the other to the Fishery Commission, for our collective exhibits—a success attained by no other country represented at the exhibition. Our country, indeed, surpassed all others in the department of pisciculture, in which, of the eleven gold medals, six were bestowed upon citizens of the United States.

The commission also received a gold medal for fish products, and a silver medal for its exhibits of fishermen’s costumes, portable tents, and fishing appliances generally. Nor should the numerous private exhibitors of the United States, who have taken off a very large proportion of the awards in Class I, that of preparations of fish, be forgotten. The exhibition has enabled these, as well as the commissioners, to make a display of American goods which is sure to benefit our commercial interests by extending a knowledge of the value of our fishery products.

When the reading of the list was ended, the United States deputy commissioner, Mr. Brown Goode, in a few well-chosen words, proposed the health of the Emperor. The Italian commissioner having made a similar proposal with reference to the Crown Prince, His Highness congratulated the commissioners and the leading prize-takers one by one on the success of their efforts, and in the case of Mr. Goode added expressions of thanks for the cordial manner in which he had referred to the Emperor.

It was generally admitted that the display of the United States was far the largest and most comprehensive in the exhibition; and the congratulations heard on all sides were a pleasing proof that our success has been received in the best and fairest spirit.

I may add, in summing up the whole matter, that the exhibition has succeeded, from first to last, far beyond the expectations of the most sanguine. Many of the rulers and statesmen of Germany have made special visits; the buildings have been steadily thronged with thoughtful observers from all parts of Europe; and while the main purpose of the exhibition—the increase and extension of knowledge regarding the great industries involved—has been subserved in the highest degree, there has been as certainly spread among thousands of thoughtful leaders of European opinion an increased respect for the skill, vigor, and thoroughness of our own countrymen.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure in No. 132.]

prizes of honor.

1. First prize of honor of His Majesty the German Emperor and King of Prussia: Prof. Spencer F. Baird, of Washington.

gold medal with special diploma of honor.

15. United States Treasury Department, Coast Survey. 1516. Illustration of apparatus for deep-sea fishing examinations. Coast map of the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Documents and maps.

16. United States Commission of Fish and Fisheries, at Washington. 1510, 1512, 1514,

1520, 1521. Grand collective exhibition.

Class I.

gold medals.

15. Isinglass and Glue Company, Gloucester. Isinglass and glue, with articles manufactured therefrom.

31. United States Commission of Fish and Fisheries, America. Collective exhibition.

silver medals.

1. Alaska Commercial Company, San Francisco. Seal-skins.

2. At wood, N. E., Provincetown, Mass. Fish-oils.

3. Beardsley’s, J. W., Sons, New York. Salt and smoked fish.

12. Booth, A., & Co., Chicago and San Francisco. Preserved salmon.

18. Forrest & Co., Halifax. Live lobsters.

45. Potter & Wrightington, Boston, Mass. Preserved fish.

46. Portland Packing Company, U. S. of America. Preserved fish.

50. Russian Cement Company, Rockport, Mass. Fish-glue.

60. Rosenstein Brothers, New York. Preserved fish.

64. Thorne, Chr. Aug., Massachusetts. 1020, 1075, 1120. Preserved fish.

65. Thurber, H. K. and F. B., & Co., New York. Preserved fish.

70. Ward, Dr. H., America. Objects of natural history of various kinds.

73. Hagedorn, Hamburg, New York. 145. Fresh American oysters.

bronze medals.

7. Bartlett, J. H., & Son, New Bedford, Mass. Preserved fish. Fish-oils.

15. Carley, J. B. M., New York. Oysters and preserved fish.

19. Cook, Caleb, Provincetown, Mass. 159. Fish-oil of different varieties.

22. Dodd, A. W., Gloucester. Fish-oils.

58. Lewis, W. K., & Co., Boston. 146. Preserved salmon.

67. Mattheson & Brown, Campbellton. Lobsters.

80. Palmer, Joseph, America. Zoological preparations.

84. Pryer, Jasper, New York. Oil of sea-mammals.

92. Schmidt, J., New York. Preserved fish.

93. Smillie, F. W., America. Photographs of fish.

102. Underwood, William, & Co., Boston, Fresh fish.

114. Wonson, William H., & Co., Gloucester. Smoked fish.

honorable mention.

3. Ams, Max, & Co., New York. Pickled fish.

7. Anthony, H. M., New York. Preserved salmon.

12. Booth, A., & Co., Baltimore, Chicago, and San Francisco. 237. Salmon in boxes, Oregon salmon in boxes.

17. Cavin Brothers, Alberton. Preserved lobsters.

23. Day, Kemp & Co., New York. Mackerel, oysters, muscles, preserved.

51. Howe & French, Boston, Mass. Isinglass.

75. Maryland Packing Company, Baltimore. 146. Fresh hard-shell crabs in boxes.

77. Mayo, H., & Co., Boston. 141, 143, 145, 146. Preserved herring, cod, and other fish.

78. McMenamia & Co., Hampton. 146, 237. Fresh crabs, oysters.

108. Snow, Franklin & Co., Boston. 141, 143, 144, 145. Preparations of mackerel.

109. Schmidt, S., New York. 145. Pickled eels in jelly.

116. Stone, Livingston, Charlestown, New Hampshire. Pictures of fish (in water-colors), salmon eggs in alcohol.

CLASS II.

gold medal.

9. Leonard, H. L., Bangor, Me. Fishing-rods of split bamboo.

silver medal.

20. Everson, James, Brooklyn, N. Y. Shell-boat.

49. Wilcox, Crittenden & Co., Middleton, Conn. Fishing apparatus.

honorable mention.

26. Collins, J. W., Gloucester, Mass. 1511. Marine drag for vessels lying to in a storm.

CLASS III.

gold medal.

1. Atkins, C. G., Bucksport, Me. 39. Fish-breeding apparatus. Hatching-house.

5. Ferguson, J. B., Baltimore, Md. Fish-breeding on steamers.

6. Green, Seth, Rochester, New York. Collective exhibition of apparatus for salmon and shad breeding.

7. McDonald, M., Lexington, Va. Salmon ladder.

8. Mather, Fred., New York. Original infundibular hatching apparatus, and apparatus for the transportation of young fish and spawn.

11. Stone, Livingston, Charlestown, N. H. Fish-breeding apparatus.

honorable mention.

1. Annin, James, Jr., Caledonia, N. Y. Hatching apparatus.

2. Clark, F. N., Northville, Mich. Boxes for breeding salmonoids, and automatic selectors.

CLASS IV.

bronze medal.

4. Mather, Fred., New York. Vessel for transporting live fish.

CLASS VI.

silver medal.

6. Merriman, C. S., New York. Life-saving costume (of India rubber).

8. United States Commission of Fish and Fisheries, Washington, 1515. Clothing for fishermen. Portable tent and fishing apparatus.

CLASS IX.

silver medal.

3. Goode, Geo. Brown, Washington. 1520, 1521. Maps of the dissemination of esculent American fish.

7. Forest and Stream Publishing Company, New York. Newspaper: Forest and Stream.

17. Scribner, Charles, & Sons, New York. The Game Fish of the United States.

18. Thaxter, S. & Co., Boston. Eldridge’s coast maps.

honorable mention.

10. United States Hydrographic Office, America. 1520, 1521. General coast maps of America.

11. United States Engineer Bureau, Washington, America. 1520, 1521. Map of the inland waters of the United States.

No. 281. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 281.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, July 5, 1880. (Received July 22.) No. 137.]

Sir: The change of government in England seems to have led to negotiations between the great powers of Europe, opening up anew one phase of what is known as “the Eastern question.”

When in the summer of 1878 the Berlin treaty was signed, it was not expected that a revolution of political opinion in England would occur very soon, and a slow course of procedure was therefore looked for with regard to the carrying out of the provisions of that treaty. The new British Government, however, had not been in office more than a month before negotiations were opened with the Porte in the intent to bring about a settlement of affairs. Mr. Goschen was sent to Constantinople, where, in concert with the ambassadors of the six great powers, he addressed what is known as “the identical note “to the Sultan. This dealt in very frank terms with particular reforms, and with certain provisions of the treaty, which the Porte should have carried into execution.

The note is chiefly remarkable as evidence of the fact that the powers are, nominally at least, quite unanimous in urging upon Turkey the necessity for speedy action on her part, if she does not wish entirely to lose their good-will. Further evidence of this fact, as regards another part of the question, is the following invitation, which the German Government, at the suggestion of the British cabinet, and, it is understood, at the request of Greece, communicated, in the beginning of June last, through its representatives abroad, to the Governments of England, France, Russia, Austria-Hungary, and Italy: The Government of His Majesty the German Emperor and King of Prussia has received the communication forwarded to it by the secretary of state for foreign affairs of Her Britannic Majesty on the Greco-Turkish frontier affair. This communication having met with a favorable reception from all the European cabinets, the Government of His Majesty, guided by the desire of seeing the common work which was sealed by the treaty of Berlin fully and entirely executed, has the honor of proposing to those powers, whose mediation is provided for by article twenty-four of that instrument, to commission their ambassadors in Berlin to meet there in conference on the 16th of June for the purpose of applying themselves to the task which appears to be assigned to their governments by the stipulations of that article.

The article referred to is as follows: In the event of the Sublime Porte and Greece being unable to agree upon the rectification of frontier suggested in the 13th protocol of the Congress of Berlin, Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, Great Britain, Italy, and Russia reserve to themselves to offer their mediation to the two parties to facilitate negotiations.

This article has not remained altogether a dead letter, for since the Berlin treaty was signed, as the contending parties would not accept the frontier proposed in the protocol, which is that drawn up by M. Waddington, several other propositions for new lines have been made. First of all, in March, 1879, the Porte suggested a somewhat indefinite boundary; in June, of the same year, England advanced a proposal; in October, Greece came forward with another 5 in November, Turkey modified the line she had suggested in March; in December, Greece changed the proposal she had made in November; and at the close of the year, France laid down the line which she thought should be adopted.

These conflicting suggestions remaining fruitless, the note above quoted was issued by the German Government, and on the day named, the 16th ultimo, the ambassadors to Germany of the mediatory powers met in the Berlin foreign office.

The following is a list of their names and the countries they represented, as officially published: Germany.—Prince von Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst, German ambassador at Paris, and now acting as temporary chief of the foreign office.

France.—Count de St. Vallier.

England.—Lord Odo Russell.

Austria-Hungary.—Count Széchéngi.

Italy.—Count de Launay.

Russia.—M. de Sabouroff, late Russian minister at Athens.

Count de Morey, of the French foreign office, and Dr. Busch, a distinguished orientialist, of the German foreign office, were chosen as secretaries to the conference.

Each mediatory power was also represented by technical delegates, who held deliberations among themselves and advised the diplomatic representations on geographical and strategical points. They were all men of much experience, many of them having personal knowledge of the districts through which the frontier line was to be drawn.

Their names are: For Germany.—Colonel Blume, of a Brandenburg (Prussian) fusileer regiment.

England.—General Sir Lintorn Simmons, and Major Ardogh, his aide-de-camp.

France.—Colonel Perrier, of the general staff, member of the institute, and of the bureau of longitudes 5 and Count de la Ferronays, major of a dragoon regiment.

Austria-Hungary—Consul-General Zwiedenik, and Colonel von Ripp, of the general staff.

Italy.—Brigadier-General Sironi, and Major Osio, military attaché to the Italian embassy.

Russia.—General Bobrikoff.

Both the Porte and Greece were asked to send unofficial delegates who should informally acquaint the mediatory ambassadors of the wishes of their respective governments. Greece accepted this invitation, and in addition to the services of her minister, M. Rangabé, she has had those of M. Armenis Brailas, Greek minister at St. Petersburg; those of M. Fontoulis, of the Greek consulate in Epirus; and those of M. Metaxas and Captain Licondis, all men, it is stated, of much technical and special knowledge on the frontier question.

The Porte left the furtherance of its interest to the Turkish embassy here.

At its first sitting the conference elected Prince von Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst its president, and determined its course of procedure. Its deliberations were supposed to be strictly secret; but it has transpired that the boundary line laid down in the protocol was referred to the technical delegates as a base on which to construct a line which should be practicable and mutually satisfactory. This the delegates accordingly proceeded to do by the aid of the Austrian staff maps, considering the line piece by piece, and then referring their decisions to the meeting of the conference proper.

It has since transpired, through well-informed authorities, that the line ultimately unanimously adopted was suggested by the French ambassador, at the recommendation of the British technical delegate, General Sir Lintorn Simmons.

This line runs from the northern branch of the Kalamas delta, a little above the thirty-ninth degree of latitude, following the river course northward to Poadhoniani, in the thirty-ninth degree of latitude. Then, turning northeastward, it passes through the village of Kalbáki, and divides the Zagórion district into two parts, giving to Greece the valleys of the Zagoritikos and Metsovitikos Rivers with the towns of Métsovon and Jânnina. It then follows the watershed north of the river Salamorias, touching the Demirkapón and Tahapka peaks, intersecting the Olympian Mountain range through its highest peak, Mount Ilias, and then running eastward to the Ægean Sea, which it touches at the mouth of the river Mavrolongos.

This line cedes to Greece, it may be observed, all she asked for last December, excepting the region north of the Kalamâs, opposite the central portion of Corfu, and the northernmost spurs of the Olympian range. The district it gives to Greece contains, it is reported, a population of 300,000, of whom one-third are Mohammedans and the remainder Greek Christians. Its extent is calculated at 22,000 square kilometers.

In an appendix, the conference suggests regulations regarding church property in the ceded district, advises that Greece should take over a portion of the Turkish national debt, that the straits between Corfu and Epirus should be free to all navigation, and that the harbors of Yolo and Arta-Préveza be open to the navies of all the powers.

The last sitting of the conference took place on the 1st instant, when a “collective note” to the Porte and Greece was signed by the ambassadors. This note recounts the occurrence which led to the mediation of the powers, indicates the frontier line agreed upon, and invites Greece and Turkey to accept it. This communication has been made to the Porte and to the Greek Government, and the reply of the former is awaited with some anxiety.

I may say in conclusion, regarding the whole matter, that the general drift of feeling constantly and strongly favors Greece, and that there is general satisfaction that Greece, though obtaining less than she asked at first, has secured more than was formerly proposed by any of the great powers.

During the negotiations Austria has generally shown a natural tendency to hold back. Russia has made a show, sometimes of generosity, sometimes of opposition, but generally of indifference, the main-spring of her policy throughout being doubtless the desire to increase complications, and thus to do what will most surely aid in the dissolution of the Turkish Empire. But there is reason to suppose that the present Queen of Greece, niece of the Russian Emperor, and who is now in Russia, has had some influence to soften Russian opposition to Greek claims.

The question now arises as to how the whole matter will be received by the Porte. The European papers have contained statements that the determination of the Porte, as formerly expressed, to consider the results arrived at by the conference merely as proposals, had been changed, and that they would be accepted as final.

There is great reason now to suppose that these statements are utterly without foundation. It is now understood that from nothing that the Government of the Sultan has done could it be assumed that the decision of the conference would be accepted; that, on the other hand, there are many things which point the other way, and that the European governments may find themselves greatly embarrassed by the quiet and stubborn refusal of the Porte to accept their conclusions.

As to the greater question, in the development of which all this is but a passing phase, there is certainly a general opinion among thoughtful men that the rule of the present dynasty at Constantinople, and, indeed, the Turkish Empire in its present form, is rapidly approaching its end.

While the dispatch of Mr. Layard, recently published, has not revealed much of a general sort which the public has not before known, it has deepened this feeling throughout Europe, and, above all, in England. The question at the bottom of all thinking on the subject at present, though it rarely comes to the surface, is really, What power can be developed to which Europe can safely give the succession at Constantinople?

Of the solutions proposed, only three seem to claim much thoughtful attention. The first is to give it to one of the existing great powers; the second is to give it to Greece-; the third is to place it in the hands of a power, or confederation of powers, to be erected upon the Balkan Peninsula.

The first seems utterly inadmissible; the second hardly within the range of possibilities; the third surrounded by enormous difficulties. The ultimate solution will be, of course, a matter of time, probably of long time; but it will be surprising if the fierce beginnings of the end are prevented much longer.

With the authorities at Constantinople desperate; with over 20,000 Turks in the districts ceded by the conference to Greece, armed with the best weapons, and called to give up their homes; with all the religious and race hatreds, which are seething in the Balkan Peninsula and neighboring territories; with Bulgaria arming most completely, and well-trained Russian officers constantly arriving to take part in her affairs, it will require almost superhuman efforts to prevent the outbreak of another war. And though happily the United States has no direct concern with the matter in Europe, it is by no means unlikely that the final convulsions of the Ottoman power will extend to Asia Minor, and for a time place American officers, traders, and missionaries there in peril.

I inclose a map, prepared by Professor Kiepert, a leading geographer here, showing the lines proposed at various times and giving some indications of the line adopted.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 282. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 282.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, September 1, 1880. (Received September 23.) No. 146.]

Sir: I have the honor to state that a note has been received from the foreign office of the German Empire, of which a copy and translation are inclosed, announcing in substance that the military fine of John Schehr has been confirmed on the ground that the treaty of 1868 does not extend to Alsace-Lorraine.

The decision will doubtless surprise you; the circumstances under which it has been rendered are as follows:

On February 27, 1879, application was made to the foreign office in behalf of Michael Pacquet, for the remission of a military fine. No answer having been received from the foreign office, attention was again called to the case on June 3 and November 26, 1879, with the same result.

On March 10 of the same year, the cases of the brothers Franz and Theobald Hess, who were subjected to fines, were presented, and on March 31 the foreign office replied that the cases should be investigated; but nothing having been heard regarding the matter, attention was again called to it on October 3, 1879.

On November 21, 1879, the case of Joseph Lauber, who was fined and ordered to leave, was presented, and on the 27th of that month the foreign office replied that an investigation had been ordered. Similar replies had been received from the foreign office in the case of Alphonse Sester, of February 9 last, of Alois Fischer, February 12 last, and of J. P. Q. Schaug, of March 20 last.

While cases apparently similar, arising in various other parts of the empire, were dealt with by the foreign office in the usual time, there was in the cases above mentioned, all of which occurred in Alsace-Lorraine, great delay. I naturally attributed it to the condition of those provinces, different as it is from that in the older parts of the empire; but from time to time made efforts to secure a decision, Mr. Everett having already endeavored in vain to do so. Soon after my arrival I called the attention of the foreign office to the matter, and followed this up by suggestions and requests to the same purpose in my conversations with Mr. von Billow on other subjects.

At a still later time I called upon Mr. von Philipsborn and urged upon him the necessity of a decision at the earliest moment possible, alluding to the fact that my general dispatch and report on all the cases of the year had been long delayed, waiting for a decision on these very cases; and on leaving him I placed in his hands a memorandum of them. On one other occasion also, calling on business, I alluded to these decisions so long delayed, and received assurances that everything possible should be done, and I again waited.

In addition to the difficulties in Alsace-Lorraine, I felt bound to make allowances for another cause of delay, naMély, the many changes which have taken place in the foreign office since my arrival. As you are aware, after the death of Mr. von Bülow, the duties of the ministry were sometimes discharged by Mr. von Philipsborn and sometimes by Mr. von Radowitz; but they were finally transferred to Prince von Hoheniohe-Schillingsfürst, who, though ambassador at Paris, is now also minister of foreign affairs ad interim. On the 13th of October last, I wrote to Mr. von Philipsborn on the subject, and finally called upon him, making a statement of the matter and leaving a memorandum.

These cases having become so numerous, and the time since the earlier ones so long, naMély, nearly eighteen months, and the usual notes and interviews proving to be entirely ineffectual, it seemed absolutely necessary to do something which would bring an answer; and I therefore, in my above-mentioned note of October 13 last, asked for distinct information as to whether the principles laid down in certain circulars in execution of the treaty of February 22, 1868, with the North German Confederation, addressed by the Prussian minister of justice and of the interior, on the 5th of July, 1868, to certain Prussian courts and officials for their guidance, were to be observed in Alsace-Lorraine, which request was calculated to elicit a declaration from the Imperial German Government as to whether the treaty in question applied to that territory.

Difficult as it was to believe that an interpretation on which all the business in regard to such cases up to February, 1879, had been conducted was to be abandoned, especially in view of the clear statements that had been made in the matter by the immediate predecessors of the present minister, it was very evident that some change of policy had been determined upon; and it seemed dangerous longer to remain in the dark regarding it.

* * * * * * *

Considering the development of the matter thus far, and the importance of warding off great hardships from those who by this new decision have been or may be brought into great difficulty or even distress, I have not felt warranted in delaying a note to the foreign office until receiving more definite instructions from the Department. A copy of this note is inclosed.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 146.]

Mr. White to Mr. von Philipsborn.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, October 13, 1879.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, has the honor to call the attention of his excellency Mr. von Philipsborn, in charge of the foreign office, to the case of John Schehr, a native of Alsace and a naturalized citizen of the United States.

From Mr. Schehr’s statement, it appears that he was born at Mothern, January 31, 1855; that he emigrated to the United States October 28, 1873; that he was naturalized September 3, 1879, and returned to Germany on a visit in the same month. It further appears that the kreisdirector of Wessemburg has summoned Mr. Schehr to pay a fine of 600 marks for non-performance of military duty, and when shown the ministerial decrees of 1863, addressed to officials of the empire, and requiring them to report the case to the minister of justice before action, is understood to have replied that these decrees did not apply to Alsace, and that Mr. Schehr did wrong to address the American legation instead of petitioning His Majesty the Emperor.

The undersigned, in view of the fact that a space of only ten days has been allowed to Mr. Schehr to obtain a remission of his fine, would respectfully request his excellency Mr. von Philipsborn to cause this case to be promptly investigated, and that if the facts prove to be as stated, this fine may be remitted.

The undersigned would also be glad to be informed if it is a fact that the ministerial decrees, which form an integral part of the treaty of 1868, have not been extended to Alsace-Lorraine, or have been superseded by others, as the local authorities in that district appear invariably to disregard them, and needlessly among naturalized American citizens returning to visit their families.

The undersigned incloses the citizen paper of Mr. Schehr with the respectful request for its ultimate return, and avails himself, &c.

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 146.]

Circular of Prussian ministers of July, 1868.

circular of the minister of justice.

In concluding the treaty of the 22d of February of this year (Bulletin of the Laws of the Confederation, p. 228) agreed upon between the North German Confederation and the United States of America, respecting the nationality of emigrants, it was the prevailing intention that in conformity to the second article of that treaty the punishment incurred by punishable emigration is not to be brought to execution on occasion of a return of the emigrant to his original country if the returning emigrant has obtained naturalization in the other country in conformity to the first article of said treaty.

In consideration whereof, in every case where legally valid condemnations of this kind exist against such persons, an official report is to be made to the minister of justice respecting the remission of the declared punishments and costs by way of grace; and, in order to shorten and simplify the matter, these recommendations are to be consolidated in a table, if the number of cases is large enough to justify a tabular form of report.

Berlin, the 5th July, 1868.
The Minister of Justice:
Dr. LEONHARDT.

To all royal courts of appeal, to all royal supreme courts, and to the state attorneys-general in Kiel, Cassel, Wiesbaden, and Frankfort-on-the-Main.

circular of the 6th of july, 1868.

Ministry of the Interior.

In concluding the treaty of the 22d of February of this year (Bulletin of Laws of the Confederation, page 228) between the North German Confederation and the United States of America, it was the prevailing intention, that, in conformity to article 2 of this treaty, the punishable action, committed by the unauthorized emigration of a citizen of the Confederation to the United States of America, should not be made the ground for a penal prosecution upon the return of such person to his former country after absence of not less than five years, and that the punishment for such action, even though already legally declared, should not be consummated if the person has acquired in America the right of citizenship in conformity to article 1 of said treaty.

The royal government is therefore instructed in the cases indicated to abstain from recommending trial and punishment, and in general from every kind of prosecution, whenever the person in question is able to produce the proof that he has become a naturalized citizen of the United States of America, in conformity with the first clause of article 1.

The proper judicial authorities will be furnished by the minister of justice with an instruction in all cases where legal sentences of this kind, against the persons above described, exist, to report officially the remission, by way of grace, of the declared punishments and costs.

Berlin, the 6th of July, 1868.
For the Minister of the Interior:
SULZER.

To all governments of the monarchy.

I send a copy to your, &c., with the very humble request that you will at once be pleased to provide the bailiwicks with the proper notice. For the Minister of the Interior:

SULZER.

To the chief president at Hanover and to the president of the police here, a copy in like manner for their guidance.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 146.—Translation.]

Prince von Hohenlohe to Mr. White.

Foreign Office, Berlin, August 5, 1880.

The esteemed note of the envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, Mr. And. D. White, of October 13 last, concerning the case of John Schehr, a native of Alsace-Lorraine, naturalized in the United States, and several analogous cases, and particularly the inquiry contained in the said esteemed note as to whether the decrees of the royal Prussian ministers of the interior and of justice, in execution of the North German and North American treaty of February 22, 1868, regulating nationality, were applicable to Alsace-Lorraine, have led to a close consideration among all the authorities concerned of the empire and of the imperial lands (Alsace-Lorraine) as to whether the provisions of that treaty or of one of the treaties regulating nationality, concluded in 1868 between the South German State and the United States of America, were to be regarded as having validity and legal force for Alsace-Lorraine.

This consideration has led to the result, that as Alsace-Lorraine at no time constituted a part of the North German Confederation, or belonged to one of the South German States (Bavaria, Württemberg, Baden, South Hesse), none of these treaties, agreed upon in 1868, appear to apply to Alsace-Lorraine.

The laws concerning nationality existing in Alsace-Lorraine, therefore, govern there without any treaty limitations in favor of people emigrating thence to the United States. These people, therefore, unless formally discharged from Alsace-Lorraine allegiance, do not lose such allegiance until they have resided abroad uninterruptedly for the period of ten years, and are during this period required to perform the duties devolving upon them in consequence of their allegiance to Alsace-Lorraine.

As John Schehr, who returned in September last to Alsace, and whose certificate of naturalization is herewith respectfully returned, therefore still owes allegiance to Alsace-Lorraine, and is in duty bound to perform military service, having withdrawn himself from the performance of this duty, he has been legally adjudged by the imperial land court at Strasburg, under date of December 31, 1878, to a pecuniary fine of 600 marks.

While the undersigned regrets that under these circumstances it has not proved feasible to obtain a cancellation (aufhebung) of this penal judgment, and while expressing the purpose of hereafter making reply to the other cases hereinbefore mentioned, he also avails himself, &c.,

HOHENLOHE.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 146.]

Mr. White to Prince von Hohenlohe.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, August 28, 1880.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, has the honor to acknowledge the esteemed note of his highness Prince von Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst, secretary of state, ad interim, for foreign affairs, dated August 5 last, referring directly to the case of John Schehr, but indirectly to the application of the treaty of 1868 to Alsace-Lorraine, and he desires most respectfully, but at the same time most earnestly, to urge upon the attention of his highness the following considerations:

First. However weighty may have been the reasons which led to the declaration announced in the note of his highness, above referred to, the undersigned believes that his highness will agree that, in view of the development of the North German Confederation into the German Empire, and the incorporation of Alsace-Lorraine with the latter, a very strong argument may be made in support of the proposition that the treaty of 1868 between the United States and the North German Confederation became binding upon the empire which was developed out of said confederation, and especially upon the new acquisition of territory made by the same controlling power which originally signed the treaty.

Second. This view was distinctly announced at the establishment of the empire by the American envoy, Mr. Bancroft, as that which both parties agreed to, and in his entire correspondence with his own government he steadily and constantly declared it to be undisputed by the Imperial German Government.

Third. That the American envoy, Mr. Bancroft, was not mistaken in this view is shown by the fact that this construction of the treaty as bearing upon Alsace-Lorraine has been acquiesced in fully by the imperial government for nearly ten years, as is clearly shown in the entire correspondence in the following cases, and especially in the notes of the imperial foreign office, bearing the dates subjoined: 1. August Mély, note of March 20, 1873.

2. Simon Weil, note of June 7, 1875.

3. Benjamin Becker, note of March 6, 1878.

4. Joseph Wackermann, notes of June 11, 1878, August 23, 1878, July 24, 1879.

5. George Wehrung, note of December 16, 1878.

6. Elie Bloch, notes of January 25, 1879, July 13, 1879.

7. Edmund Klein, notes of January 26, 1879, April 28, 1879.

8. Frank Lütz, note of January 31, 1879.

9. George Steig, note of April 9, 1880.

These cases, with the exception of those of Lütz, Mély, and Wackermann, were decided in favor of the United States, and, with the exception of that of Mély, were presented on the basis of the treaty of 1868. In not one of them was a favorable decision rendered on the ground of ten years’ absence from Alsace-Lorraine or on the ground of a previous discharge from Alsace-Lorraine citizenship, and in not one, as far as the documents in the various cases show, was it possible to put in such a plea. Not one of these naturalized American citizens had been absent from Alsace-Lorraine for ten years.

Fourth. The case of Mély, though decided adversely to the claimant, would seem to furnish conclusive evidence that the imperial government considered the treaty of 1868 as applying to Alsace-Lorraine. In reply to a communication of this legation, written in behalf of Mr. Mély, who had been called upon by the authorities of Alsace-Lorraine to refund the amount of 2,271 francs which had been paid him for damages to Ms personal property during the war, his excellency Mr. von Bülow, then in charge of the imperial foreign office, stated in his note of March 20, 1873, after informing the legation that the indemnity above referred to had been so allowed, as follows: “But when Mély subsequently produced a certificate of naturalization and claimed American citizenship in order to prevent the entry of his son’s name on the military roils, the circuit director (kreisdirector) of Saarburg; decreed, under article 1, No. 4, of the law of June 14, 1871, the re-collection of the indemnity,” the amount being retained from a credit due to Mély by the community for work performed.

When subsequently a question of the right of further sojourn in Alsace-Lorraine of Mr. Mély’s son arose the circuit director above referred to, seemingly in strict keeping with the position assumed by Mr. von Billow as to Mély’s nationality, informed Mély, in a communication dated Saarburg, March 2, 1877, a copy of a translation of which, as also of the covering letter of Mr. Mély, is herewith inclosed, the original having, at his request, been returned to him, as follows: “To your communication of the 27th ultimo, I respectfully reply that the treaty concluded between Germany and America, on the 22d of February, 1868, applies also to all persons emigrating to America and returning thence who were born in Alsace-Lorraine.”

Although the case of Wackermann was decided adversely, the undersigned nevertheless cites it, for the reason that in the note of August 28, 1878, of the late minister of the United States at Berlin, Mr. Bayard Taylor, in which this case was presented to the imperial foreign office, the grounds on which the right of Wackermann to sojourn for two years in Alsace-Lorraine was claimed were distinctly stated to be the provisions of the treaty of February 22, 1868, as were, indeed, almost invariably the claims for relief addressed by this legation to the imperial foreign office in kindred cases.

Mr. Taylor, in the note referred to, after acknowledging the receipt of the communication of the 25th instant of his excellency Mr. von Radowitz, in charge of the imperial foreign office, “communicating the decision of the imperial government expelling Joseph Wackermann, of Reichshofen, in Alsace-Lorraine, before the expiration of the two years’ stay permitted to all German-American citizens by article 4 of the treaty of February 22, 1868,” adds, “While trusting the imperial foreign ministry possesses full and satisfactory reasons for making this case an exception to the above stipulation of the treaty,” &c., stating, further on, “The undersigned does not mean in any way to question the action of the imperial government in accordance with existing laws; but he would most respectfully request that in future cases where the provision contained in article 4 of the treaty of February 22, 1868, is suspended or set aside, a distinct specification of the nature of the offense may be furnished to this legation.”

In reply to this note of his excellency Mr. von Bülow, imperial secretary of state for foreign affairs, no dissent whatever was expressed to the position thus distinctly assumed by Mr. Taylor that: the treaty of February 22, 1868, applied also to Alsace-Lorraine, his excellency basing the enforcement of the decree of expulsion of Wackermann solely on his bad behavior at Reichshofen. Nor has such dissent ever been expressed in any reply of the imperial foreign office to the numerous communications from this legation assuming this position, until now in the case of John Schehr, who, as it is now declared, still owes allegiance to Alsace-Lorraine, although in all the cases hereinbefore mentioned, and in many others which have been subjects of intervention by this legation, the imperial government has recognized the American citizenship of the individuals concerned, and has applied to their cases the provisions of the treaty of February 22, 1868.

Though the case of Lütz was also decided against the United States, it is nevertheless striking evidence that the imperial government considered the treaty of 1868 as extending to Alsace-Lorraine. The decision against Lütz seems to have been based upon fraud in his naturalization papers, and upon that alone; the discovery of this fraud was the result of careful examination of records, documents, and dates—a tedious examination which the imperial government would have spared itself had it considered Lütz as not coming under the treaty of 1868.

Fifth. This construction of the treaty having been acquiesced in and adopted by both parties during nearly ten years, the said construction has naturally come to be considered throughout the United States as fully settled, and naturalized Citizens of the United States, formerly resident in Alsace-Lorraine, are therefore likely at any moment to return to their old homes for temporary visits, entirely innocent of any intention to violate the laws of the empire, entirely ignorant of any change in the views of their relations to the German Government; and are therefore liable to be arrested, fined, placed in the army, or summarily expelled from the country; and as they are entirely unprepared, not expecting anything of this kind, the detriment to their business and the distress to their families will be all the greater. Even now the legation is in receipt of a communication of the 15th instant, from Mr. Elie Bloch, the subject of the case mentioned under No. 6, hereinbefore, in which he states that he has been ordered to leave the country, to which he did not return from the United States until January 28, 1879, and adds that when he showed the local authorities at Bischweiller the letters from the legation acquainting him with the favorable decisions obtained in his case from the imperial government, these authorities refused to give any attention to his plea, informing him that a new law had been made since his case had been submitted to the minister for foreign affairs, and this notwithstanding the note of January 25, 1879, in which his excellency Mr. von Billow, the late secretary of state for foreign affairs, informed the legation that he had recommended to the appropriate authority (the legation felt itself justified in considering this recommendation as equivalent to a command) that Mr. Bloch be allowed to return to his native place, and to reside there two years without being liable to the infliction of a penalty against his person or his property. And notwithstanding the note of July 13, 1879, of his excellency Mr. von Philipsborn, in charge of the imperial foreign office, in which the legation was informed that the fine imposed upon Mr. Bloch for violation of military duty had been remitted together with costs.

In connection with this case the undersigned begs leave to state that he will make Mr. Bloch’s application for permission to remain at Bischweiller until October 1, next, at which time he intends to return to the United States, the subject of a special note to his highness.

Sixth. Under the same circumstances and for the same reasons, a large number of naturalized citizens of the United States, formerly resident in Alsace-Lorraine, are liable to be subjected to great and unexpected hardship by the imposition of military fines for which they are utterly unprepared, their cases being similar to those already adjudged favorably by the imperial authorities, and they would thus be virtually punished by a law ex post facto in its character as far as they are concerned.

Seventh. While the construction alluded to in the note of his highness may thus bring the deepest distress on individuals and their families, vexation to their friends, and consternation to many American citizens of German birth, and irritation to the hearts of millions of people on the other side of the Atlantic, the former construction already adopted, as above shown, by his highness’s predecessor in office, has inflicted, and can inflict, but a comparatively trifling annoyance upon the authorities of Alsace-Lorraine. The records of the imperial foreign office will show that the number of cases which have arisen in the last ten years has been small, only averaging about two cases a year, and there are no signs that the number of such cases is likely permanently to increase.

In view, then, of these facts, namely, that the treaty of 1868 was applied to Alsace-Lorraine, and acted upon by both the German and American Governments during the whole of the period which has elapsed since the incorporation of these districts into the empire; that the inconveniences are apparently trifling; that the benefits to both nations are great, especially in consolidating the old traditional friendship of the two nations, which has existed uninterruptedly from the time of the great Frederick until the present hour, the undersigned would most seriously urge upon his highness, the secretary of state ad interim for foreign affairs, a reconsideration of the decision referred to, and also, in any case, that the application of it be suspended and held in abeyance until the undersigned shall have been empowered to present more definite views from the government at Washington, and until such publicity be given in the United States to the understanding officially, arrived at between the two nations that cases of hardship to unsuspecting and innocent persons, with their necessarily irritating effect upon the two nations, may be avoided.

And he would especially urge that in the cases of Michael Pacquet, presented February 27, 1879; Franz and Theobald Hess, presented March 10, 1879; Joseph Lauber, presented November 21, 1879; Alphonse Sester, presented February 9, 1880; Alois Fischer, presented February 12, 1880; Jean P. Q. Schang, presented March 20, 1880; Alois Genres, presented June 11, 1880; Aaron Weill, presented June 28, 1880; Nicholas V. Gabriel, presented July 2, 1880; Solomon Bloch, presented August 11, 1880; Elie Bloch, presented August 28, 1880, as well as in the case of John Schehr, the penalties of whatever kind imposed may be remitted, if the statements made by these persons be found correct, on the ground that they returned unsuspectingly and in good faith, relying upon the settled construction of the treaty of 1868, by the imperial government, in all previous cases similar to their own, and that, at least, so far as they are concerned, the penalties imposed are of a law ex post facto. To this last point he would especially call the attention of his highness, relying implicity on his highness’s sense of justice.

The undersigned may also here state that the question to which his highness the minister of foreign affairs refers was asked without the slightest expectation of an answer of the kind received; that in view of the facts above stated it was supposed that only one answer could possibly be given to it, and that it was hoped that the question would suggest to the imperial foreign office a strong argument based both on justice and policy in favor of bringing to a conclusion cases which had been so long delayed.

In conclusion the undersigned would apologize to his highness for the delay in this reply, caused by the fact of his absence from Berlin and the necessity of a minute study under considerable difficulty of the voluminous documents in the considerable number of cases referred to.

The undersigned avails himself, &c.

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 283. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 283.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, September 21, 1880. (Received October 9.) No. 151.]

Sir: At the request of Count Limburg-Stirurn, minister in charge of foreign affairs, I called at the foreign office this morning. The subject which he opened to me was the Alsace-Lorraine matter referred to in my dispatch No. 146. He said that the German Government remain fully of the opinion that the treaties of 1868 do not apply, but that the government is ready to enter into negotiations regarding an additional treaty for Alsace-Lorraine.

He also said that as the existing treaties were more to the advantage of the United States than of Germany, the government thought it proper that the proposals for negotiations be made from our side.

Without acknowledging at all that the United States was more benefited than Germany, I promised to communicate with you, and in due time inform him of the result. I then pressed upon him the matter of the naturalized Americans from Alsace-Lorraine who had fallen into difficulties there, and urged that these cases receive speedy attention, laying stress upon the fact that these men certainly were guilty of no crime, and that it is a case of very great hardship, one which our own government feels deeply. To this he replied that this is a matter which he must reserve for the present, and cited the maxim, “Ignorantia juris non excusat.” To this I replied that I could not see the application of the maxim in this case; that the construction was one which we had distinct reasons for supposing definitely settled; that certainly it was not ignorance of any law but rather a knowledge of what was taken as law by our government and acknowledged as the law by his own, which led these individuals into trouble; that it was utterly impossible for them to have acted otherwise. He replied that this was a matter which he must reserve, but intimated that there is another way out of the difficulty, by which I understood him to mean that there might be a direct interposition on their behalf from the central governmental authority.

I would, therefore, respectfully ask for instructions on the points raised in this interview.

You will observe that Prince von Hohenlohe-Schillingsfürst has been succeeded by Count Limburg-Stirum. Whether the former is to return to his position at Paris or to resume his duties here, is uncertain.

The name of Count von Hatzfeldt, now German ambassador at Constantinople, has been frequently mentioned in connection with the post here, but nothing seems decided. I need not say that these frequent changes add to the difficulties in the case.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 284. Mr. Evarts to Mr. White. No. 284.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. White.

Department of state,
Washington, October 7, 1880. No. 138.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 146, of the 1st instant, with its inclosures.

You have very elaborately set forth the condition of affairs as regards the remission of fines and penalties imposed upon adopted citizens of this country upon their return to that portion of Germany known as Alsace-Lorraine. After so long a time since the German Empire was established, it is to be regretted that such a change of position has been adopted, and especially made retroactive and without warning to this government.

Your repeated efforts to obtain a settlement of the question of the rights of adopted citizens of the United States returning to Alsace-Lorraine, some of which are cases of eighteen months’ standing, meet with the department’s approval. You will take occasion to express the great concern felt here at this change of position, and also the hope that this subject will receive reconsideration.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 285. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 285.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, October 15, 1880. (Received Nov. 3.) No. 160.]

Sir: About an hour ago I received a telegram from one Aaron Weill, a naturalized citizen of the United States, whose case is referred to in the inclosure to my dispatch No. 146, of 1st September last, stating that he is in prison at Reichshofen, Alsace-Lorraine.

Weill was born at Reichshofen June 2, 1855, emigrated to the United States August 22, 1872, and was naturalized there in December, 1879. He returned to his native place on the 1st of January of the present year, and shortly after was officially notified that in 1877 a fine of 600 marks had been imposed upon him because he did not present himself for military service, a fine which he refused to pay. On the 15th of June he was further informed by the local authorities that he must either perform military service or leave the country within four weeks. As a United States citizen, he protested against this decision and appealed to this legation. On June 28 I applied to the foreign office, asking that he be unmolested, and that the order for the fine be withdrawn. I referred to the case again, together with a number of other Alsace-Lorraine cases, in my note to the foreign office of 28th of August last, but heard nothing in regard to it until this morning, when I received a note from the foreign office bringing Weill under its decision as regards persons returning to Alsace-Lorraine within ten years, and, as above stated, a telegram from Weill informing me that he was in prison.

Immediately upon receiving this telegram, I called upon Count Lim-burg-Stirum, acting minister of foreign affairs, and represented the case to him as earnestly as possible. I dwelt upon the fact that Weill had every reason to suppose his right to return to Alsace-Lorraine undoubted, and upon the feeling such an imprisonment is likely to produce in the United States, urging strongly that while the questions lying below this and the other Alsace-Lorraine cases are in abeyance, Weill be released from prison. At first the minister seemed decidedly adverse to interfering with the case, saying that a release depended upon the concurrent assent of various authorities, and that he had little power in the premises. But as I presented the above considerations more fully, he seemed to take a different view, asked me for a memorandum of the case which I had prepared, and said that he would do everything in his power to secure Weill’s release. I have just telegraphed Weill that I have made application in his behalf, and shall do everything for him in my power.

* * * * * * *

I shall continue to give the case my closest attention.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 286. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 286.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, October 18, 1880. (Received November 3.) No. 161.]

Sir: In the last report made to the Department of State in Mr. Everett’s dispatch, No. 95, of March 21, 1879, of disputed questions of American nationality settled between this legation and the German foreign office under the provisions of the naturalization treaty of 1868, twenty-four cases were given, extending over a period of fourteen months from October, 1878, to December, 1879, of which, only one remained at that time undecided. For convenience of reference the same series of numbers is continued in the present report, the old case of Klein (No. 18), being first completed.

There have been altogether, from December, 1878, to December, 1879, inclusive, twenty-six new cases decided, of which seven have resulted unfavorably to those claiming the intervention of the legation; of these, two (Lutz, No. 25, and Iversen, No. 26) were clearly proved to be deserters from the German army; the third case was one of a gross offense against the civil laws, and the remaining four (Nos. 32, 34, 48 and 49,) were decided against us under the new ruling of the German Government, that Alsace-Lorraine is not covered by the treaty of 1868.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure in No. 161.]

list of military cases requiring intervention.

18. E. F. O. Klein (see Foreign Relations for 1879, p. 372).—Mr. Klein’s case being still unsettled at the end of February, 1879, and the property, which had been taken from him eighteen months previously by the German officials, not having been yet returned to him, the legation, on the 7th of March, 1879, wrote to the foreign office requesting their attention to the matter, and, in consequence of an instruction of the 26th of June, 1879, from the Department of State, to which Klein had appealed, the legation again addressed the foreign office on the 11th July, 1879, no answer having in the mean time been received to the previous note. In a few days an answer was received, under date of July 13, that Kleins property had been sold by mistake, but that the damages sustained by him, when ascertained, would be paid. This reply was sent to the Department in dispatch No. 29, of July 16. 1879. A valuation of his losses, amounting to 8318, was made by Klein; was forwarded to the legation by the State Department in instruction 39 of August 27, and was sent to the foreign office on the 12th September. On the 21st October, a reply was received inclosing the sum of 1,332.60 marks in payment of the balance of the claim, with which 8312.50 of American exchange was purchased and transmitted to Klein through the State Department. A receipt from Klein, inclosed in an instruction of the 21st November, and transmitted to the foreign office on the 4th December, finally closed this long and troublesome case two years and four months from its commencement, and after the exchange of no less than forty letters, notes, instructions, and dispatches.

25. Frank Lutz.—A native of Grossrederchen, Alsace-Lorraine, according to his statement to the legation, emigrated to the United States in April, 1873; was naturalized, after a residence there of over five years, on the 4th May, 1878, and came to Germany during the summer of 1878 to attend to his family affairs, with the avowed intention of soon returning to the United States. It appears that soon after his arrival Lutz was fined 750 marks by the local authorities at Saargemund, Lorraine, for evasion of military duty, but that upon showing his certificate of American citizenship the fine was remitted. On the 29th November, however, he was forcibly enrolled in the Fifty-third Regiment of Royal Prussian Infantry at Julich, near Aix-la-Chapelle.

The legation was first informed of this case on the 21st December, 1878, through the vice-consul-general at Frankfort, and at once wrote to the imperial foreign office, requesting an investigation, and at the same time instructed the United States commercial agent at Aix-la-Chapelle to go to Julich and obtain a sworn statement from Lutz of the facts in his case. This, however, the commercial agent found great difficulty in doing, partly from opposition on the part of the colonel of the regiment, and partly from a refusal on the part of Lutz to sign anything without the advice of his friends. A rather vague statement was, however, eventually obtained from him. The case was discussed by Mr. Everett, chargé d’affaires ad interim, with the minister of foreign affairs, as reported in dispatch No. 70, of 9th January, 1879, who enumerated some of the difficulties incident to investigating this class of cases in Alsace-Lorraine, owing to the irregular way in which citizens from that province had elected for French or German citizenship. About the end of January, the foreign office replied to the legation in detail (as given in inclosure to dispatch No. 73, of 18th January, 1879), claiming that Lutz was untruthful in his statements, that his naturalization paper was dated less than five years from the time of his sailing from Europe, and that on arriving in Germany he announced his intention of remaining in Germany, but pleaded the Alsace-Lorraine amnesty bill against being put into the army. This being denied him, he pleaded French citizenship at the time of emigration, which the German Government claimed was vitiated by his remaining in Alsace-Lorraine after having elected for French nationality, so that at the time of his emigration he was a German citizen under the provisions of the naturalization treaty of 1868, which, as had already been shown, he had violated. The want of ingenuousness on the part of Lutz prevented the legation from being able to disprove any of these allegations of the German Government, and Lutz had, consequently, to be given up to them as a German subject. This was reported to the State Department in dispatch No. 21, of the 8th July, 1879, and the case thus closed.

26. Iver Iversen.—According to the statement made by him to the legation, was born in Schleswig-Holstein, in 1849, emigrated to the United States in 1869, was naturalized in the State of Missouri in June, 1875, and returned to Denmark, but not to Germany, the same year; that he came to Germany for the first time in June, 1878, to visit his parents, and was then forcibly enrolled in the Eighth Regiment of Prussian Infantry. In September, 1878, in consequence of his refusing to take the oath of allegiance, Iversen was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment in the fortress of Magdeburg. The legation first heard of his case in August, 1878, and immediately wrote to Iversen to furnish documentary proof of his citizenship and alleged persecution, but received no answer till December following, when a friend of his informed the legation that Iverson had been in prison for three months. The legation at once wrote to the foreign office on the subject, and on the 14th of March received a very full reply to the effect that, in the first place, Iversen had really returned to Germany and not to Denmark, in 1875, and had consequently lost his American nationality by remaining so long beyond the two years allowed by the treaty; and that, secondly, he was a deserter from the German army, having emigrated after he had been assigned to a regiment in 1869, for which offense he had been sentenced to six months’ imprisonment. The whole case in its progress and result was reported to the State Department in Mr. Everett’s dispatches No. 70 of 6th of January, 1879; No. 71 of 13th January, 1879; No. 73 of 18th January, 1879, and No. 94 of 17th of March, 1879. On the 18th March, 1879, Iversen wrote to the legation asking what had been done in his behalf, and in reply was informed of the unfavorable developments in his case, and that nothing further could be done for him by the legation without instructions from the State Department. Subsequently, under instruction No. 5 of the 19th of May, 1879, the legation was informed that Iversen must be considered as a deserter from the German army and a German citizen, which closed the case.

27. Samuel Margouiner.—A naturalized American, returned to Germany toward the end of 1878, apparently in the hope of obtaining work to support his large family. On his arrival at Bromberg he was sentenced to a tine of 150 marks and imprisonment of 6 weeks for evasion of military duty. The legation first heard of the case on the 7th January, 1879, through the consul-general at Berlin, to whom Mrs. Margouiner wrote that her husband had already been four weeks in prison. The statements were so vague that the legation wrote to Mrs. Margouiner for more particulars, but in the mean time addressed a note to the foreign office asking to have Margouiner liberated until his case could be investigated, and Mr. Everett mentioned the case in his dispatch No. 71 of the 13th of January, to the State Department. On the 29th January a reply was received from the foreign office that Margouiner was liberated pending the investigation of his case, and on the 28th March a further communication stated that Margouiner had been liberated on the 20th January, and that his pardon by the Emperor had been recommended by the minister of justice, which on the 30th of April the legation was informed had been granted, and this result, together with his papers, was duly seat to Mr. Margouiner. This case of unjust imprisonment, involving the loss of time and liberty of an innocent man, arose from the German local authorities taking action before referring the case to the ministry of justice in Berlin, as required by the ministerial decrees appended to the treaty of 1868. In calling the attention of his excellency Mr. von Billow to the case, Mr. Everett took occasion to remark that the recent arrests showed that the welcome hopes held out in the esteemed note of his excellency Mr. von Philipsborn, of the 18th July, 1878, that “the general points of view established by the imperial government shall receive full consideration at the hands of the local authorities” have not been realized.

28. Edward Klein.—Was born at Saargemund, Alsace-Lorraine, in June, 1854; emigrated to the United States in 1872 with the consent of the German authorities; was naturalized in July, 1878, and returned to Germany in August, 1878. For six months after his arrival at his native place he was unmolested, but on the 6th January a decree was read to him by a police commissioner that he was to leave Germany within four weeks, or be imprisoned for six weeks and then be forcibly conducted across the frontier. The legation sent Klein the ministerial decrees on the question to show to the local authorities, but this producing no effect a note was addressed to the foreign office on the 21st January, calling attention to the case, to which a preliminary reply was received on the 26th January that Klein would not be molested during the investigation of his case, and on the 28th April a final answer was received that he could remain till the expiration of his two years, and his papers were returned. This result was communicated to Klein with his papers, which he duly acknowledged with thanks to the legation for its efforts in his behalf. This case, being easily and promptly settled, was not reported at the time to the State Department.

29. Alexander Kunz.—A native of Frankfort-on-the-Main, emigrated to the United States in 1870, when thirty years of age, and married there a lady likewise a native of Frankfort. He was naturalized October 12, 1878, and resided in the United States until December, 1878, when he returned with his wife to Frankfort for a short visit to their relatives. On the 27th January, 1879, Kunz was arrested and put in prison on a charge of neglect of military duty, for which he had been fined 300 marks in March, 1874. The United States consul-general at Frankfort used his best endeavors with the local authorities to have Kunz released, and reported the case at once to the legation. A note was addressed immediately on receipt of the consul-general’s letter, on the 29th January, to the foreign office, in reply to which a speedy investigation was promised. On the 21st February the legation was informed by the foreign office that Kunz had been released two days after his arrest, which the legation already knew through the consul-general, and on the 30th June the foreign office returned Kunz’s papers to the legation with the information that he had been pardoned and his fine remitted by the Emperor in the usual course. There seemed to be no reason why so summary and unusual treatment should have been used in this case, which apparently was a more favorable one than those of most of the returning naturalized Americans, inasmuch as Kunz had papers to show that previous to his emigration he had received his discharge from military service on the ground of disability, a fact which should have saved him from arrest as a deserter on his return.

30. C. J. Koernicke.—A native of Brehna, in Saxony, emigrated to the United States in 1861, at the age of twenty-five, and was naturalized on the 15th July, 1874, after having served three years as a soldier in the United States Army, and had now returned to Germany with his family. Soon after his arrival at Brehna he was fined 91 marks by the local authorities, on the ground, as stated in the official notice, that he had not resided in the United States five years after his naturalization—a point never before raised, and doubtless originating with some over-zealous official imperfectly acquainted with the treaty of 1868. The legation was informed on the 7th February, in a very illiterate letter from Koernicke, of his trouble, and at once replied to him, asking him for the evidence of his American nationality requisite for intervening in his behalf. This letter found him in prison, from which, however, he was soon released while his case was being investigated. The attention of the minister of foreign affairs was called to his case on the 10th February, and on the 12th February a reply was received that it should be promptly attended to, which apparently was done, as Koernicke left for America before the end of February, after writing to the legation to forward him his citizen-paper. This was impossible till the month of June, when his papers were returned to the legation from the foreign office with the notice of the remission of his fine by the Emperor. This termination of the affair was communicated to Koernicke, with his papers on the 6th October, in reply to reply to a letter from him in America giving his address there; since which nothing has been heard from him. His arrest was, as far as the legation could ascertain, quite unjustifiable, especially on the ground assigned.

31. Jos. Aurel Rasch.—Was born in Bavaria March 28, 1856; emigrated to the United States March 12, 1873; was naturalized February 5, 1879, and had not as yet returned to Germany. On the 20th May, 1877, the property of said Rasch in Germany was attached for an alleged “offense against public order,” of which Rasch informed the legation from the United States, though without any papers establishing his citizenship and the correctness of his statements. After receiving from him his citizen-paper and the requisite proofs of the facts, the legation addressed a note to the foreign office in his behalf on the 22d February. An answer of the 1st May, to the effect that his case would receive attention, and another of the 31st May, that the injunction had been entirely, removed were duly received at the legation and at once sent to Mr. Rasch, since when nothing further has been heard from him.

32. Michael Pacquet.—Was born in Alsace 27th July, 1855; emigrated to the United States 18th January, 1872; was naturalized 17th September, 1878, and returned the same year to Germany. During his absence, on the 27th June, 1877, his father paid 1,406 marks to the local authorities as a fine for his son’s alleged neglect of military duty. On the 12th February, 1879, the son wrote to the legation asking for its intervention to have this sum repaid him. On the 27th February, after having procured the necessary facts, Mr. Everett, chargé d’affaires, called attention of the foreign office to the case, and on the 31st March was informed in reply that it was under investigation.

Pacquet, about the middle of July, returned to America and sent his address to the legation. On the 26th November, 1879, the legation again called the attention of the foreign office to the case, and subsequently, on the 24th March, 1880, and on the 8th May following. No reply was received to any of these representations until the 28th September, 1880, when the legation was informed by the foreign office, under date of 26th September, that Pacquet was still considered a citizen of Alsace-Lorraine, and that his fine could not be repaid. This decision was communicated to Pacquet the same day, and information of the same sent to the Department of State in dispatch No. 154, of 28th September, 1880. His case was considered by the legation as an unsound one to prosecute any further, on account of the fine having been paid before Pacquet was naturalized.

33. Andreas Grzechowiak.—Was born in Posen 16th November, 1851; emigrated to the United States in February, 1872, when over 21 years of age; was naturalized there 20th November, 1878, and in December of the same year revisited Germany. He stated that in 1873, after his emigration to America, an attachment had been put on his inheritance to secure a fine of 270 marks imposed on him in 1872 for alleged neglect of military duty. On the 24th January, 1879, Grzechowiak claimed the assistance of the legation to have the attachment removed, but some delay was caused by his illiterate writing and insufficiency of evidence. On the 28th February the legation called the attention of the foreign office to the case, and on the 13th July received a reply that the attachment was removed. In the mean time Grzechowiak had left for America, and after receiving his address there, the legation notified him, on the 23rd July, of the successful termination of his case.

34. Francis and Theobald Hess.—Were born in Alsace, the former on the 28th October, 1852, and the latter on the 1st August, 1855. After the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine to Germany, not wishing to serve in the German army, the brothers Hess emigrated to America in August, 1872, and were naturalized there on the 16th October, 1878. After their departure two fines of 1,200 and 250 marks was levied on the two brothers for alleged neglect of military duty, and as one of them wished to return to Germany on a visit to their father, he wrote, on the 20th February, 1879, to the legation to ask if their fines must be paid. After some further correspondence to ascertain the exact terms of the decree the legation called the attention of the foreign office to the case on the 10th March, 1879, and requested that the sentence of fine might be removed. No answer having been received to this, and Mr. Hess having forwarded to the legation a fresh decree confirming the original decision against him and his brother, another note was addressed to the foreign office, on the 3d October, 1879. No reply was received to these notes, in spite of several reminders, until the 29th September, 1880, when the legation was informed by the imperial foreign office that the fine against the Hess brothers could not .’be remitted, as the government still considered them citizens of Alsace-Lorraine, on the ground already stated in the recent decision of John Schehr’s case (No. 48), that the naturalization treaty of 1868 did not apply to Alsace-Lorraine, and that German allegiance was not lost by emigrants until ten years after their departure from their native place.

35. William Brandt.—A native of Germany, emigrated at thirteen years of age; was naturalized 27th of January, 1879, and when his case came up was still in the United States. During his absence from Germany his property, in the hands of one Schulte, his guardian at Hintersee, had been attached by the local authorities on the ground of evasion of military duty, and the legation was written to on the 17th March, 1879, by the clerk of the court in Wisconsin, where Brandt was naturalized, to request that diplomatic influence might be employed to have the injunction removed. The legation addressed a note to that effect on the 3d April, 1879, to the foreign office, and on the 30th June received a final reply that the fine and costs were remitted by the Emperor, of which Mr. Brandt was at once informed, and his papers returned to him. Since then nothing more has been heard from him or his friends.

36. John Huber.—A native of Schleswig was born 28th June, 1853; emigrated to the United States 17th June, 1872; was naturalized March 1, 1878, and returned to Germany, on a visit, 29th February, 1879. In April, 1879, the royal kreisgericht at Schleswig sentenced him, without any assigned reason, to a fine of 200 marks, which was unwisely paid by his family on the 30th April, 1879. On the 6th May the legation was informed of the case through the United States consul at Hamburg, and on the day of receiving the letter called the attention of the minister of foreign affairs to the injustice of the fine imposed. In reply a prompt investigation was promised, and on the 1st October the legation was informed that his pardon had been recommended. Subsequently a demand was made on Huber for a fine of 48 marks, or a declaration from him that he was too poor to pay it. This new difficulty formed a subject of a second note to the foreign office on the 17th November 1879, to which a favorable reply was received on the 1st December, 1879. A very vague and illiterate letter from Huber of the 22d December, previous to leaving for America, left it somewhat doubtful whether the above costs had ever been taken off or not. Final notice of his pardon and repayment of fine was received from the foreign office on the 12th May, 1880.

37. Jacob Dettmar.—Emigrated to the United States in July, 1859, at the age of nineteen; was naturalized in the city of Brooklyn, October 18, 1865, where he continued to reside. By an instruction to the legation from the Department of State of 21st May, 1879, it appeared that Dettmar had appealed through his attorney to the United States Government for the intervention of the legation in Berlin with the German Government to remove an attachment on his inheritance in Germany for 110 thalers. From the correspondence which ensued between the legation and the foreign office it appeared that the attachment referred to had been already removed as long ago as July, 1873, but at any rate it would have expired by limitation, so that any diplomatic action was superfluous. This result was communicated by the legation to the State Department in dispatch No. 16, of the 16th February, 1880.

38. Richard W. and Casper D. Boisselier.—Were born in the United States, the former in 1852, and the latter in 1854, their father, Carl Boisselier, being a naturalized American citizen. In 1856 they went with their father to Germany and remained there till 1873, when the elder brother returned to America, but the younger one not till 1874. Both of them have since remained in America. The legation was informed of their case by a telegraphic instruction of 6th June, 1879, from the Department of State, to the effect that a summons had been received by the elder brother from the German Government, to report himself for military duty, to which he replied by furnishing proof that he was a native-born American citizen. A fine of 3, 150 marks was nevertheless levied on the two brothers, and the property of their father threatened with confiscation if the sons failed to appear before the court at Schleswig on the 2d July, 1879. The legation at once directed the proper consul to investigate the case, and, as soon as his reply had been received, called the attention of the foreign office to the case, on the 13th June, 1879, in a note which was presented by Mr. White and earnestly pressed in a personal interview with the minister of foreign affairs, the result of which was communicated to the Department of State in the dispatch No. 4, of 14th June, 1879. The German Government at once stopped proceedings, but requested evidence of the father’s American citizenship, which was furnished in the form of a passport issued to the father by the State Department in 1856. On the 14th July, the legation received a note from the foreign office stating that the Boisselier brothers were acquitted and the fine removed by the circuit court of Schleswig, it having been found that they possessed no property. This information was at once telegraphed to the State Department, and reported in detail in dispatch No. 32, on the 20th July.

The father’s passport was then returned to him and the case was thus supposed to be closed. About a year, afterwards, however, the legation was informed by the Department of State in instruction No. 126, of 28th July, 1880, that according to an article in a Saint Louis paper, a copy of which was inclosed, the decree of the royal court of Schleswig, acquitting the Boisselier brothers, was illegal and that the two young men were, by an instruction from the imperial chancery of the 8th and 14th of May, still to be considered Prussian subjects seeking to avoid military duty until they had obtained a discharge from Prussian citizenship, which they were advised to do. The minister at once called the attention of the minister of foreign affairs personally to the matter and was assured in reply that no information of such a nature had reached the foreign office, but that the matter should be investigated, which was accordingly reported to the State Department in dispatch No. 152, of the 21st September, 1880.

39. George Steig.—A native of Alsace, emigrated to the United States in 1873 at the age of fifteen; was naturalized in Iowa on the 5th March, 1879, and did not return to Germany. The legation was informed by the Department of State, under date of 16th July. 1879, that Steig had been sentenced to a fine of 300 dollars for neglect of military duty in Germany and that his inheritance there was threatened with attachment to secure the payment of the fine, in spite of the proofs of his American citizenship, which Steig had forwarded to his brother in Alsace to show to the authorities.

The legation at once wrote to the brother to obtain some further essential particulars, and on receiving his answer, addressed (August 1, 1879) a note to the imperial foreign office, requesting that, if the facts proved to be as stated by the legation, the fine might be removed.

On the 9th April, 1880, a note from the foreign office informed the legation that the fine imposed upon Steig had been removed by order of the governor of Alsace-Lorraine, which was communicated to him through a dispatch to the Department of State (No. 104) of April 10, 1880.

40.Amandus Flade.—Was born in Germany, 7th May, 1855; emigrated to the United States, 23d September, 1873; was naturalized there in March, 1879, and in July of the same year returned to Germany to visit his parents. Soon after his arrival he was arrested, taken before the military authorities, found physically unfit for service, and informed that his punishment would be decided by the royal Kreisgericht. On the 31st July he wrote to the legation to protect him, and especially to procure the return of his papers, which had been refused him. A copy of the ministerial decrees attached to the treaty was forwarded to which the legation believed, if shown to the local authorities with a respectful request for the return of his papers, would secure that result. Flade, was, however, on the contrary, told that his papers would not be returned him until he had paid a fine of 150 marks or suffered imprisonment for four weeks.

On the 15th August the legation called the attention of the foreign office to the case, laying especial stress on the disregard of the ministerial decrees, and after the usual preliminary reply that the case would receive immediate attention, was informed, on the 5th November, that the proceedings against Flade were correct, but that his pardon by the Emperor had been recommended. A further note from the foreign office was received at the legation a month later, announcing the remission of of the fine, and it is supposed that Flade’s papers were returned to him, as he informed the legation that he was about to start on a journey, and has not been heard from since.

41. Edward Richter.—Was born in Saxony, August 3, 1856; emigrated to the United States in June, 1874, when less than 18 years of age; was naturalized there, as shown by his citizen papers, on the 23d June, 1879, and in July of the same year, provided with a passport from the Department of State, returned to Germany on a visit to his father. Soon after his arrival at Chemnitz he was arrested by the authorities of that city for refusing to pay a fine of 300 marks levied on him for alleged avoidance of military duty, but was promptly released through the intervention of the American consul at Chemnitz, who reported the case to the legation.

An order was subsequently issued by the authorities that the fine must be paid before the end of the month. The legation called the attention of the foreign office to the case on the 19th August, and was promptly assured in reply that the Government of Saxony had been communicated with, and on the 30th September a final answer was received that Richter had been pardoned and his fine remitted, which he was informed of through the consul at Chemnitz, and his citizen paper was at the same time returned to him.

42. Dr. P. F. Vast.—Was born in France, 12th January, 1837; emigrated to the United States in July, 162, at the age of twenty-five, and became a naturalized American citizen on the 31st October, 1872. In the month of April, 1876, he went to Germany, and on the 1st May following took up his residence in Alsace-Lorraine, where he continued to reside, practicing the profession of medicine. On the 22d August, 1879, he was notified by the local authorities that he must leave the country, though without any reason being assigned for this proceeding.

At the request of Dr. Vast the legation addressed a note to the foreign office on the 30th August, requesting an investigation of the case which, as Dr. Vast was not of German origin, clearly did not come under the treaty of naturalization. Oh the 22d January a reply was received from the minister of foreign affars, that Dr. Vast had been expelled for immoral practices in the exercise of his profession, and that his sentence could not be revoked. Dr. Vast’s citizen papers were returned to him, and the final decision communicated to him on the 23d January, 1880.

43. E. G. Hellrung.—Was born in Saxony in 1850, emigrated to the United States in 1871, and was naturalized there, on the 23d October, 1876. On the 18th June, 1878, he returned to Germany on a visit to his parents, and was arrested in his native town of Niederorsehel on the 26th of the same month for refusing to pay a fine of 179 marks imposed by the royal Kreisgericht at Worbis for non-performance of military duty. In spite of his showing his citizen paper and passport, he was taken to prison at Worbis, his purse containing 210 marks was taken from him, and he was kept in confinement till the following day, when he was released, his money, however, being retained. Information of his detention was sent to the legation by his father, and as soon as his citizen paper could be obtained from him the legation addressed a remonstrance to the ministry of foreign affairs, which at once replied, promising to have the case investigated; and on the 23th January a second note from the foreign office was received, to the effect that the return of the money had been ordered. This information was at once communicated to him and his papers returned, since which nothing has been heard from him. It is presumed that he returned at once to the United States, as he had stated in person at the legation his intention of so doing.

44. Arfst A. Rörden.—A native of Schleswig, emigrated to the United States at the age of 16; was naturalized there on the 13th September, 1877, and came to Germany in June, 1879, to visit his parents. Three months after his arrival at Alkersum, his native town, the local authorities, in spite of his showing his citizen paper, informed him that he must become a German citizen or leave the country in fourteen days. As soon as information of his trouble with the authorities was received from him (September 12, 1879), the legation called the attention of the foreign office to the case, and in reply was told that the case would be at once investigated. On the 22d December a final note from the foreign office was received at the legation, stating that Rörden was allowed to stay. This result, together with his papers, was transmitted at once to him by the legation, and a polite note of acknowledgment was shortly received from him in reply.

45. Hans P. Jessen; 46. P. C. Schmidt; 47. Hans Hansen.—These three men were all natives of the town of Norburg in Schleswig-Holstein; had emigrated to the United States before the military age; had been legally naturalized, and returned to Germany during the month of October, 1878, on a visit to their families. About a year after their arrival, in spite of their citizen papers and the exhibition of the ministerial decrees, forwarded to them by the legation, they were notified to leave Germany within fourteen days or to become German subjects. The legation made a strong appeal in their behalf to the minister of foreign affairs on the 25th September, 1879, which secured immediate attention to their case, and eventually (January 2d, 1880) a final note was received, to the effect that all proceedings against them had been discontinued.

48. John Schehr.—Was born at Mothern, Alsace January 31, 1855; emigrated to the United States October 28, 1873; was naturalized 3d September, 1879, and returned to Germany on a visit the same month. Soon after his arrival he was summoned by the local authorities to pay a fine for non-performance of military duty and was allowed only ten days to pay it. A remonstrance was addressed by the legation to the foreign office on the 13th October, 1879, of which Schehr was informed the same day. On the 18th October the foreign office informed the legation that the case should be investigated. On the 25th October Schehr wrote to know how his case was progressing and whether he could leave for America, to which the legation replied that if he wished to leave, his papers, when returned, should be sent after him to any address he might indicate. Accordingly, on the 15th December, Schehr wrote that he should leave for America on the 20th December, and gave his American address. No answer was received from the foreign office until the 5th August, 1880, when the legation was informed that the naturalization treaty of 1868 did not apply to Alsace-Lorraine, and that consequently Schehr must be considered as owing allegiance to Alsace until having been absent ten years he lost his German citizenship under the general law of Germany. A forcible protest against this decision was addressed by Mr. White to the foreign office on the 28th August, 1880, and the correspondence reported to the Department of State in dispatch No. 146 of the 1st of September, 1880.

49. Joseph Lauber.—Was born at Kaisersberg, Alsace-Lorraine, November 8, 1853; emigrated to America in November, 1872; was naturalized September 16, 1878, and in October, 1879, returned to Alsace. During his absence the local authorities of his native place sentenced him to a fine of 1,000 marks and six months’ imprisonment, and soon after his return demanded the payment of the fine and ordered him to leave the country within six weeks. On the 14th November, 1879, Lauber appealed to the legation for assistance. The minister addressed the foreign office in his behalf on the 21st of November, 1879, and a week later received a reply that the case was being investigated. The following month Lauber wrote to know what he should do about leaving, and was advised by the legation in reply to remain quiet until his case was decided. No further answer was received from the foreign office until the 10th October, 1880, when the legation was informed that inasmuch as Lauber still owed allegiance to Alsace-Lorraine his fine for avoidance of military duty could not be remitted, but that he had not been ordered to leave the country, of which Mr. Lauber was at once informed. This decision was in accordance with the general one rendered in the case of John Schehr applying to all emigrants from Alsace-Lorraine. The case was reported to the Department of State in dispatch No. 146 of the 1st September, 1880.

50. Otto Eick.—Was born in Wettmann, Rhine Provinces, on the 3d December, 1854; emigrated to the United States on the 1st May, 1872; was naturalized in Philadelphia 16th May, 1879, and returned to Germany September 25, of the same year. On arriving at his native place he was fined 150 marks by the local authorities of Bochum, and thrown into prison on the 3d December following. On the 4th December he wrote to the legation for its intervention, and in consequence of a note addressed by the minister to the foreign office on the 5th December was at once set at liberty, but forced to give bail in the sum of 1,000 marks. On the 17th January, 1880, the foreign office informed the legation that Rick had been released and the bail returned to him, of which Rick was duly informed, and replied, thanking the legation for its intervention. Here it was supposed the case had ended, but on the 2d April, 1880, a telegram was received at the legation from Eick to the effect that he was again imprisoned; on which the minister at once addressed a note to the foreign office requesting his release, and on the 31st May received a reply that he had not been imprisoned for the second time. Mr. Eick pleaded, in excuse for this shameful falsehood, that he had been summoned to pay a second fine, and threatened with imprisonment again if he did not pay. He therefore thought it safe to telegraph the legation in anticipation of that eventuality. On the 10th October, 1880, the foreign office finally informed the legation that Eick had been pardoned by an imperial order of the 31st August, 1880, and that the proper authorities had been instructed accordingly.

No. 287. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 287.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, October 18, 1880. (Received November 3.) No. 162.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that since the reply and decision in the case of John Schehr, which was reported to you in my dispatch No. 146, unfavorable answers from the German Government have been received in several other cases of American citizens of Alsace-Lorraine origin, in accordance with the decision in Mr. Schehr’s case, which will become at least for the present a precedent for all cases from that province.

The unfavorable cases I would now mention are those of Joseph Lauber, Alois Fischer, and Nicholas V. Gabriel.

Joseph Lauber was born at Kaisersberg, Alsace-Lorraine, November 8, 1853; emigrated to America in November, 1872; was naturalized September 16, 1878, and in October, 1879, returned to Alsace-Lorraine. During his absence the local authorities of his native place sentenced him to a line of 1,000 marks and six months’ imprisonment for neglect of military duty, and soon after his return demanded payment of the fine, and ordered him to leave the country in six weeks.

On the 14th November Lauber appealed to the legation for assistance. I addressed the foreign office in his behalf on the 21st November, and a week later received a reply that the case was under investigation. The following month Lauber wrote the legation to know what he should do about leaving, and in reply was advised to remain where he was until his case was decided. No further answer was received from the foreign office until the 10th October, 1880, when the legation was informed that inasmuch as Lauber still owed allegiance to Alsace-Lorraine his fine could not be remitted, but that he had not been ordered to leave the country.

It remains to be seen whether Lauber’s absence in America of eight years will be taken into account towards freeing him from his German allegiance, in case he leaves at once; or whether the ten years absence insisted on by the German Government must be an uninterrupted one like the five years specified in the treaty of 1868, in which case Lauber would at any minute be liable to be put into the German army.

Alois Fischer was born at Aschbach, Alsace, July 23, 1854; emigrated to the United States in August, 1872, at the age of 18; was naturalized there September 16, 1878, and still resides there. After his departure a fine of 600 marks for alleged neglect of military duty was imposed upon him, and his inheritance was attached to secure the same. Mr. Fischer’s brother, who resides in Germany, brought the case to the notice of the legation on the 9th September, 1879, but for want of substantiating evidence the legation was unable to intervene till the 12th February, 1880. A reply was duly received that the case was being investigated, but it was not till the 7th October, 1880, that the foreign office finally informed the legation that Fischer had not yet lost his German citizenship, and that the fine could not be taken off.

If Fischer remains in America till 1882 this decision will probably make no difference to him, as the attachment will, as in other cases, have then expired by limitation.

Nicholas V. Gabriel was born in Petit Tauquin, Alsace-Lorraine, on the 4th April, 1853; emigrated to the United States September 10, 1872, from Havre; was naturalized on the 8th June, 1880, and still resides in the United States. After his departure a fine of 933.17 marks was imposed on him for neglect of military duty, and some property belonging to him attached as security, although he left Alsace before the time at which he would have been liable to military duty according to the treaty between France and Germany.

The case was brought to the notice of the legation in September, 1879, but it could not intervene till July, 1880, owing to the delay occasioned by sending to America for Gabriel’s citizen paper, the first one sent by him being only his declaration of intention. It thus appeared that he was not naturalized until the legation informed him that his citizen paper was necessary to substantiate his case at the German foreign office.

No answer was received from the foreign office until October, 1880, when the legation was informed that Gabriel was still considered a citizen of Alsace-Lorraine, and that accordingly his fine could not be taken off.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 288. Mr. Hay to Mr. White. No. 288.
Mr. Hay to Mr. White.

Department of State,
Washington, October 26, 1880. No. 147.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 94, of the 4th of March last, in relation to spurious American diplomas, and inclosing a diploma of one P. C. E. Volland, in order that its legal value might be ascertained with a view to the indictment of the man in question for wrongfully using the title of “doctor,” I now have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 149 of the 9th ultimo, communicating a copy of a letter of the 27th of August last, from the royal amts-attorney at Prenzlau, to your legation, inquiring whether you had been informed as to the action of this government in reference to the Volland diploma.

In reply I have to inform you that upon the receipt of your dispatch of the 9th ultimo this Department addressed a letter to the Secretary of the Interior for the purpose of ascertaining what progress had been made in the proceedings instituted, at the instance of the Commissioner of Education, for the punishment of the persons concerned in the sale of spurious diplomas at Philadelphia. At the same time the attention of the Secretary of the Interior was recalled to the desire of the German authorities to have the Volland diploma returned to them as soon as practicable.

I inclose herewith a copy of a letter from the Secretary of the Interior, dated the 14th instant, from which it appears that the criminal proceedings which have been instituted against certain persons in the State of Pennsylvania, implicated in the sale of diplomas, are still pending, and that the document in question is in the possession of the attorney-general of that State, who desires to retain it for the present, as an important aid in the prosecution of the criminals, provided the German authorities can spare it still longer for that purpose.

I will, therefore, thank you to communicate the foregoing facts to the foreign office, and to ask at the same time that, if practicable, the attorney-general of Pennsylvania may be permitted to retain the Volland diploma until the criminal proceedings now pending shall be concluded.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 289. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 289.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, November 1, 1880. (Received November 19.) No. 165.]

Sir: Regarding the case of Aaron Weill, the subject of my dispatch No. 160, of the 16th ultimo, I have to state that he is still detained in prison.

On the 19th ultimo I again addressed the acting minister of foreign affairs, Count Limburg-Stirum, on the subject, in a note, a copy of which is inclosed. In explanation of one part of the note I may say that Count Limburg-Stirum, in my first interview with him upon the subject, cited the proverb “ignorance of the law excuseth no man,” and hence I took pains to again remind him more distinctly than before that it was not Weill’s ignorance but his knowledge of the law, as both sides until then understood it, which led him into difficulty. Having again received a note from Weill, dated the 26th ultimo, stating that he was still detained, I, on the 28th ultimo, sent another note to the foreign office, of which a copy is also inclosed.

On the 30th ultimo I received from the acting minister of foreign affairs a note stating that, on the strength of the additional views presented by me, he had requested of the governor of Alsace-Lorraine a thorough and speedy reconsideration of Weill’s case.

I have, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 165.]

Mr. White to Count Limburg-Stirum.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, October 19, 1880.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, desires to present to his excellency Count Limburg-Stirum, minister in charge of the imperial foreign office, the following memorandum, in addition to that left with his excellency after the interview of the 15th instant in the case of Aaron Weill, now in prison in Alsace-Lorraine.

Weill returned to Alsace and remained there bona fide, having every reason to suppose that he was entitled to do so. His was not a case of ignorance of the law, but knowledge of the law as it was then supposed to be at this legation, for, amongst others, the following reasons: First. Because for nearly ten years all cases decided by the imperial foreign office were decided in accordance with the supposition that the treaties of 1868 apply to Alsace-Lorraine.

Second. Because on the 20th March, 1873, Mr. von Bülow, then in charge of the imperial foreign office, in his note regarding the case of August Mély, distinctly confirmed this application of the treaty of 1868 to Alsace-Lorraine in that he approved the decree of the kreis-director of Saarburg, who had based his action of re-collecting a fine upon the application of the treaty.

Third. That the kreis-director above referred to, in strict accordance with the opinion of Mr. von Billow, in a communication dated 2d March, 1877, wrote as follows: “To your communication of the 27th ultimo I respectfully reply that the treaty concluded between Germany and America on the 22d February, 1868, applies to all persons emigrating to America and returning thence who are born in Alsace-Lorraine.”

This legation, then, had every reason to suppose that Weill came under the action of the treaty of 1868, and when he asked this legation what he should do he was virtually informed, in accordance with the above state of things, that the treaty of 1868 applied to him. The fault, therefore, as his excellency will see, is not his ignorance of the law, but his knowledge of it as it was then understood.

In view of these facts, and the additional fact that no notice whatever was given by the imperial government which enabled this legation to warn Germans, born in Alsace-Lorraine, who had acquired American citizenship, from returning, the undersigned would again express the earnest hope that, pending negotiations between the two governments regarding the main questions at issue, Weill may be released.

The undersigned avails himself, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 165.]

Mr. White to Count Limburg-Stirum.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, October 28, 1880.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States of America, has the honor, referring to his note of the 19th instant, to call the attention of his excellency Count Limburg-Stirum, in charge of the imperial foreign office, once more to the case of Aaron Weill, an American citizen imprisoned at Strasburg.

The undersigned has just received a letter from Weill, which states that he is still in prison, and that there is no mitigation of his punishment.

The undersigned would, therefore, again respectfully present the case, reminding his excellency that Weill has not intentionally violated any law, and urging remission of his punishment.

The undersigned avails himself, &c.,

AND. D. WHITE.

No. 290. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 290.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

[Telegram.]

[undated]. Received November 5, 1880.

Evarts,
Secretary, Washington:

Aaron Weill released third instant.

WHITE, Berlin.

No. 291. Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts. No. 291.
Mr. Everett to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, November 22, 1880. (Received December 10.) No. 4.]

Sir: I have the honor, referring to previous correspondence in the military case of Aaron Weill, to inform you that the acting minister for foreign affairs, under date of the 19th instant, informs the legation that Aaron Weill’s fine and costs have been remitted by a pardon in the usual way, which will definitely end this case.

Also, under date of the 20th November, the legation is informed by the foreign office that Alois Gehres, whose case is referred to in dispatches 86, of 2d February, and 119, of 4th May, likewise a citizen originally from Alsace-Lorraine, has been pardoned for his alleged violation of military duty. I venture to think, therefore with these two cases as precedents, that no further difficulty will be made by the German Government in the settlement of sound cases of returning Alsacians, and that the refusal to extend the benefit of the treaty of 1868 to Alsace-Lorraine originated in that province and has not been indorsed by the ministry of state in Berlin.

I have, &c.,

H. SIDNEY EVERETT.

No. 292. Mr. White to Mr. Evarts. No. 292.
Mr. White to Mr. Evarts.

[Telegram.]

Received November 29, 1880.

Evarts,
State Department, Washington:

Gehres’ Alsace case decided in our favor; all penalties and fines remitted both for him and Weill.

WHITE, Paris.

Correspondence with the German Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the German Legation in Washington.

[293] . Mr. von Schlözer to Mr. Evarts.

Imperial German Legation, Washington, February 25, 1880.

[294] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. von Schlözer.

Department of State, Washington, March 8, 1880.

[295] . Mr. von Schlözer to Mr. Evarts.

Imperial German Legation, Washington, March 17, 1880.

[296] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. von Schlözer.

Department of State, Washington, March 20, 1880.

No. 293. Mr. von Schlözer to Mr. Evarts. No. 293.
Mr. von Schlözer to Mr. Evarts.

Imperial German Legation,
Washington, February 25, 1880.

Esteemed Mr. Secretary of State: I had the honor duly to receive the note which you were kind enough to address to me, under date of April 17, 1879, in reference to the cook Weinrebe, who was arrested on board of the steamer Mosel. The foreign office at Berlin, to which I transmitted that note, is of the opinion that the government of the United States gives to Article XII, paragraph 2, of the consular convention of December 11, 1871, and especially to the words “examination and search,” an interpretation which differs from that of the imperial government, and which seems specially to limit the signification of those two words.

I am consequently instructed to lay before you the following:

In concluding the treaty of December 11, 1877, the imperial government acted on the supposition that paragraph 2 of Article XII referred to all official acts on board of a vessel, and that such official acts could not, therefore, be performed by the authorities of one of the contracting states on board of a vessel of the other state without previous notice having been given to the consul of that state.

In the English text of the treaty the term “search of merchant vessels” was therefore selected, which, according to American usage, is equivalent to visit or visitation of vessels (J. Bouvier, Law Dictionary, adapted to the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, vol. II, p. 505, s. v. Right of Search.)

In the present case United States custom-house officers went on board of the German vessel, and there examined Weinrebe’s effects, after obtaining, it is true, the consent of the proper deck officer, but without having previously notified the imperial consul-general at New York.

I should be obliged to you, esteemed Mr. Secretary of State, if you would have the kindness to inform me whether the interpretation given by the imperial government to the article in question of the consular convention meets with your approval.

Accept, &c.,

SCHLÖZER.

No. 294. Mr. Evarts to Mr. von Schlözer. No. 294.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. von Schlözer.

Department of State,
Washington, March 8, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 25th ultimo, relating to the arrest on board the steamer Mosel, of Carl Weinrebe, the cook of that vessel, for a violation of the revenue laws of the United States.

In my note of the 17th of April last,* in regard to that occurrence, which you do me the honor to say you submitted to the foreign office at Berlin, you were furnished with an account in detail of the facts and circumstances attending the arrest of Weinrebe, and the search of his personal effects on board the Mosel, which proceedings he himself invited, and which also the officers of the steamer permitted and afforded facilities for. These facts and circumstances appeared to me to have offered sufficient reasons for the proceedings against Weinrebe, and while their mere statement was conceived sufficient to remove any misapprehension which might have existed in your own mind, or that of the government you so worthily represent, as to the conduct or intentions of the United States revenue officers engaged in making the arrest and prosecuting the search of Weinrebe’s personal effects, I nevertheless deemed it proper, in view of the friendly relations existing between this government and that of Germany, to convey to you in that note the declaration that the German Government might rest assured that in all cases where a search of a vessel of that nationality might become necessary by the judicial or customs authorities of this government ample opportunity would be afforded to the proper consular officer of the imperial government to be present at such proceedings,

With a renewal of this assurance I feel constrained to believe that a discussion of the character invited by your note as to the true intent and meaning of the second clause of the XII Article of the treaty of 1871 is not rendered necessary by the circumstances of Weinrebe’s case, and would in itself at best prove to be unprofitable.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

* Vide vol. Foreign Relations for 1879, page 408.

No. 295. Mr. von Schlözer to Mr. Evarts. No. 295.
Mr. von Schlözer to Mr. Evarts.

Imperial German Legation,
Washington, March 17, 1880.

Esteemed Mr. Secretary of State: According to a communication from Mr. von Brandt, the imperial envoy at Peking, bearing date of November 14, 1879, the consultations between the representatives of the treaty powers at that capital have led to the resolution to discontinue the negotiation which has been conducted in writing with the Chinese Government in regard to the audience question and other matters of etiquette, and to confine themselves to the demand that hereafter free access to the provincial authorities shall be allowed to all consular representatives of the treaty powers.

My government is prepared to express its approval of the above resolution to Mr. von Brandt, but desires to know, before doing so, whether the Government of the United States shares this view.

I should therefore be very grateful to you, esteemed Mr. Secretary of State, if you would let me know your opinion on this subject.

Accept, &c.,

SCHLÖZER.

No. 296. Mr. Evarts to Mr. von Schlözer. No. 296.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. von Schlözer.

Department of State,
Washington, March 20, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 17th instant, stating that your government has received a communication from the imperial envoy at Peking reporting that the representatives of the treaty powers at that capital have adopted the resolution to discontinue the negotiation which has been conducted in writing with the Chinese Government in regard to the audience question and other matters of etiquette, and to confine themselves to the demand that hereafter free access to the provincial authorities shall be allowed to all consular representatives of the treaty powers.

You state, furthermore, that your government is prepared to express its approval of the resolution in question to its envoy at Peking, but desires to know, before doing so, whether the Government of the United States shares this view.

In reply to your inquiry, I have the honor to state that this government adheres to the view of the treaty powers that it is advisable to discontinue the discussion of points of etiquette, and to seek the more practical advantages to be obtained by insisting upon free access to the provincial authorities.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Great BritainGreat Britain

[297] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, July 29, 1879. (Received August 9.)

[298] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Hoppin.

Department of State, Washington, September 15, 1879.

[299] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, October 29, 1879. (Received November 11.)

[300] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, November 4, 1879. (Received November 17.)

[301] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, December 27, 1879. (Received January 12.)

[302] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, January 23, 1880. (Received February 7.)

[303] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin.

Department of State, Washington, February 11, 1880.

[304] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin.

Department of State, Washington, March 25, 1880.

[305] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, March 27, 1880. (Received April 9.)

[306] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, April 24, 1880. (Received May 5.)

[307] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, May 1, 1880. (Received May 13.)

[308] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, June 16, 1880. (Received July 1.)

[309] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, June 17, 1880. (Received July 1.)

[310] . Mr. May to Mr. Lowell.

Department of State, Washington, July 7, 1880.

[311] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, August 6, 1880. (Received August 19.)

Contents

No. 297. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. No. 297.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, July 29, 1879. (Received August 9.) No. 327.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a note just received from Lord Salisbury, in which it is proposed that the two governments shall enter into an arrangement by which an account shall be rendered, and payment made of expenses incurred in connection with cases of extradition, once annually, at the most convenient period of the financial year.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure in No. 327.]

The Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Welsh.

Foreign Office, July 23, 1879.

Sir: The secretary of state for the home department has had under his consideration whether, in view of the frequent claims arising between Her Majesty’s Government and foreign governments for the repayment of small sums on account of expenses incurred in connection with cases of extradition, some plan might not be devised for simplifying such transactions, and it is accordingly proposed to discharge, in one annual payment, by or to each government, the total amount of such claims for extradition expenses as may have been incurred during the year.

If this arrangement should meet with the approval of your government, it would probably be most convenient that once annually, at the most convenient period of the financial year, an account of such expenses, accompanied by proper vouchers, should be submitted by each government to the other, when, if found correct, the amount could be repaid in the usual course through this department.

I should feel much obliged if you would have the goodness to inform me, at your early convenience, whether the United States Government is disposed to accede to this arrangement.

I have, &c.

SALISBURY.

No. 298. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Hoppin. No. 298.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Hoppin.

Department of State,
Washington, September 15, 1879. No. 371.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Welsh’s No. 327, of the 29th of July last, inclosing a copy of a note dated the 23d of the same month, from the Marquis of Salisbury, in which it is proposed that this government shall enter into an arrangement with that of Great Britain by which an account shall be rendered and payment made of expenses incurred in connection with cases of extradition once annually, at the most convenient period of the financial year.

In reply, I have to say that the treaty of 1842, Article X, provides that “the expense of such apprehension and delivery shall be borne and defrayed by the party who makes the requisition and receives the fugitive.”

The statutory provisions in regard to extradition are silent on the question of expenses.

No legal objections are perceived to entering into such an arrangement as that proposed by the Marquis of Salisbury.

An inconvenience, however, might arise from such an arrangement as the result of the following circumstances:

There are very few requisitions for offenses against the Federal laws. Each State and Territory is required to bear the expenses of requisition and extradition in each case presented by it for the extradition of fugitive criminals from the justice of such State or Territory.

The expenses which this government would be called upon by Great Britain to pay are such as are usually incurred about Scotland Yard, such as services of detectives, the expenses of keeping prisoners, &c.

These expenses the agent appointed by the President, on the nomination of the executive of the State, is expected to pay at the time of taking charge of the fugitive. If, in any case, they should be left unpaid as in some few cases they have been, this Department might be called upon to audit and pay a considerable sum at the end of the year without any fund under its control from which it could properly pay, and might, moreover, find it difficult to get reimbursement from the State. As the matter is now, each case can be scrutinized on its own merits and at the moment.

In view of these circumstances this Department does not consider it expedient to enter into the arrangement proposed in the Marquis of Salisbury’s note above mentioned. I will thank you to communicate this conclusion to Her Majesty’s Government.

I am, &c.,

WM. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

No. 299. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 299.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, October 29, 1879. (Received November 11.) No. 89.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 66, of the 8th instant, in relation to Mormon emigration to the United States, I have the honor to acquaint you that I have received communications on this subject from the consulate general of the United States and from the consuls at Bradford and Liverpool and the commercial agent at Nottingham. The only information of importance in these letters is that given by Mr. Smith of Nottingham and Mr. Packard of Liverpool, copies of whose letters I herewith inclose.

Immediately upon the receipt of Mr. Packard’s communication, I addressed a letter to Lord Salisbury informing him of the contemplated departure of a party of Mormons on the 18th instant, from Liverpool. I have had no reply to this until this morning, when I received a note from his lordship, stating the action which was taken by the home secretary in relation to this matter, and inclosing a notice signed by Sir E. Y. W. Henderson, the commissioner of metropolitan police, I herewith transmit copies of all these papers.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 89.]

Mr. Smith to Mr. Hoppin.

United States Commercial Agency,
Nottingham, September, 16, 1879.

Sir: A few days ago I received a circular from the Secretary of State at Washington, on the subject of Mormon emigration to the United States, with instructions to report to the legation at London any facts in relation to that subject which might come to my notice. In compliance with that instruction, I have the honor to report that there has been for some years past a Mormon congregation in this place. Mr. William Bramall is the head elder of the Nottingham branch, which numbers about 200 members. Their meeting place is in the assembly room, Low Pavement. Services are held on Sundays at 2.30 and 6 p.m., and on Wednesday at 8 p.m.

Money is sent from Utah to the Mormon emigration office at Islington, Liverpool, for the benefit of the poor who have not the means to pay their passage. Each person who receives money from this fund is expected to repay it in work when settled in Utah. No money has been sent to the Nottingham branch this year. Each emigrant who has the means with which to pay his passage, is required to pay the necessary amount to the elder of the district. The names of the emigrants, with the money paid, are sent to the office at Liverpool, and when all is complete, and the number of emigrants is known, a contract is made to take them to New York.

When landed they are taken in charge by the elder and forwarded by rail to their destination. Emigration commences in May and ends in October. Three or four parties usually go out each year. The last party for this year is expected to leave Liverpool on the 18th of October. It is expected that a company of from 200 to 300 will leave Liverpool at that time, composed of English, Germans, Scandinavians, and others.

The above are all the facts I have been able to collect with regard to the Mormons in this town.

I am, &c.,

JASPER SMITH,
United States Commercial Agent.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 89.]

Mr. Packard to Mr. Hoppin.

Consulate United States of America,
Liverpool, October 15, 1879.

Sir: In compliance with a circular from the State Department dated August 26, 1879, which instructs me to report to the legation without loss of time any facts relative to the emigration of Mormons to the United States, I have the honor to inform you that a large number, probably about 70 persons, known as Mormons, have engaged passage and are expected to emigrate from this port on Saturday next, the 18th instant, destined for the Territory of Utah, in the steamship Arizona of the Guion line of steamers bonnd for New York.

Also, in compliance to Department instruction, I have called the attention of his worship the mayor of the borough of Liverpool to the proposed departure of Mormon emigrants. A copy of my letter to him is inclosed.

I am, &c.,

S. B. PACKARD, Consul.

[Inclosure in Mr. Packard’s letter.]

Mr. Packard to the Mayor of Liverpool.

Consulate United States of America,
Liverpool, October 15, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the United States Government has communicated to its diplomatic representative in Great Britain a circular letter, dated at the State Department August 9, 1879, on the subject of Mormon emigration (a printed copy attached) and, under date of August 26, the State Department, in a communication to this consulate, instructs me with reference to the departure of Mormon emigrants, and adds: “discreet and opportune suggestions on your part to the local authorities concerning such movements would doubtless aid the general representations which the legation is instructed to make.”

I have the honor to state that I am credibly informed that a large number, say seventy persons, Mormons, intend to sail per steamship Arizona next Saturday, October 18, destined for the Territory of Utah, there to join a Mormon community at Salt Lake, Utah, with intent there to violate the laws of the United States.

I am, sir, &c.,

S. B. PACKARD, Consul.

His worship the Mayor for the Borough of Liverpool.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 89.]

Mr. Hoppin to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, October 16, 1879.

My Lord: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 6th instant in reply to mine of the 25th of August upon the subject of Mormon emigration from this country to the United States, and to state that I did not fail to transmit a copy of it by the earliest opportunity to Mr. Evarts.

Referring to your lordship’s statement that Mr. Cross will cause a notice to be inserted in the newspapers cautioning persons against being deceived by Mormon emissaries, and making generally known the law of the United States affecting polygamy, and the penalties attaching to infringements thereof, I have the honor to acquaint your lordship that I have received to-day a letter from S. B. Packard, esq., the consul of the United States at Liverpool, informing me that a large number, probably about seventy persons, known as Mormons have engaged passage and are expected to emigrate from that port on Saturday next, the 18th instant, destined for the Territory of Utah, in the steamship Arizona, of the Guion line of steamers, bound for New York.

I have to add that the consul also informs me that he sent yesterday a written communication to his worship the mayor of the borough of Liverpool, calling his attention to the proposed departure of these people with intent to violate the laws of the United States in the Territory of Utah.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 89.]

The Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, October 29, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acquaint you, with reference to my note of the 6th instant, on the subject of the Mormon emigration from this Country to the United States, that I have been informed by Her Majesty’s secretary of state for the home department that a notice, * * * was about to be inserted in the newspapers, with a view to check the emigration of persons from this country for the purpose of joining the Mormon community in the United States.

I have further the honor to acquaint you that I have been informed by Her Majesty’s secretary of state for the home department, to whom I referred a copy of your note of the 16th instant, calling attention to the intention of certain persons to leave this country on the 18th instant with a view, as it would appear, to join the Mormon community in the United States, that a communication was at once addressed to the mayor of Liverpool, requesting that steps might be taken to publish at that port a notice similar to the one to be published in London, warning persons desirous of joining the Mormon community of the illegal nature of the practice of polygamy existing at Salt Lake City.

I have, &c.,

SALISBURY.

No. 300. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 300.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, November 4, 1879. (Received November 17.) No. 95.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instruction No. 380, of the 15th ultimo, and in obedience thereto I herewith inclose three copies of Her Majesty’s order in council, of the 14th of August last, relating to the prevention of collisions at sea, which I received from Lord Salisbury this morning.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure with. No. 95.]

At the Court at Osborne House, Isle of Wight, the 14th day of August 1879.

Present, the Queen’s most excellent majesty in council.

Whereas, by “the merchant shipping act amendment act, 1862,” it was enacted that on and after the 1st day of June, 1863, or such later day as might be fixed for the purpose by order in council, the regulations contained in the table marked C in the schedule to the said act should come into operation, and be of the same force as if they were enacted in the body of the said act; but that Her Majesty might from time to time, on the joint recommendation of the admiralty and the board of trade, by order in council, annul or modify any of the said regulations, or make new regulations in addition thereto or in substitution therefor; and that any alterations in or additions to such regulations made in manner aforesaid should be of the same force as the regulations in the said schedule;

And whereas, by the same act, it was further provided that whenever it should be made to appear to Her Majesty that the government of any foreign country was willing that the regulations for preventing collisions contained in Table C in the schedule to the said act, or such other regulations for preventing collisions as are for the time being in force under the said act, should apply to the ships of such country when beyond the limits of British jurisdiction, Her Majesty might, by order in council, direct that such regulations should apply to the ships of the said foreign country, whether within British jurisdiction or not; and it was further provided by the said act that whenever an order in council had been issued applying any regulation made by or in pursuance of the said act to the ships of any foreign country, such ships should, in all cases arising in any British court, be deemed to be subject to such regulation, and should, for the purpose of such regulation, be treated as if they were British ships;

And whereas, by an order in council made in pursuance of the said recited act, and dated the 9th day of January, 1863, Her Majesty was pleased to direct—first, that the regulations contained in the schedule to the said act should be modified by the substitution for such regulations of certain regulations appended to the said order; secondly, that the said regulations appended to the said order should, on and after the 1st clay of June, 1863, apply to French ships, whether within British jurisdiction or not;

And whereas, by several orders in council subsequently made, Her Majesty was pleased to direct that the regulations appended to the said order of the 9th of January, 1863, should apply to ships of the countries specified in the said orders, whether within British jurisdiction or not;

And whereas, by order in council dated the 30th day of July, 1868, Her Majesty, on the joint recommendation of the admiralty and the board of trade, was pleased to make certain additions to the regulations appended to the said first-recited order in Council, for the purpose of explaining Articles 11 and 13 of the said regulations, and of removing doubt and misapprehension concerning the effect of the said two articles;

And whereas the admiralty and the board of trade have jointly recommended to Her Majesty that the regulations contained in the order in council dated the 9th day of January, 1863, and the additions to the said regulations contained in the said order in council of the 30th day of July, 1868, shall be annulled from the 1st day of September, 1880, and that there shall be substituted for the said regulations and additions respectively the new regulations hereinafter set forth;

And whereas it has been made to appear to Her Majesty that the governments of the several foreign countries mentioned in the second schedule hereto are respectively willing that the regulations contained in the first schedule hereto shall apply to ships of the said countries respectively, whether within British jurisdiction or not:

Now, therefore, Her Majesty, by virtue of the powers vested in her by the said recited act, and by and with the advice of her privy council, is pleased to direct— First, that on and after the 1st day of September, 1880, the regulations appended to the said order in council of the 9th day of January, 1863, and the additions to the said regulations contained in the said order in council of the 30th day of July, 1868, shall be annulled, and that there shall be substituted for the said regulations and additions respectively the new regulations contained in the first schedule hereto.

Second, that the said regulations contained in the said first schedule hereto shall, from and after the 1st day of September, 1880, apply to ships of the countries mentioned in the said second schedule hereto,* whether within British jurisdiction or not.

C. L. PEEL.

FIRST SCHEDULE.

regulations for preventing collisions at sea.

Preliminary.

Article 1. In the following rules every steamship which is under sail and not under steam is to be considered a sailing-ship; and every steamship which is under steam, whether under sail or not, is to be considered a ship under steam.

Rules concerning lights.

Article 2. The lights mentioned in the following articles, numbered 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11, and no others, shall be carried in all weathers from sunset to sunrise.

Article 3. A seagoing steamship when under way shall carry (a) On or in front of the foremast, at a height above the hull of not less than 20 feet, and if the breadth of the ship exceeds 20 feet, then at a height above the hull not less than such breadth, a bright white light, so constructed as to show an uniform and unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 20 points of the compass; so fixed as to throw the light 10 points on each side of the ship, viz, from right ahead to two points abaft the beam On either side; and of such a character as to be visible on a dark night, with a clear atmosphere, at a distance of at least five miles.

(b) On the starboard side, a green light so constructed as to show an uniform and unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 10 points of the compass; so fixed as to throw the light from right ahead to 2 points abaft the beam on the starboard side; and of such a character as to be visible on a dark night, with a clear atmosphere, at a distance of at least two miles.

(c) On the port side, a red light, so constructed as to show an uniform and unbroken light over an arc of the horizon of 10 points of the compass; so fixed as to throw the light from right ahead to 2 points abaft the beam on the port side; and of such a character as to be visible on a dark night, with a clear atmosphere, at a distance of at least two miles.

(d) The said green and red sidelights shall be fitted with inboard screens projecting at least three feet forward from the light, so as to prevent these lights from being seen across the bow.

Article 4. A steamship, when towing another ship, shall, in addition to her side lights, carry two bright white lights in a vertical line one over the other, not less than three feet apart, so as to distinguish her from other steamships. Each of these lights shall be of the same construction and character, and shall be carried in the same position as the white light which other steamships are required to carry.

Article 5. A ship, whether a steamship or a sailing-ship, when employed either in laying or in picking up a telegraph cable, or which from any accident is not under command, shall at night carry, in the same position as the white light which steamships are required to carry, and, if a steamship, in place of that light, three red lights, in globular lanterns, each not less than 10 inches in diameter, in a vertical line one over the other, not less than three feet apart; and shall by day carry in a vertical line one over the other, not less than three feet apart, in front of but not lower than her foremast head, three black balls or shapes, each two feet in diameter.

These shapes and lights are to be taken by approaching ships as signals that the ship using them is not under command, and cannot therefore get out of the way.

The above ships, when not making any way through the water, shall not carry the side lights, but when making way shall carry them.

Article 6. A sailing-ship underway, or being towed, shall carry the same lights as are provided by Article 3 for a steamship under way, with the exception of the white light, which she shall never carry.

Article 7. Whenever, as in the case of small vessels during bad weather, the “green and red side lights cannot be fixed, these lights shall be kept on deck, on their respective sides of the vessel, ready for use; and shall, on the approach of or to other vessels, be exhibited on their respective sides in sufficient time to prevent collision, in such manner as to make them most visible, and so that the green light shall not be seen on the port side nor the red light on the starboard side.

To make the use of these portable lights more certain and easy, the lanterns containing them shall each be painted outside with the color of the light they respectively contain, and shall be provided with proper screens.

Article 8. A ship, whether a steamship or a sailing-ship, when at anchor, shall carry, where it can best be seen, but at a height not exceeding 20 feet above the hull, a white light, in a globular lantern of not less than eight inches in diameter, and so constructed as to show a clear, uniform, and unbroken light visible all around the horizon at a distance of at least one mile.

Article 9. A pilot vessel, when engaged on her station on pilotage duty, shall not carry the lights required for other vessels, but shall carry a white light at the masthead, visible all round the horizon, and shall also exhibit a flare-up light or flare-up lights at short intervals, which shall never exceed fifteen minutes.

A pilot vessel, when not engaged on her station on pilotage duty, shall carry lights similar to those of other ships.

Article 10. (a.) Open fishing-boats and other open boats when under way shall not be obliged to carry the side lights required for other vessels; but every such boat shall in lieu thereof have ready at hand a lantern with a green glass on the one side and a red glass on the other side; and on the approach of or to other vessels such lantern shall be exhibited, in sufficient time to prevent collision, so that the green light shall not be seen on the port side, nor the red light on the starboard.

(b) A fishing-vessel, and an open boat, when at anchor, shall exhibit a bright white light.

(c) A fishing-vessel, when employed in drift-net fishing, shall carry on one of her masts two red lights in a vertical line one over the other, not less than three feet apart;

(d) A trawler at work shall carry on one of her masts two lights in a vertical line-one over the other, not less than three feet apart, the upper light red and the lower-green, and shall also either carry the side lights required for other vessels, or, if the side lights cannot be carried, have ready at hand the colored lights, as provided in Article 7, or a lantern with a red and green glass, as described in paragraph (a) of this-article,

(e) Fishing-vessels and open boats shall not be prevented from using a flare-up in addition, if they desire to do so.

(f) The lights mentioned in this article are substituted for those mentioned in the 12th, 13th, and 14th articles of the convention between France and England scheduled to the British Sea Fisheries Act, 1868.

(g) All lights required by this article, except side lights, shall be in globular-lanterns, so constructed as to show all round the horizon.

Article 11. A ship which is being overtaken by another shall show from her stern to such last-mentioned ship a white light or a flare-up light.

Sound signals for fog, &c.

Article 12. A steamship shall be provided with a steam-whistle or other efficient steam sound signal, so placed that the sound may not be intercepted by any obstructions, and with an efficient fog-horn to be sounded by a bellows or other mechanical means, and also with an efficient bell. A sailing-ship shall be provided with a similar fog-horn and bell.

In fog, mist, or falling snow, whether by day or night, the signals described in this article shall be used as follows, that is to say: (a) A steamship under way shall make with her steam-whistle, or other steam sound signal, at intervals of not more than two minutes, a prolonged blast.

(b) A sailing-ship under way shall make with her fog-horn, at intervals of not more than two minutes, when on the starboard tack one blast, when on the port tack two blasts in succession, and when with the wind abaft the beam three blasts

(c) A steamship and a sailing-ship, when not under way, shall, at intervals of not more than two minutes, ring the bell.

Speed of ships to be moderate in fog, &c.

Article 13. Every ship, whether sailing-ship or steamship, shall, in a fog, mist, or falling snow, go at a moderate speed.

Steering and sailing rules.

Article 14. When two sailing-ships are approaching one another, so as to involve risk of collision, one of them shall keep out of the way of the other, as follows, viz: (a) A ship which is running free shall keep out of the way of a ship which is close-hauled.

(b) A ship which is dose-hauled on the port tack shall keep out of the way of a ship which is close-hauled on the starboard tack.

(c) When both are running free, with the wind on different sides, the ship which has the wind on the port side shall keep out of the way of the other.

(d) When both are running free, with the wind on the same side, the ship which is to windward shall keep out of the way of the ship which is to leeward.

(e) A ship which has the wind aft shall keep out of the way of the other ship.

Article 15. If two ships under steam are meeting end on, or nearly end on, so as to involve risk of collision, each shall alter her course to starboard, so that each may pass on the port side of the other.

This article only applies to cases where ships are meeting end on, or nearly end on, in such a manner as to involve risk of collision, and does not apply to two ships which must, if both keep on their respective courses, pass clear of each other.

The only cases to which it does not apply are, when each of the two ships is end on, or nearly end on, to the other; in other words, to cases in which, by day, each ship sees the masts of the other in a line, or nearly in a line, with her own; and, by night, to cases in which each ship is in such a position as to see both the side lights of the other.

It does not apply, by day, to cases in which a ship sees another ahead crossing her own course; or, by night, to cases where the red light of one ship is opposed to the red light of the other, or where the green light of one ship is opposed to the green light of the other, or where a red light without a green light, or a green light without a red light, is seen ahead, or where both green and red lights are seen anywhere but ahead.

Article 16. If two ships under steam are crossing, so as to involve risk of collision, the ship which has the other on her own starboard side shall keep out of the way of the other.

Article 17. If two ships, one of which is a sailing-ship and the other a steamship, are proceeding in such directions as to involve risk of collision, the steamship shall keep out of the way of the sailing-ship.

Article 18. Every steamship, when approaching another ship, so as to involve risk of collision, shall slacken her speed or stop and reverse if necessary.

Article 19. In taking any course authorized or required by those regulations, a steamship underway may indicate that course to any other ship which she has in sight by the following signals on her steam-whistle, viz:

One short blast to mean “I am directing my course to starboard.”

Two short blasts to mean “I am directing my course to port.”

Three short blasts to mean “I am going full speed astern.”

The use of these signals is optional; but if they are used the course of the ship must be in accordance with the signal made.

Article 20. Notwithstanding anything contained in any preceding article, every ship, whether a sailing-ship or a steamship, overtaking any other, shall keep out of the way of the overtaken ship.

Article 21. In narrow channels every steamship shall, when it is safe and practicable, keep to that side of the fair-way or mid-channel which lies on the starboard side of such ship.

Article 22. Where, by the above rules, one of two ships is to keep out of the way, the other shall keep her course.

Article 23. In obeying and construing these rules due regard shall be had to all dangers of navigation, and to any special circumstances which may render a departure from the above rules necessary in order to avoid immediate danger.

No ship under any circumstances to neglect proper precautions.

Article 24. Nothing in these rules shall exonerate any ship, or the owner, or master, or crew thereof, from the consequences of any neglect to carry lights or signals, or of any negect to keep a proper lookout, or of the neglect of any precaution which may be required by the ordinary practice of seamen, or by the special circumstances of the case.

Reservation of rules for harbors and inland navigation.

Article 25. Nothing in these rules shall interfere with the operation of a special rule, duly made by local authority, relative to the navigation of any harbor, river, or inland navigation.

Special lights for squadrons and convoys.

Article 26. Nothing in these rules shall interfere with the operation of any special rules made by the government of any nation with respect to additional stations and signal-lights for two or more ships of war or for ships sailing under convoy.

SECOND SCHEDULE.

Austria-Hungary.

Belgium.

Chili.

Denmark.

France.

Germany.

Great Britain.

Greece.

Italy.

Netherlands.

Norway.

Portugal.

Russia.

Spain.

Sweden.

United States.

* See page 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], post.

No. 301. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 301.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, December 27, 1879. (Received January 12.) No. 128.]

Sir: Referring to Mr. Welsh’s No. 327, of the 29th July last, and to instruction No. 371 of the 15th of September last, upon the method of settling international accounts of extradition expenses, I have the honor to inclose a copy of the correspondence which has taken place upon this subject since the last-mentioned date, between this legation and the foreign office.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 128.]

Mr. Hoppin to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, October 3, 1879.

My Lord: Referring to your lordship’s note of the 23d of July to Mr. Welsh, in which it is proposed that the Government of the United States shall enter into an arrangement with that of Great Britain, by which an account Shall he rendered, and payment made, of expenses incurred in connection with cases of extradition, once annually, at the most convenient period of the financial year, I have the honor to state that Mr. Welsh sent a copy of your lordship’s note to Mr. Evarts immediately after it was received, and that I have now in hand the reply of the Department of State to the proposition in question, which I am instructed to communicate to your lordship.

The treaty of 1842, Article X, provides that “The expense of such apprehension and delivery shall he borne and defrayed by the party who makes the requisition and receives the’ fugitive.” The statutory provisions in regard to extradition are silent on the question of expenses. No legal objections are perceived to entering into such an arrangement as that proposed by your lordship.

An inconvenience, however, might arise from such an arrangement as the result of the following circumstances. There are very few requisitions for offenses against the Federal laws. Each State and Territory is required to bear the expenses of requisition and extradition in each case presented by it for the extradition of fugitive criminals from the justice of such State or Territory:

The expenses which the Government of the United States would be called upon by Great Britain to pay are such as are usually incurred about Scotland Yard, such as services of detectives, the expenses of keeping prisoners, &c.

These expenses the agent appointed by the President, on the nomination of the executive of the State, is expected to pay at the time of taking charge of the fugitive.

If in any case they should be left unpaid, as in some few cases they have been, the Department of State might be called upon to audit and pay a considerable sum at the end of the year without any fund under its control from which it could properly pay, and might, moreover, find it difficult to get reimbursement from the State. As the matter is now, each case can be scrutinized on its own merits and at the moment.

In view of these circumstances, the Department of State does not consider it expedient to enter into the arrangement proposed in your lordship’s note of the 23d of July last.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 128.]

The Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, December 23, 1879.

Sir: With reference to my note of the 23d of July last, relative to the mode of payment of certain small claims arising in connection with cases of extradition, I have the honor to state to you that having now received replies from various governments to which I had addressed a similar communication, it appears that a considerable divergence of opinion exists as to the most convenient mode of effecting such payments.

Under the circumstances it appears to me that it will be most expedient to adhere to the plan hitherto pursued in this respect, namely, that each claim arising on a case of extradition should be preferred separately, and I have, therefore, the honor to request you to invite your government to accede to such an arrangement.

I have, &c.,

SALISBURY.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 128.]

Mr. Hoppin to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, December 27, 1879.

My Lord: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your lordship’s note of the 23d instant, upon the subject of the payment of the expenses in extradition cases, and expressing your lordship’s opinion that it will he more convenient to adhere to the plan hitherto pursued, that is to say, that each claim arising on a case of extradition should he preferred separately.

I beg to say that I shall fulfill your lordship’s request to invite my government to accede to this arrangement, which, I may be permitted to state, it has already virtually done, as will appear from my letter to your lordship of the 3d of October last.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

No. 302. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 302.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, January 23, 1880. (Received February 7.) No. 139.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 89 of the 29th of October last, I have the honor to inclose the copy of a note I received yesterday from Lord Salisbury and of a document accompanying the same in relation to the interference of Her Majesty’s government with Mormon emigration from Great Britain to the United States.

It will be seen from this communication that the home secretary has been advised by the law officers of the Grown that the government here is under no obligation, and, indeed, has no power to prevent such emigration, and that it can do no more than to give notice to the public of the illegal character of Mormon marriages according to the law of the United States.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 139.]

The Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, January 19, 1880.

Sir: With reference to your letter of the 16th of October last, and to previous correspondence upon the same subject, I have the honor to acquaint you that a communication has been received from Her Majesty’s secretary of state for the home department stating that he is advised by the law officers of the Crown, to whom the question has been referred, that Her Majesty’s government is under no obligation, and, indeed, has no power, to prevent the emigration of British subjects desirous of joining the Mormon community in the United States, and that they can do no more than to give notice to the public of the illegal character of Mormon marriages according to the law of the United States.

Copies of the notices issued in London and Liverpool are inclosed herewith for your information.

I have, &c.,

SALISBURY.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 139.]

Notice to emigrants and emigration agents.

Metropolitan Police Office,
Great Scotland Yard, 14th day of Oct., 1879.

Whereas there is reason to believe that a system of solicitation extensively prevails to induce persons to emigrate from Great Britain to the United States for the purpose of joining the Mormon community at Salt Lake, in the Territory of Utah, this notice is to warn all persons that the law of the United States prohibits the practice of polygamy existing in the Mormon community, and renders any person who engages therein liable to heavy fine and a long period of imprisonment.

E. Y. HENDERSON,
The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis, acting under the immediate authority of Her Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department.

No. 303. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin. No. 303.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin.

Department of State,
Washington, February 11, 1880. No. 421.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 139, of the 23d ultimo, inclosing a copy of a note from the Marquis of Salisbury to you in relation to Mormon emigration from England to the United States, in which his lordship states that Her Majesty’s government is under no obligation, and, indeed, has no power, to prevent the emigration of British subjects desirous of emigrating to this country, and they can do no more than give notice to the public of the illegal character of Mormon marriages according to the law of the United States, and that such notice has accordingly been given.

This action upon the part of the British Government is very gratifying to this department, since the object aimed at by previous correspondence is thus gained; namely, the promulgation of information under the authority of the home government to proposed emigrants of the penal consequences of the practice of polygamy in the Mormon, community in Utah Territory.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 304. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin. No. 304.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin.

Department of State,
Washington, March 25, 1880. No. 432.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 128, of the 27th of December last, referring to Mr. Welsh’s No. 327, of the 29th of July last, and to the instruction No. 371 of the 15th of September last, of this Department upon the subject of the method of settling accounts of extradition expenses. You also inclose a copy of your correspondence with the British foreign office upon the subject in question since the date last mentioned, from which it appears that in consequence of the divergence of opinion as to the most convenient method of effecting the payment of extradition expenses expressed by the various governments to which the Marquis of Salisbury had addressed communications, on the subject, his lordship had reached the conclusion that it would be best to adhere to the plan hitherto pursued, preferring’ separately each claim arising on a case of extradition; and he therefore asks this government to accede to the proposed arrangement.

In reply, I have to instruct you to inform Her Majesty’s government that this Department approves of the plan proposed, with the understanding, however, that the arrangement shall not preclude the settlement of expenses on the spot by the agent sent to receive the prisoner, or make it obligatory that the claim should be formally preferred by one government to the other, and so settled. The few cases where the expenses are not paid on the spot would, of course, it is thought by this Department, be properly matters for adjustment between the two governments.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 305. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 305.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, March 27, 1880. (Received April 9.) No. 166.]

Sir: Referring to instruction No. 421, of the 11th of February last, from the Department of State, I have the honor to inclose the copy of a correspondence between myself and the consul at Liverpool in regard to the anticipated departure of a company of Mormon emigrants from that port for the United States.

I hope that my action in this matter will be approved by the Department.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 166.]

Mr. Packard to Mr. Lowell.

Consulate, United States of America,
Liverpool, March 17, 1880.

Sir: In compliance with a circular from the State Department, dated August 26, 1879, which instructs me to report to the legation, without loss of time, any facts relative to the emigration of Mormons to the United States, I have the honor to inform you that the first company of this year’s emigration will leave Liverpool on Saturday, April 10, 1880, per steamer Wyoming, of the Guion line, hound for New York.

I am, &c.,

S. B. PACKARD.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 166.]

Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Packard.

Legation of the United States,
London, March 18, 1880.

Sir: I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yesterday, addressed to Mr. Lowell, stating that the first company of Mormon emigrants for this year would leave Liverpool on Saturday, the 10th of April next, by the Wyoming, of the Guion line.

As Her Majesty’s Government confines its action in this matter to the publication of a notice, by the police authorities, warning intending emigrants to Utah of the consequences of infringing the laws of the United States on the subject of polygamy, it would be desirable to bring this projected departure of Mormons to the notice of the police of Liverpool, with the request that it should repeat the warning that was given in previous cases.

I am, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

No. 306. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 306.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, April 24, 1880. (Received May 5.) No. 180.]

Sir: I have the honor to acquaint you that at four o’clock in the afternoon of the 21st instant, I received from Mr. Nunn, the vice-consul general of the United States, an original telegram purporting to be addressed by E. P. Brooks, United States consul at Queenstown (Cork), to the consul-general in London, complaining that British custom-house officers had been put on board of the frigate Constellation, at Queens-town, notwithstanding the protest of Captain Potter, and conveying the latter’s request to the consul-general to obtain an order for their removal.

I thereupon wrote to Mr. Nunn that I should address a note to the foreign office on the subject.

I accordingly at once wrote to Lord Salisbury stating the information I had received, expressing a hope that the proceedings at Queenstown would be satisfactorily explained, and asking him to procure an order from the proper authorities, directing the officers of customs to leave the frigate.

I also immediately on the same afternoon telegraphed to Captain Potter at Queenstown the action I had taken in this matter. On the 23d instant, I received a note from Mr. Lister (for the Marquis of Salisbury), stating that he had referred my communication to the proper department of Her Majesty’s Government, with the request that immediate effect might be given to my wishes, and that he should address me again on the subject.

I have received no further communications on this subject.

I inclose a copy of the correspondence.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 180.]

Mr. Hoppin to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, April 21, 1880. Immediate.]

My Lord: I have the honor to acquaint you that the frigate Constellation, a duly commissioned ship of war of the United States, which has been directed by my government to convey a portion of the supplies contributed by the citizens of the United States for the relief of the destitute people of Ireland, has just arrived at Queenstown. I am informed by a telegram addressed by Mr. E. P. Brooks, the consul of the United States at Cork, to the consul-general of the United States in London, that certain officers of Her Majesty’s customs have been placed on board of the Constellation by the receiver of customs at Queenstown, and that the frigate is treated like an ordinary merchant vessel.

It is further stated that Captain Potter, in command of the Constellation, protested against this proceeding and has also complained of it to the admiral of the station. I am also informed that, at the request of the United States consul, the customs officers left the frigate yesterday, but that they afterwards returned, and were, at the date of his telegram, still on board of her.

I cannot but hope that some satisfactory explanation may be made of these proceedings, and in the meantime I have the honor to request that an order may be issued by the proper authorities directing the customs officers to leave the frigate.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 180.]

Copy of telegram handed in at the Queenstown office at 12.57 p.m., received at the Gresham House branch office, London, at 2.29 p.m., from E. P. Brooks, United States consul, April 21, 1880.

Queenstown, Cork. [undated].

To the Consul-General of the United States, London:

Custom-house officers were placed on board Constellation by order customs receiver. She is treated by customs as if an ordinary merchant vessel. Captain Potter protested and complained to the admiral, who agreed with him that the proceeding was contrary to what should be expected under the circumstances.

At my request the officers left yesterday, but have since returned, and now are on board.

Captain Potter requests me to advise you of this, and requests you will obtain an order from the customs for their removal. The customs people were distinctly told that the Constellation is a duly commissioned war ship of the United States. Please telegraph reply.

Copy of paper accompanying the above telegram, 3.15 o’clock.

Respectfully submitted by—

J. NUNN,
U. S. Vice Consul-General, London.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 180.]

Copy of telegram sent April 21, 1880, at 5 p.m.

To Captain Potter,
U. S. S. Constellation, Queenstown, Ireland:

I have written to Lord Salisbury for order to remove customs officers from frigate.

HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 180.]

Mr. Lister to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, April 22, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of yesterday’s date, stating that, from information received by you, it would appear that on the arrival at Queenstown of the United States ship Constellation, conveying supplies contributed by citizens of the United States for the relief of the destitute people of Ireland, the receiver of customs at that port placed custom-house officers on board the frigate, and that although, at the request of the United States consul at Cork, the customs officers left, they afterwards returned, and are by last advices still on board, and I have to state to you that I have referred your communication to the proper department of Her Majesty’s Government, with a request that immediate effect may be given to your wishes.

I shall, on receiving a reply, have the honor of addressing a further communication to you upon the subject.

I have, &c.,

For the Marquis of Salisbury.
T. V. LISTER.

No. 307. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 307.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, May 1, 1880. (Received May 13.) No. 184.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch. No. 180 of the 24th ultimo, I have the honor to inclose a copy of a letter received since the date of that dispatch from Lord Tenterden, expressing the regret of Her Majesty’s Government at the action of the officers of customs at Queenstown in respect to the United States frigate Constellation.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 184.]

Lord Tenterden to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, April 28, 1880.

Sir: I transmitted to the lords commissioners of Her Majesty’s treasury, by whom it was in turn referred to the commissioners of Her Majesty’s customs, your letter of the 21st instant, complaining of the proceedings of the authorities of the latter department in connection with the United States ship Constellation, conveying supplies contributed by citizens of the United States for the relief of the destitute people of Ireland.

I have now the honor to acquaint you that a communication has been received in reply, from which it would appear that on the arrival of the Constellation at Queenstown, the circumstance of a vessel of war arriving with cargo not merchandise on board being most unusual the superior customs official at that port took action most ill advisedly under the provisions of the fifty-second section of the customs consolidated act, 1876, of which a copy is herewith transmitted, and, in accordance with the act in question, placed custom-house officers on board the frigate. The matter was, however, promptly brought to the notice of the collector of customs at Cork, who immediately by telegraph directed their withdrawal.

The latter reports that he waited upon the commander of the Constellation as soon as he was able to do so, and that Captain Potter accepted his apologies and the expression of his regret at the mere supposition of an international disrespect for the American flag.

I have to request that you will be good enough to convey to your government the expression of the sincere regret of Her Majesty’s Government at this occurrence, which is to be entirely attributed to the mistaken sense of his duties on the part of the customs officer of Queenstown, whose proceedings in the matter have been strongly disapproved.

I have, &c.

For the Marquis of Salisbury.
TENTERDEN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 184.]

Copy of the fifty-second section of the customs consolidation act, 1876.

The captain or other officer having the charge of any ship (having commission from Her Majesty or from any foreign state) having on board any goods laden in ports beyond the seas, shall on arrival at any port in the United Kingdom, and before any part of such goods be taken out of such ship, or when called upon so to do by any officer of the customs, deliver an account tin writing under his hand, to the best of his knowledge, of the quality and quantity of every package or parcel of such goods, and of the marks and numbers thereon, and of the names of the respective shippers and consignees of the same, and shall make and subscribe a declaration at the foot of such account declaring to the truth thereof, and shall also truly answer to the collector or other proper officer, such questions concerning such goods as shall be required of him, and on failure thereof, such captain or other officer shall forfeit the sum of £100, and all such ships shall be liable to such searchers as merchant ships are liable to, and the officers of the customs may freely enter and go on board all such ships and bring from thence on shore into the Queen’s warehouse any goods found on board any such ship as aforesaid, subject nevertheless to such regulations in respect to ships of war belonging to Her Majesty, as shall from time to time be directed in that respect by the commissioners of Her Majesty’s treasury.

No. 308. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. No. 308.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, June 16, 1880. (Received July 1.) No. 17.]

Sir: Referring to your instruction to Mr. Welsh, of the 11th of July, 1879* (No. 328), in respect to the trial at Calcutta of John Anderson, for an offence alleged to have been committed on board of a vessel of the United States on the high seas, I have the honor to inclose a copy of the correspondence between this legation and the foreign office in relation to this subject.

It will be observed that Earl Granville, while he takes occasion to differ from yourself upon certain points of international law mentioned in your instructions, admits that the high court at Calcutta had no jurisdiction to try the case in question, and that the trial was a nullity and requests me to express to my Government the regret of Her Majesty’s Government that the action of the authorities at Calcutta should have been governed by a view of the law which, in the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government, cannot be supported, and trusts that I will convey the assurance to the Government of the United States that you have justly attributed this incident to a misconception, and not to any design to question the jurisdiction of the United States in this or any similar case.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 17.]

Mr. Welsh to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, July 29, 1879.

My Lord: I have the honor to inform you that the Secretary of State of the United States has recently received from A. C. Littlefield, Esq., the consul-general of the United States at Calcutta, a dispatch in relation to the case of one John Anderson, an ordinary seaman on hoard the American hark C. O. Whitmore, who, it appears, stabbed and killed the first officer of the ship on the 31st of January last, while that vessel was on her way from New York to Calcutta, sixteen days from her port of departure, and on the high seas, in latitude 25° 35' north, and longitude 35° 50' west.

It also appears that the consul-general invoked the aid of the local police authorities in securing the safe custody of the accused, who was a prisoner of the United States, until he could complete the necessary arrangements for sending him for trial to that country against whose municipal laws only he was accused of having offended.

It further appears that while he was thus in the temporary custody of the local police the colonial authorities took judicial cognizance of the matter, claiming, under the advice of the advocate-general of the colony, that under the colonial statute which confers upon the courts of the colony jurisdiction of crimes committed by a British subject on the high seas, even though such crime be committed on the ship of a foreign nation, Anderson’s case came under the jurisdiction of those colonial courts.

It is to be remembered in this connection that the prisoner appeared on the ship’s articles under the name of John Anderson, a subject of Sweden, and the only evidence that he was a British subject seems to have been his own declaration that his real name was Alfred Hussey, and that he was a native of Liverpool.

It is believed that the matter has now reached that point in the judicial proceedings when effective measures for asserting the jurisdictional rights of the United States would be unavailable in this particular case, and whilst Mr. Evarts entertains no doubt that the accused will receive a trial in the high court of Calcutta, where, it is understood, he is to be tried, as he would in the circuit court of the United States, in which tribunal he would be arraigned were he sent to the United States for trial, Mr. Evarts deems it proper at the same time to instruct me to bring the question to the attention of Her Majesty’s Government, in order to have it distinctly understood that this case cannot be admitted by the Government of the United States as a precedent for any similar cases that may arise in the future.

No principle of public law is better understood nor more universally recognized than that merchant vessels on the high seas are under the jurisdiction of the nation to which they belong, and that as to common crimes committed on such vessels while on the high seas the competent tribunals of the vessel’s nation have exclusive jurisdiction of the questions of trial and punishment of any person thus accused of the commission of a crime against its municipal laws.

The nationality of the accused can have no more to do with the question of jurisdiction than it would had he committed the same crime within the geographical territorial limits of the nation against whose municipal laws he offends.

The merchant ship, while on the high seas, is, as the ship of war is everywhere, a part of the territory of the nation to which she belongs.

Mr. Evarts further states that he passes over the apparent breach of comity in the proceedings of the colonial officials as being the result of inadvertence and possible misconception on the part of the government law officer of the colony, rather than of any design to question the sovereignty of the United States in this or cases of a similar nature.

I am instructed to take an early occasion to present these views to Her Majesty’s Government.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 17.]

Earl Granville to Mr. Lowell.

Foreign Office, June 8, 1880.

Sir: Her Majesty’s Government have had under consideration, in communication with the Government of India, the letter addressed by Mr. Welsh to my predecessor on the 29th of July, on the subject of the trial at Calcutta, in January, 1879, of one John Anderson, a British subject, on the articles of the American bark C. O. Whitmore, who was charged with having killed the first officer of that vessel while on the high seas. In that letter, Mr. Welsh stated that, in the opinion of the Government of the United States, the exercise of jurisdiction in that case by the high court at Calcutta was a breach of comity. He urged that “as regards common crimes committed on board merchant vessels on the high seas, the competent tribunals of the vessel’s nation have exclusive jurisdiction of the question of trial and punishment of any person thus accused of the commission of a crime against its municipal law.”

As regards the general proposition above laid down, Her Majesty’s Government are not prepared to admit that a statute conferring jurisdiction on the court of the country of the offender in the case of offenses committed by its own subjects on the high seas, on board a foreign vessel, or in places within foreign jurisdiction, would violate any principle of international law or comity.

On the contrary, they are of opinion that there are many cases in which the conferring of such jurisdiction would subserve the purposes of justice and be quite consistent with those principles.

Such an assumption of jurisdiction does not involve a denial of jurisdiction on the part of the state in whose territory the offense was committed; it involves no more than an assertion of a right of concurrent jurisdiction, and the most eminent authorities on international law in this country, and also in the United States lay down that the legislative and judicial powers of a state extend to the punishment of all offenses against its municipal laws by its subjects wheresoever committed.

But as regards the particular case of John Anderson, it appears from a report furnished by the Government of India that, in the opinion of their law officers, the high court at Calcutta had jurisdiction to try the accused by virtue of the imperial act 23 and 24 Victoria, cap. 88, which extends to Her Majesty’s territories in India the provisions of the act 12 and 13 Victoria, cap. 96, “to provide for the prosecution and trial in Her Majesty’s colonies of offenses committed within the jurisdiction of the admiralty.”

The question of jurisdiction was not raised at the trial, and no decision was therefore pronounced upon it, but Her Majesty’s Government are advised by the law officers of the Crown in this country that the jurisdiction of the admiralty does not extend to offenses committed on the high seas in other than British ships.

It follows therefore from their view of the law that the high court at Calcutta had not jurisdiction to try the case and that the trial was a nullity.

It further appears from the report of the Government of India that, after the trial, the consul-general of the United States applied for the extradition of the prisoner, and was informed that the Government of India were unable to order the surrender of a person on a charge in respect of which he had been already tried and convicted by a competent British court.

I have the honor to request that you will express to your government the regret of Her Majesty’s Government that the action of the authorities at Calcutta, in the case of John Anderson, should have been governed by a view of the law which, in the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government, cannot be supported, and I trust that you will convey to them the assurance that Mr. Evarts has justly attributed this incident to a misconception and not to any design to question the jurisdiction of the United States in this or any similar case.

I have, &c.,

GRANVILLE.

* Vide Vol. Foreign Relations for 1879, pp. 435, 466.

No. 309. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. No. 309.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, June 17, 1880. (Received July 1.) No. 19]

Sir: I have the honor to acquaint you that your telegram instructing me to inquire if the supplies* stored by the British Arctic Expedition of 1875-’76 might, in case of necessity, be used by the polar expedition now organizing under the United States Signal Officer, arrived here late Friday evening, the 28th ultimo.

As it would have required considerable time to make these inquiries in the usual way through the foreign office, Mr. Nadal, at my request, on the 29th ultimo, went to the admiralty and saw Lord John Hay, one of the junior lords, who stated that the board on the day before, the 28th of May, decided to offer these stores for the use of our expedition, and I immediately communicated this fact to you by cable.

On the 1st instant I addressed Earl Granville on the subject, and asked him for a full list of these stores. I herewith inclose a copy of my note.

On the 9th of June instant I received a reply from his lordship, forwarding a chart of Smith’s Sound indicating the position of the several depots of provisions left by Sir George Nares’s expedition, and stating that the board of admiralty had pleasure in placing them at the disposal of the United States officers.

His lordship also inclosed a statement of the scale according to which the rations referred to on the chart are calculated. I transmit herewith a copy of this letter.

Agreeably to your telegram of the 28th of May, I sent the original chart with a copy of the accompanying papers on the 10th instant to Lieutenant Greely, care of the American consul at St. John’s, Newfoundland, and I forward a copy of my letter to him.

Finally, I addressed a note of thanks to Earl Granville, of which I also inclose a copy.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 19.]

Mr. Lowell to Earl Granville.

Legation of the United States,
London, June 1, 1880. Immediate.]

My Lord: I have received unofficial information that the hoard of admiralty have decided upon offering the supplies stored north of Cape York by the English Arctic expedition now organizing under the direction of the United States signal office. I have been instructed by the Department of State to apply for a full list of these stores, which the humanity of Her Majesty’s Government and their generous interest in the cause of Arctic discovery have induced them to offer to be transmitted to Lieutenant Greely at St. John’s, Newfoundland. I have the honor to request that your lordship will have the goodness to cause me to be supplied with this list at as early a period as may be convenient.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 19.]

Earl Granville to Mr. Lowell.

Foreign Office, June 7, 1880.

Sir: With reference to my note of the 3d instant, I have the honor to acquaint you that I have received a letter from the lords commissioners of the admiralty forwarding a chart of Smith’s Sound, which is inclosed herewith, indicating the position of the several depots of provisions left by the expedition under Sir George Nares in 1875.

I am further informed by the board of admiralty that they have much pleasure in placing these provisions and stores at the disposal of the expedition which is shortly to be dispatched to the Arctic regions by your government.

I have the honor to inclose likewise a statement of the scale according to which the rations referred to on the chart are calculated; and I would call your attention moreover to the possibility that the depot at the Cary Islands may have been disturbed by whalers or bears.

I have, &c.,

GRANVILLE.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 19.]

Mr. Lowell to Lieut. Greely.

Legation of the United States,
London, June 10, 1880.

Sir: On the 28th ultimo I received a cable message from the honorable the Secretary State, directing me to inquire if supplies stored north of Gape York by the British Arctic Expedition, 1875—’76, remain and may be used in case of urgent necessity by the Polar expedition now organizing under the United States Signal Office, and if the reply was favorable to telegraph Mr. Evarts the fact and to send by mail a full list to Lieut. Greely, American consulate, St. John’s, Newfoundland.

I caused these inquiries to be made immediately, and was informed that the admiralty had decided on the 28th of May last to offer these stores for the use of our Polar expedition.

I telegraphed this information to Mr. Evarts on the 29th of May last.

On the 9th instant I received from Earl Granville a note, dated on the 7th instant, in relation to this matter, and also a chart and a statement of the scale on which the rations referred to in the chart are calculated.

In obedience to my instructions, I now forward to you this chart and also copies of Earl Granville’s note and the accompanying statements.

On the 9th instant I received from Mr. Evarts a dispatch repeating the message he had sent by cable, and inclosing a copy of the letter addressed by yourself to the Department of State.

I am, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure 4 in. No. 19.]

Mr. Lowell to Earl Granville.

Legation of the United States,
London, June 14, 1880.

My Lord: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your lordship’s letter of the 7th instant, forwarding a chart of Smith’s Sound, upon which is indicated the position of the several depots of provisions left by the expedition of Sir George Nares in 1875, and accompanied by a statement of the scale according to which the rations referred to on the chart are calculated.

Your lordship is also good enough to state that you are further informed by the board of admiralty that they have much pleasure in placing these provisions and stores at the disposal of the expedition which is shortly to be dispatched to the Arctic regions by my government.

I have telegraphed to the Department of State already this action of the lords commissioners, and I am sure I am only anticipating the wishes of the President in asking your lordship to convey to them his cordial thanks for their humane and generous determination in this matter.

I have sent, in obedience to Mr. Evarts’s instructions, the chart and copies of the accompanying papers to Lieutenant Greely, acting signal officer, commanding the expedition, at St. John’s, Newfoundland.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

* Vide Foreign Relations for 1875, part 1, pp. 649, 650.

No. 310. Mr. May to Mr. Lowell. No. 310.
Mr. May to Mr. Lowell.

Department of State,
Washington, July 7, 1880. No. 35.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 17, of the 16th ultimo, inclosing a copy of the correspondence between your legation and the foreign office in relation to the case of John Anderson, who was tried in Calcutta for a crime alleged to have been committed on board a vessel of the United States on the high seas, which correspondence contains an expression of the regret of Her Majesty’s Government that the action of the authorities at Calcutta in the case in question should have been governed by a view of the law which, in the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government, cannot be supported.

In reply, I have to instruct you to convey to the proper quarter an expression of this Department’s appreciation of the candor and goodwill with which Her Majesty’s Government have considered this matter, and to say, moreover, that it has afforded this government great satisfaction to learn that the action of the authorities of Calcutta in the case of Anderson is to be attributed to a misconception, and not to any design to question the jurisdiction of the United States in that or any similar case.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 311. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. No. 311.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, August 6, 1880. (Received August 19.) No. 35.]

Sir: On the 2d of December last, Captain Tukey, of the American merchant ship Normandy, wrote to Mr. Hoppin, at that time chargé d’affaires, calling attention to the disadvantage in the London freight market suffered by American vessels on account of their exclusion from the conveyance of British Government stores. It was said by Captain Tukey that an exception had been made in the case of the Italian ship Manilla, and it was suggested that admission to this trade might be obtained for American vessels. On the 23d of December last, Mr. Hoppin addressed a note to the British Government on this subject, to which I have just received a reply. The reply states the decision of the Indian council not to alter the present practice of chartering or employing for the conveyance of stores to India vessels only that sail under the British flag. I inclose herewith copies of the notes of Mr. Hoppin and Earl Granville and of the letter of Captain Tukey, thinking that the correspondence may be of interest to the Department.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 35.]

Mr. Hoppin to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, December 23, 1879.

My Lord: I have the honor to ask your lordship’s attention to a letter, a copy of which I inclose herewith, addressed to me by Captain Tukey, of the American merchant ship Normandy.

It seems it is customary for the honorable council for India, to send government stores to that country by British ships only. I am informed that there is no law excluding foreign bottoms; but it is judged more convenient in case of any reclamation against master and owners that they should be within the jurisdiction of the British courts.

Captain Tukey suggests that this difficulty maybe entirely obviated by a bond or other security, to be given by responsible British subjects to the shippers, guaranteeing them against any loss or damage.

I venture to ask your lordship whether it may not be possible for the vessels of the United States to obtain a share of this business upon furnishing the indemnity above mentioned.

It seems, from Captain Tukey’s statement, that the custom of employing British bottoms only has recently been departed from in the case of an Italian ship, the Manilla, and if foreign vessels are ever to be used, there is no reason why those of my own country, which are staunch, strong, and well found, and will pass the most rigid inspection, should not also be chartered.

I should hesitate in asking your lordship’s kind offices in presenting this matter to the India board if it were not obvious that throwing open the competition for this business to American bottoms would have a tendency to diminish freights, and thus prove quite as advantageous to the government shippers here as to my countrymen.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 35.]

Mr. Tukey to Mr. Hoppin.

American Ship Normandy,
West Jndia Dock, London, December 2, 1879.

Honorable Sir: I desire to bring under your notice the fact that American ships are at a great disadvantage in the London freight market, by being excluded from the conveyance of British government stores.

I cannot find that any law exists with reference to this, beyond the fact that it has been customary to ship by British vessels only, owing, I presume to difficulties which might arise in the event of any reclamations becoming chargeable, and proceedings having to be taken in a foreign instead of an English court. This, however, could be effectually met by a banker or broker, located here, becoming guarantee on behalf of the ship and owners in America for any such claims.

I am induced to bring this matter under your notice, as I have been compelled to take about £300 less freight under my present charter for Bombay than was offering for a cargo for same destination of which government stores formed a portion, whereas I find the custom of only shipping by British vessels was recently departed from by the conveyance of India in council stores under the Italian flag by a vessel called the Manilla. Under these circumstances, I venture to hope it will only require your representation to the British Government of the above facts to have the United States flag placed upon the same footing.

I remain, &c.,

I. M. TUKEY,
Master of American Ship Normandy.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 35.]

Earl Granville to Mr. Lowell.

Foreign Office, August 3, 1880.

Sir: My predecessor referred to the late secretary of state for India in council, Mr. Hoppin’s letter of the 23d of December last, together with its inclosure, relative to the conveyance to India of government stores in foreign vessels, and I have the honor to acquaint you that a communication has been received in reply, stating the circumstances set forth in Mr. Hoppin’s letter above referred to, have been very carefully considered by the present secretary of state for India in council, but that, having regard to the difficulties which might arise through the employment of foreign vessels, it is not deemed expedient to alter the present practice of chartering or employing for the conveyance of stores to India, vessels only that sail under the British flag, which it has been ascertained is in accordance with that pursued by the lords commissioners of the admiralty and by the colonial governments.

It is added that the engagement of the Manilla, to which reference is made by Mr. Hoppin, was quite exceptional, and was entered into to meet a pressing difficulty in obtaining sufficient tonnage, a circumstance which is not likely to recur.

I have, &c.,

GRANVILLE.

Correspondence with the British Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the British Legation in Washington.

[312] . Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, August 9, 1879.

[313] . Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, August 12, 1879.

[314] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward.

Newburyport, September 8, 1879.

[315] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter.

Newburyport, September 13, 1879.

[316] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, September 16, 1879.

[317] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, September 24, 1879.

[318] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter.

Washington, October 2, 1879.

[319] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Newburyport, October 20, 1879.

[320] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Newburyport, October 22, 1879.

[321] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, October 28, 1879.

[322] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 4, 1879.

[323] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 14, 1879.

[324] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, November 14, 1879.

[325] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 15, 1879.

[326] . Mr. Hunter to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, November 18, 1879.

[327] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, December 13, 1879.

[328] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, December 13, 1879.

[329] . Mr. Hay to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, December 20, 1879.

[330] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, January 21, 1880.

[331] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, February 3, 1880.

[332] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, February 19, 1880.

[333] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, February 27, 1880.

[334] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, February 28, 1880.

[335] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, March 13, 1880.

[336] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, March 25, 1880.

[337] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hay.

Washington, March 29, 1880.

[338] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, April 17, 1880. (Received April 17.)

[339] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, April 23, 1880. (Received April 24.)

[340] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, May 14, 1880.

[341] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, May 25, 1880.

[342] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, June 8, 1880.

[343] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 9, 1880.

[344] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 12, 1880.

[345] . Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, June 16, 1880.

[346] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 17, 1880.

[347] . Mr. Hay to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, June 19, 1880.

[348] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 19, 1880.

[349] . Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 28, 1880.

[350] . Mr. Hay to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State, Washington, June 29, 1880.

[351] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond.

Department of State, Washington, July 30, 1880.

[352] . Mr. Drummond to Mr. Hay.

Windsor, Vt., August 20, 1880.

[353] . Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Windsor, Vt., August 24, 1880.

[354] . Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Saratoga, August 26, 1880.

[355] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Drummond.

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1880.

[356] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond.

Department of State, Washington, September 6, 1880.

[357] . Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Lenox, September 7, 1880.

[358] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Drummond.

Department of State, Washington, October 26, 1880.

[359] . Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 1, 1880.

[360] . Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 20, 1880.

No. 312. Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 312.
Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, August 9, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to state for your information that this department has received a communication, dated the 6th instant, from the honorable Secretary of War of the United States, accompanied by a report made to him by Col. Nelson A. Miles, Fifth Infantry, dated July 3, ultimo, relative to depredations committed in the Yellowstone Valley by Northern Indians.

It appears, from the report in question, that daring the past few months a number of depredations have been committed in the Yellowstone Valley by small parties of Indians coming from the north. It was ascertained that those parties were not wholly composed of hostiles from Sitting Bull’s camp, but that some Missouri River Indians, particularly Yanktonnais and Gros Ventres, were implicated in the outrages, and, doubtless, acted as guides for the hostiles.

Some of the particulars of the depredations in question, as given in the report, of Colonel Miles, are, that about the 1st of March, 1879, several head of stock were stolen from McDonald and Dillon, ranchmen near Powder River. On the night of the 4th of March, ultimo, twenty-three head of stock were run off from Countryman’s ranch, near the mouth of Stillwater. The trail of these depredators led toward Studley’s crossing of the Musselshell.

On the afternoon of March 28 two ranchmen were murdered on the Yellowstone, above Ferry’s Landing, and one wounded. About this time horses were run off from Rease’s Bottom, from ranches near the mouth of Buffalo Creek, in the vicinity of Pompey’s Pillar, and sixty-seven ponies were stolen from the Crows at their agency. The chiefs and head men of the Crows, at the time, reported the raiders to be Northern Indians, with perhaps a few Nez Percés. It is said that this party of Nez Percés Indians arrived at Wood Mountains on the 25th of April, having in their possession American horses, and boasted of the murder on the Yellowstone of two white men.

On the evening of the 6th of April, a small party of Indians attacked the ranch of Sebbezze and Peterson, near Powder River, killing the former-named ranchman and wounding the latter, and running off eight or ten head of stock. Mr. Sebbezze, in an ante-mortem statement, identified some of these depredators as Gros Ventres, recognizing them as such from their dress and language, and it was subsequently ascertained that the leader of the band was an Indian named Rushing Thunder, from the Northwest Territory, and that the raiding party crossed the Missouri on the 9th of April, and have since taken their property to the north side of the Canadian boundary.

In view of the foregoing facts this Department deems it proper to express the wish of this government that the Canadian authorities may be instructed to return the Indians who have been guilty of murder to the United States, if possible, for trial and punishment, and also to restore the stolen property to the owners, if it can be found.

I have, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 313. Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 313.
Mr. Seward to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, August 12, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I am advised through the Secretary of the Treasury that it is the practice of Canadian fishermen upon the shores of Lake Ontario, in the neighborhood of the mouth of the Niagara River, to cross into the United States and set their nets in the lake a few rods from the American side, and running out across the channel, in which the fish reach the river, to the great injury and chagrin of American fishermen plying their vocation there; while, if an American fisherman happens to go to the Canada side with his nets for a like purpose, they are immediately seized by the Canadian authorities.

This matter would seem to be one which calls for the attentive consideration of the Dominion Government, and I would be pleased, therefore, to have you communicate with the governor-general of Canada upon the subject, and submit that it is the desire of this government that an investigation may be made, and, if the facts be found to be as represented, that the Canadian authorities will take the proper measures to prevent these fishermen from persisting in encroaching upon the rights and privileges belonging to fishermen of the United States in the waters in question.

I have, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 314. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward. No. 314.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Seward.

Newburyport, September 8, 1879.

Sir: It will be in your recollection that in June last I had the honor, in accordance with an instruction which I had received from the Marquis of Salisbury, to convey to the Secretary of State the wish of Her Majesty’s Government to know whether the Government of the United States would be disposed to join Great Britain and Germany in offering their mediation with a view to concluding the war between Chili and Peru.

In reply, Mr. Evarts stated that the Government of the United States had been and was ready to assist in the restoration of peace between the belligerent powers whenever its good offices might be usefully proffered.

It did not, however, favor a premature effort, nor an effort in combination with other neutral powers which would carry the impression of dictation or coercion in disparagement of the rights of the belligerent powers.

I have recently observed that it has been stated by some of the American newspapers that the Government of the United States has instructed its ministers at Lima and at Santiago de Chili to communicate to the governments to which they are respectively accredited the deep regret of the United States at the unhappy state of affairs existing between Peru and Chili, and to state that whilst the Government of the United States does not wish to force mediation upon them, it would be ready to use its good offices to secure an honorable settlement of the difficulties between the belligerent governments whenever they shall intimate that such friendly services will be accepted with a view to bringing about an honorable peace.

As Her Majesty’s Government has already shown the interest it feels upon this subject, and its wish that so desirable an end may be attained, I have the honor to express my hope that you will think yourself justified in acquainting me, for the information of my government, whether the newspaper statements to which I have referred are founded on fact, and whether it may entertain the hope that the steps thus taken by the Government of the United States may lead to the conclusion of peace between the republics of Chili and Peru.

I have, &c.,

ED W’D THOROTON.

No. 315. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter. No. 315.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter.

Newburyport, September 13, 1879.

Sir: In compliance with an instruction which I have received from the Marquis of Salisbury, I have the honor to transmit herewith translation of a law passed by the Colombian legislature relative to the custody of ships’ registers in Colombian ports, and to invite your attention to the third article of that law.

Her Majesty’s Minister at Bogotá has expressed the opinion that there are objections to that article, but believes that it is based upon the terms of a convention between the minister of the United States at Bogota and the late Colombian secretary for foreign affairs.

I am, therefore, instructed to state that Her Majesty’s Government would be glad to be informed whether that convention has been approved by the Government of the United States, and what view is taken by it of the new Colombian law.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure in Sir Edward Thornton’s note of September 13, 1879.]

Law No. 40, of 1879 (June 24), revising law No 60, of 1875.—Translation.

The Congress of the United States of Colombia decrees: Article I. All merchant-vessels touching at the ports of the Republic shall present to the collector of customs or the comptroller of the port their registers or other papers. The said papers shall be immediately deposited with the consular agent of the country to which the ship belongs, who shall be obliged to give a certificate stating that said papers have been delivered to him, to the collector of customs or the comptroller at the port. The captain of a vessel failing to fulfill this enactment shall become liable to a fine of from one [five?—E. T.] hundred to one thousand dollars ($500 to $1,000), the amount to be determined by the collector of customs or the comptroller of the port in his stead.

Article II. Foreign consular agents at the ports of the Republic shall, on receiving the register and other papers appertaining to a vessel of their nation touching at the port, draw up a certificate to that effect, which shall be delivered to the collector of customs or the comptroller at the port.

Article III. The said consular agents shall not return the register and other papers to the captain who shall have deposited them, till the clearance, issued by the proper authority, shall have been presented to them.

The returning of a ship’s register and other papers without the necessary clearance issued by the competent national authority, having been previously produced, shall be considered a sufficient cause for the withdrawal of the exequatur or permission to act from a consul, vice-consul, or consular-agent, as the case may be.

Article IV. The fines and other punishments referred to in this law may be reduced or altogether condoned by the executive power whenever the person on whom their shall have been imposed shall produce sufficient proofs of his innocence.

Given at Bogotá on the 23d of June, 1879.

No. 316. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 316.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, September 16, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 13th instant, stating that you had been directed by the Marquis of Salisbury to inquire whether this government had approved of a convention concluded by the minister of the United States at Bogota with the Colombian minister for foreign affairs relative to the custody of ships’ papers. The inquiry is made because that convention is supposed to have been the basis of an act of the Colombian Congress upon the subject, the third section of which is regarded by Her Majesty’s minister at Bogota as specially objectionable.

In reply, I have the honor to state that the convention adverted to has not been formally approved by this Department. The third section of the Colombian law, however, to which you refer, appears to have been framed pursuant to section 4211 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, with the exception that the penalty imposed upon a consul for delivering the papers of a vessel to the master without a clearance from the custom-house, is, under our law, a fine instead of a threat of cancelling the exequatur of the consul.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 317. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 317.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, September 24, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note to this Department, dated the 8th instant, in which you refer to previous correspondence in reference to the inquiry you made in June last, by direction of the Marquis of Salisbury, as to whether the Government of the United States would be disposed to join Great Britain and Germany in offering their mediation with a view of concluding the war between Chili and Peru. You also mention the reply of this government to that proposal expressing its readiness to assist in the restoration of peace between the belligerents whenever its good offices might be usefully proffered, but not favoring a premature effort nor an effort in combination with other neutral powers which would carry the impression of dictation or coercion in disparagement of belligerent rights.

You say, furthermore, that you have recently observed statements in American newspapers to the effect that this government has instructed its ministers at Lima and Santiago de Chili to tender the good offices of the United States to secure an honorable settlement of the difficulties between the belligerent governments, whenever they shall intimate that such friendly services will be accepted with that end in view, and you express the hope that I will think myself justified in acquainting you, for the information of Her Majesty’s Government, as to whether the newspaper statements to which you refer are founded on fact, and whether the hope may be entertained that the steps thus reported to have been taken by the Government of the United States may lead to the conclusion of peace between the republics of Chili and Peru.

In reply, I have to say that I have delayed answering your note above mentioned, which was brought to my notice on my return to Washington, on the 16th instant, until I could examine the correspondence with the several ministers at Peru, Chili, and Bolivia, which had taken place during my absence.

The statements in the newspapers to which you refer, have not specifically attracted my attention. I am able to say, however, that our ministers have given and are giving attention to the wishes of this government to proffer its good offices in favor of peace at the earliest indication of the readiness of the belligerents to consider such good offices acceptable.

This purpose this government will not fail to pursue; and with good hopes that the events of the war may soon dispose all the belligerents to desire its honorable conclusion. It would be premature to anticipate an immediate opportunity for a definite proposal of peaceful methods through the good offices of this government which would gain the concurrent consent of the three belligerents.

It will give me pleasure early to acquaint you, for the information of your government, with any decisive indications of a disposition to make a peaceful solution of the unhappy controversy through the interposed friendship of this government.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 318. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter. No. 318.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hunter.

Washington, October 2, 1879.

Sir: In compliance with an instruction which I have received from the Marquis of Salisbury, I have the honor to inform you with reference to the Liberian boundary commission on which the Government of the United States, at the request of that of Her Majesty, was good enough to name Commodore Shufeldt as arbitrator. It appears from the reports of the British commissioners of the 26th of April and 1st of May last, that in consequence of the British commissioners being satisfied that the territories referred to in the deeds of cession produced by the Liberian Government had no existence, the commission came to a conclusion on the 24th of April last, and that the joint commissioners so informed Commodore Shufeldt in their letter of the same day.

I am now instructed to request the Government of the United States, through you, to convey to that officer the best thanks of Her Majesty’s Government for the interest in and attention to the labors of the commission shown by him, although no occasion offered itself for the commissioners to avail themselves of his services as arbitrator.

I am also to request the Government of the United States to convey to the commodore the expression of the sincere regret which has been felt by Her Majesty’s Government, that, owing to the unfortunate delays occasioned in the first instance by the non-arrival at the time originally specified of the instructions to the British commissioners, and secondly, by the adjournment of the commission at the request of the Liberian commissioners from the 14th of February to the 1st of April, he should have been put to inconvenience by so lengthened a detention in the neighborhood of Sierra Leone.

I have, &c.,

ED W’D THORNTON.

No. 319. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 319.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Newburyport, October 20, 1879.

Sir: With reference to Mr. Seward’s note of the 9th of August last relating to the incursions, attended with murder and robbery, said to have been made across the United States border by Indians from Canadian territory, I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of an approved report of the committee of the privy council of Canada, which I have received from the govern or-general of the Dominion.

It will be seen that this report expresses concurrence in a memorandum by the acting minister of the interior, who caused full inquiry to be made into the allegations set forth, and failed to discern evidence in support of the conclusions arrived at by the United States authorities.

I have, &c.,

ED W’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure 1.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council, approved by his excellency the governor-general in council, on the 9th October, 1879.

The committee of council have had under consideration a dispatch from Sir Edward Thornton, dated August 13, 1879, covering copy of a communication dated 9th of same month from Mr. Seward, acting Secretary of State, Washington, relating to incursions, attended with murder and robbery, said to have been made across the United States border by Indians from Canadian territory, and expressing the wish of the American Government that the Indians alleged to have been guilty of the crimes in question may be returned to the United States for trial and punishment, and that the stolen property may be restored to its owners, if it can be found.

They have also had before them a memorandum, dated September 9, 1879, from the honorable the acting minister of the interior, to whom said dispatch with inclosure has been referred, and they recommend said memorandum for your excellency’s approval, and advise that a copy of this minute, when approved, and of the memorandum, be transmitted to Sir Edward Thornton, for the information of the Government of the United States.

Certified:

W. A. HEMSWORTH,
Clerk Privy Council for Canada.

[Inclosure 2.]

memorandum.

Department of the Interior,
September 9, 1879.

The Honorable the Privy Council:

Referring to the dispatch of Sir Edward Thornton of the 13th August, covering copy of a communication dated two days previously from Mr. Seward, Acting Secretary of State, Washington, relating to incursions attended with murder and robbery, said to have been made across the United States border by Indians from Canadian territory, and expressing the wish of the American Government that the Indians alleged to have been guilty of the crimes in question may be returned to the United States for trial and punishment, and that the stolen property may be restored to its owners, if it can be found, the undersigned has the honor to report to council as follows:

1. The undersigned submits that there is no evidence to support the conclusion of Mr. Seward that the perpetrators of the crimes and depredations committed in the Yellowstone Valley were hostiles from the Canadian side of the boundary, nor is there any good reason offered for assuming that either the criminals or the stolen property are in Canadian territory.

2. With respect to the parties guilty of these crimes, the undersigned thinks it improbable that they were composed of hostiles from Sitting Bull’s camp. The enmity existing between the Crows and Sioux will sufficiently account for the attempt of the former to implicate the Northern Indians in those outrages, and the Crows are the only witnesses cited in support of the conclusions on this head at which the communication of Mr. Seward would appear to point.

3. The undersigned is in receipt of a dispatch from Colonel MacLeod, commanding the Northwest mounted police, dated Fort Walsh, August 9, covering three reports from Major Walsh, the officer in charge of the mounted police station at Wood Mountain, dated respectively the 22d, 25th, and 31st July, which prove conclusively that neither the stolen property nor the criminals alluded to were on this side of the line, so far as could be ascertained at the time (July 3) when Colonel Miles wrote the report upon which Mr. Seward’s representations are founded.

From Major Walsh’s reports the undersigned learns that on the evening of the 18th July, Lieutenant Tillson, of the United States Army, accompanied by a Mr. Stearns, arrived at the Wood Mountain police post, with instructions from Colonel Miles to request the co-operation and assistance of the Candian authorities in identifying and procuring the extradition of certain Indians accused of murder on the southern side of the boundary. Major Walsh did everything in his power to forward the object of his visit, and on the 23d of July took Lieutenant Tillson and Mr. Stearns through the whole Sioux camp (then some fourteen miles from the Wood Mountain post), so that they might make whatever investigation they thought necessary, and in order to give the latter an opportunity to search for horses alleged to have been stolen from him, and to see one Johnson, a Nez Percé, said to have been one of the party which attacked Stearns’s house on the Yellowstone. Mr. Stearns failed to find any of his horses in the camp. “I caused Johnson,” says Major Walsh, “to go up and speak to Stearns when he (Stearns) said positively that he was not one of the party who committed the depredations.” Every facility was offered to Lieutenant Tillson for the accomplishment of his mission, and the active assistance and co-operation of the Canadian authorities afforded him; but he returned to his command without having obtained any trace whatever of either the Indians or the property of which he was in search.

4. The undersigned submits that the Government of Canada has hitherto exercised due vigilance to prevent Indians from this side from crossing the border for any other purpose than to secure the necessaries of life, when the buffalo had left our territory. If, however, notwithstanding these precautions, horses have occasionally been stolen by the American refugee Sioux from the Crows and their other Indian enemies or from whites, the animals have invariably been taken possession of by the mounted police and handed back to their owners as soon as identified. The undersigned begs to call the attention of the council to the fact that no attempt whatever is made to prevent raids of this character from the other side of the line. Major Walsh, in his report of the 26th of July, expresses the belief that twice as many horses have been stolen by the Crows from Canadian territory as have been stolen from the United States territory by parties from this side, an assertion which he had made, accompanied with evidence of its truth, to Colonel Miles, on the occasion of having an interview with the latter on the previous day. It is easy to see that, so long as the robbery of horses by Indians from the United States is permitted without any attempt to check it, and only on the Canadian side can horse thieves be punished or stolen horses recovered, the temptations to the Indians north of the boundary to follow their property and possess themselves of it by force will continue to be very great. Major Walsh alone has a record of over one hundred and sixty horses stolen from Canada by Crows and other Indians from the United States, not one of which has ever been returned. This is a state of things to which, the undersigned is of opinion, the attention of the Government of the United States ought to be particularly called, and he has no hesitation in saying that on the United States authorities taking similar steps to those already taken by the Government of Canada to prevent and punish offenses of this character, such offenses will become, if not entirely unknown, at least so rare as to form no reasonable ground of complaint.

All of which is respectfully submitted.

J. C. AIKINS,
Acting for ths Minister of the Interior.

No. 320. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 320.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Newburyport, October 22, 1879.

Sir: With reference to Mr. Seward’s note of the 12th of August last, relative to encroachments said to have been made by Canadian fishermen within the jurisdiction of the United States on the shores of Lake Ontario at the mouth of the river Niagara, I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of an approved report of the privy council of Canada upon this subject, which I have received from the governor general of Canada.

I have, &c.,

ED W’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure in Sir Edward Thornton’s note of October 22, 1878.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general on the 9th day of October, 1879.

The committee of council have had under consideration a dispatch from Her Majesty’s minister at Washington, dated the 14th of August last, with certain communications therein inclosed from Mr. Seward, Acting Secretary of State of the United States.

The honorable the acting minister of marine and fisheries, to whom this dispatch with inclosure has been referred, reports that Mr. Seward states that “he is advised by the United States Secretary of the Treasury that it is the practice of Canadian fishermen upon the shores of Lake Ontario, in the neighborhood of the mouth of the Niagara River, to cross into the United States and set their nets in the lake a few rods from the American side, and running out across the channel in which the fish reach the river, to the great injury and chagrin of American fishermen plying their vocation there; while,” Mr. Seward adds, “if an American fisherman happens to go to the Canadian side with his nets for a like purpose, they are immediately seized by the Canadian authorities.”

Mr. Seward further states that “the matter would seem to be one calling for attentive consideration on the part of the Dominion authorities,” and he expresses the desire of the American Government “that an investigation be made, and that if the facts be proved as represented, they will take proper measures to prevent these fishermen from persisting in encroaching upon the rights and privileges of the fishermen of the United States in the waters in question.”

Upon this reference the minister reports that he has not been able to ascertain that such a practice as that described by Mr. Seward exists at the mouth of the Niagara River; but he is informed that isolated acts of the kind complained of have very probably taken place; that it is difficult, however, to obtain accurate information from the fishermen on the subject; that it will be observed that the unlawful acts complained of are stated to have occurred “within a few rods of the American shore.” Their prevention would seem, therefore, to rest with the authorities of the United States, rather than with those of Canada.

It may possibly be intended to suggest that measures of prevention might be taken in advance and whilst the Canadian fishermen are still within Canadian jurisdiction. The fishermen in question all understand, it is believed, that’ they have no treaty rights of fishery on the American shore, and that they are doing an unlawful act when they cast their nets there; and, on further consideration, the minister believes it will be conceded that it is impracticable to deal with or hinder such an offense beforehand, and whilst the fisherman’s intention to visit American waters is either not formed or known only to himself.

The minister states that he has made inquiry, and cannot learn that any seizure of nets of American fishermen at the mouth of the Niagara River has been made by the Canadian authorities, and he believes that in this respect Mr. Seward has been misinformed.

A seizure, however, has been made by the American custom-house officers of the nets of a Canadian fisherman for an offense such as that described by Mr. Seward.

The minister has directed that instructions be sent to all officers of his department to warn Canadian fishermen against plying their vocation in American waters, and cautioning them that if they do, they will expose themselves to be dealt with by the American authorities; and he will at all times gladly co-operate with the United States authorities in all efforts to protect the fisheries of both countries.

The committee recommend that a copy of this minute when approved be transmitted to Her Majesty’s minister at Washington for the information of the United States Government.

Certified.

W. A. HIMSWORTH,
Clerk, Privy Council, Canada.

No. 321. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 321.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, October 28, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 22d instant, in reply to one of this Department of the 12th of August last, relative to encroachments by Canadian fishermen within the jurisdiction of the United States, and to express the gratification with which this Department has learned of the prompt attention given to the subject by the Canadian Government. It is hoped that the proposed action of the Canadian authorities will supersede the necessity of any seizures or forfeitures on the part of the United States.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 322. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 322.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 4, 1879.

Sir: You have doubtless been informed by the consul of the United States at Tangier of the negotiations which have recently taken place between the Moorish Government and the foreign representatives on the subject of the irregular protection afforded to Moorish subjects by the diplomatic and consular officers in Morocco.

It appears that although the greater part of the demands put forward by the Moorish Government were unanimously agreed to, yet no settlement has been arrived at, several of the most important points having been met by objections on the part of the French, Italian, Portuguese, and Brazilian representatives.

Under these circumstances it is thought that a continuance of the discussion is not likely to further an agreement upon the questions left undecided, and that unless the governments concerned are disposed to send positive instructions to their agents of a nature to satisfy the Moorish Government, the best prospect of a solution lies in a reference of the question to a commission or meeting of representatives at some foreign court, in which the Moorish Government might be represented by a delegate or delegates deputed for the purpose.

In case this mode of procedure were resorted to, it seems to Her Majesty’s Government that the best place for such a meeting would be Madrid, both on account of its comparative proximity to Morocco, and in consideration of the interest which the Spanish Government and people take in the affairs of that country. In regard to this particular question, moreover, the Spanish Government has shown a disposition to take a liberal and conciliatory view, which promises to conduce to an equitable settlement.

The Marquis of Salisbury has therefore instructed me to inquire what are the views of the Government of the United States with regard to this question, and whether, in the event of its proving necessary, it would regard with favor the proposal to refer the further discussion of the points still at issue to a meeting of the representatives of the powers concerned at Madrid, to which the Moorish Government should be-invited to send a delegate.

By this means the discussion would be removed from the hands of those who have hitherto conducted it, and any difficulties which may have arisen from personal feelings or opinions will be avoided.

I shall therefore feel obliged if you will acquaint me with the views of the Government of the United States upon this subject; and in the mean time, if you should require further details of the negotiations which have for some time been carried on at Tangier, I shall be prepared to furnish them from the documents which are in my possession.

I have, &c.,

ED W’D THORNTON.

No. 323. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 323.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 14, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inclose copy of a letter addressed to the Marquis of Salisbury by Mr. George Kelly, of Mazatlan, Mexico, together with a copy of the Mexican custom-house regulations to which that letter refers, and under the provisions of which it would appear that the captain of the American steamer Newbern was imprisoned in September last.

Lord Salisbury has instructed me to inquire whether the United States Government is aware of the existence of these regulations, and whether it proposes to take any steps to procure their modification or removal.

I have, &c.,

ED W’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure 1.]

Mr. Kelly to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Mazatlan, September 19, 1879.

My Lord: In the absence of diplomatic relations and consequently of a British consulate at this port, I have the honor to inclose to your lordship an amendment of the Mexican tariff relating to punishment in the cases of smuggling or mistakes.

The very extraordinary authority given by this decree to ignorant or misguided officials over foreign mail steamships and merchant vessels generally, has shown itself by a test case which occurred yesterday.

The American steamer Newbern, W. Metzger, master, arrived on 11th instant from San Francisco, landed mails, passengers, and cargo, and proceeded on her voyage round the Gulf of California, returning to this port yesterday homeward bound.

During the steamer’s absence four packages without documents or owner were found in the custom-house warehouses, and, without any evidence, were supposed to belong to the Newbern.

The district attorney at once accused Captain Metzger as a criminal. He was taken off his ship, lodged in prison, and a mail steamer, having many passengers and a valuable specie freight, had to proceed to San Francisco under charge of her first mate.

* * * * * * *

GEO. KELLY.

[Inclosure 2.—Translation.]

office for foreign affairs and of the department of justice and public instruction, second section.

The President of the Republic has been pleased to send me the following decree:

Porfirio Diaz, constitutional President of the United Mexican States, to the inhabitants thereof:

You are to understand—

That the Congress of the Union has thought fit to send me the following decree:

The Congress of the United Mexican States decrees: Article 1. Besides the penalties fixed in chapters 20 and 21 of the tariff for the maritime and frontier custom-houses, of 1st January, 1872, smugglers, or those who defraud the fiscal duties, their accomplices and receivers, and such officials as connive with any of the former, will be punished with the corporal penalties hereinafter expressed.

Art. 2. For the cases specified in sections I, II, and III of article 86 of the aforesaid tariff, if the owners, conveyors, captains, or any other persons who bring the goods be apprehended, they shall suffer five years’ imprisonment and their names shall be published in the newspapers; if it be proved that any house of commerce established in the republic has been guilty of or favored smuggling after this law shall have come into force, besides the previous penalties applicable according to the cases, the name of that house shall also be published in the newspapers, the firm shall be debarred from all affairs and transactions with the public exchequer, and shall not be admitted into any official or mercantile document by the government offices.

Art. 3. In all the other cases specified in articles 86 and 87 of the tariff a corporal punishment shall be imposed of two months to five years’ imprisonment, on the following conditions: If the amount of the defrauded duties shall exceed a hundred dollars but not go beyond a thousand, the penalty of imprisonment from two to six months shall he imposed; if it exceeds a thousand without reaching two thousand, double; if it should exceed two thousand dollars but not reach three thousand, triple; and so on successively, without exceeding the maximum of five years.

Art. 4. Corporal punishment shall not be inflicted in the cases included in sections IV, V, and VI of article 86, chapter XX of the aforesaid tariff, when the amount of the duties; does not exceed two hundred dollars.

Art. 5. When the statement of the merchandise in the consular documents is made out in an ambiguous manner and without observance of the nomenclature of the items in the custom-house tariff, the penalty of double duties is imposed on the merchandise that is ambiguously declared, and in this case all the packages of the cargo are to be examined.

Art. 6. In cases of smuggling or fraud, when the penalty of imprisonment ought to be oris imposed on the perpetrators of such smuggling or fraud, half the punishment shall be awarded to accomplices, and one-fourth part to receivers concerned in these offenses.

Art. 7. Officials who are found to have been implicated in the aforesaid offenses shall suffer the punishments specified in the present law and those fixed in the existing custom-house tariff and the other laws applicable to the case, but always on the understanding that the penalty of imprisonment awarded to them can never be less than double the time that is imposed on the principal delinquent or delinquents in the smuggling or fraud.

Art. 8. All trials involving corporal punishment shall take place before the tribunals of the federation.

Art. 9. In the cases of smuggling or fraud aforesaid when the duties do not exceed a hundred dollars, the punishment shall be by the fines only, imposed in each case by the custom-house tariff of 1st January, 1872.

Art. 10. The circular of 9th September, 1877, is annulled. Consequently no more deductions shall be made for the partition of the value of the capture than those of the fiscal dues specified by the table of the said tariff, and the two per cent, mentioned in article 105 thereof.

Art. 11. The judges shall give notice to the departments of justice and finance of all actions brought for infractions of the tariff, and send copies of the sentences pronounced, which shall be published and sent to the consuls of the republic abroad to be published in the markets and exchanges of the countries in which they reside.

Art. 12. The maritime and frontier custom-house tariff of 1st January, 1872, and all provisions relative thereto, remain in force in all that is not at variance with the present law.

GUILLERMO PALOMINO,
Deputy and President.

IGNACIO SANCHEZ,
Deputy and Secretary.

V. L. VILLAREAL,
Senator and President.

J. RIYERA y RIO,
Senator and Secretary.

Wherefore I direct that this be printed, published, and circulated, and that it be duly fulfilled.

National Palace of Mexico, the 4th of June, 1879.
PORFIRIO DIAZ.

To the Licentiate, Protasio p. Tagle,
Secretary for Foreign Affairs and of the Department of Justice and Public Instruction.

I communicate this for your information and observance.

Freedom in the constitution.

Mexico, June 4, 1879.
PROTASIO P. TAGLE.

No. 324. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 324.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, November 14, 1879.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence on the same subject, I now have the honor to invite your attention to the statements contained in the inclosed copy of a report, dated the 25th ultimo, of Mr. N. S. Porter, Indian agent of the United States at Fort Peck Agency, in relation to the British half-breeds and Sitting Bull’s men, who are now intruding upon the Crow Reservation in Montana Territory. Complaints as to the incursions of British Indians and half-breeds from the Dominion of Canada have recently been repeated so frequently that they have become exceedingly embarrassing, and the circumstances above mentioned afford an additional reason for endeavoring to reach some practical solution of this vexatious problem.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure 1.]

Mr. Porter to Mr. Hayt.

United States Indian Service, Fort Peck, Indian Agency,
Fort Buford, Dak., October 25, 1879.

Sir: In answer to your telegraph dated 18th instant, I have the honor to make the following explanation:

Half-breeds are camped on the west side of my reservation, and to my orders to leave they claim to be on Belknap Reservation, and think to the order of that agent they would claim to be on my agency. They say that if they are moved it will be by force, and that they will return as soon as force leaves.

Would further report a larger number of Sitting Bull’s men near them, and as there is upwards of 250 families of half-breeds you will see the necessity of military; which I will call from Fort Assinnaboine, as that is the nearest post to them, the honorable Commissioner having given permission in above referred-to telegraph.

As soon as the annuity goods are issued, I will visit that camp in person.

Major Walsh writes me on 13th instant, a copy of which I inclose.

Very respectfully, &c.,

N. S. PORTER,
United States Indian Agent.

[Inclosure 2.]

Major Walsh to Mr. Porter.

Wood Mountain, October 13, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your favor of 4th instant, and in reply would say that I believe all the half-breeds on Milk River are Canadians, and entitled to take up land on this side of the line. Our government is anxious to have the people abandon the chase and commence agricultural pursuits, but I am of the opinion that this cannot be accomplished so long as they are allowed to hunt in the Milk River country.

I have, &c.,

P. WALSH.

No. 325. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 325.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 15, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of yesterday’s date, relative to the intrusion of British half-breeds and Sitting Bull’s men upon the Crow Reservation in Montana Territory, which has been reported by the Indian agent of the United States at Fort Peck Agency, and to inform you that I am transmitting a copy of your note and of its inclosure to the governor-general of Canada.

At the same time I take the liberty of reminding you of my note of the 30th of September last, in which I inclosed copy of a report of the privy council of Canada, relative to the prohibition imposed upon Canadian Indians from following the buffalo into United States territory, although United States Indians are allowed that privilege in Canadian territory, and also to the desire of the Sioux Indians, who took refuge in Canadian territory, to return to the United States.

In Mr. Hunter’s note of the 4th ultimo he was good enough to inform me that the subject should receive the attention of the Government of the United States.

I need hardly assure you of the earnest desire of the Canadian Government that some arrangement should be come to with regard to these matters, which have caused it great embarrassment and have been a burthen imposed upon the Dominion by no fault of its own.

I have, &c.,

ED W’D THORNTON.

No. 326. Mr. Hunter to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 326.
Mr. Hunter to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, November 18, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 14th instant, with its inclosures relating to certain Mexican custom-house regulations, and to the imprisonment of the captain of the American steamer Newbern for an alleged violation of them, and stating that you have been instructed by the Marquis of Salisbury to inquire whether the American Government is aware of the existence of the regulations in question, and whether it intends to take any steps to procure their modification or removal.

In reply, I have to inform you that Mr. Foster, the American minister at the city of Mexico, has been instructed to bring the case of the captain of the Newbern to the attention of the Mexican Government, and to ask for an investigation of the facts, with a view of obtaining suitable relief, and to state furthermore that the custom-house regulations referred to in your note are deemed unreasonably and unnecessarily harsh, and this government will remonstrate against them.

I have, &c.,

W. HUNTER.
Acting Secretary.

No. 327. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 327.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, December 13, 1879.

Sir: With reference to my note of the 4th ultimo, upon the subject of irregular protection afforded to Mohammedan and Jewish subjects of the Emperor of Morocco by the diplomatic and consular agents of foreign powers in that country, I have the honor to inform you that a dispatch was recently addressed to the Marquis of Salisbury by Sir John Drummond Hay, accompanied by a memorandum of the language held by the Rev. A. Löwy, the secretary of the Anglo-Jewish Association, respecting the prejudicial results which might follow the abolition of protection to Jews in Morocco by the foreign representatives, and of Sir John Drummond Hay’s reply to that gentleman. I have the honor to inclose copy of this memorandum, as there is good reason for supposing from Mr. Lowy’s language that the above-mentioned association entertained very erroneous ideas on the subject, which may have been produced by the misrepresentations which have been made to them or to the “Alliance Israelite Universelle” at Paris (with which society they are connected) by certain influential Jews who are irregularly protected in Morocco by some of the representatives of foreign powers.

It is understood that representations have already been made to the Spanish Government by those Jews on the subject of foreign protection to their coreligionists in Morocco, and it is not improbable that similar representations may have been made to other foreign governments, proceeding from the reports of interested parties in that country.

I am, therefore, of opinion that it will be satisfactory to the Government of the United States to be in possession of the statements made upon the subject by a man with so long an experience in Morocco as Sir John Drummond Hay.

I avail myself at the same time of this opportunity to express my hope that the Government of the United States has taken into consideration the inquiry which, in compliance with Lord Salisbury’s instructions, I made in my note above mentioned, whether it would regard with favor the proposal to refer the further discussion of the question of their regular protection of Moors to a meeting of the representatives of the powers concerned at Madrid, and if a decision shall have been arrived at, that you will have the goodness to communicate to me its purport as soon as it may be in your power.

I have, &c.,

ED W’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure in Sir Edward Thornton’s note of December 13, 1879.]

Memorandum of the language held to Sir J. H. Drummond Hay by the Rev. A. Löwy, Secretary of Anglo-Jewish Association, and of Sir J. H. Drummond Hay’s replies.

M. Löwy informed me that a deputation from the Anglo-Jewish Association desired to make a representation to me regarding the serious results which might be brought about in Morocco by the withdrawal from the Jewish population of the protection hitherto afforded to them by the foreign representatives, as their brethren in such case would be exposed more than ever to the unjust and tyrannical action of the Moorish Government and their authorities.

M. Löwy said he was aware that I had frequently used my good offices with the Moorish Government in behalf of their brethren who were oppressed, but that the association had been informed I was taking a very active part in urging the withdrawal by foreign governments of protection to the Jews in Morocco.

I replied that the association appeared to have been misinformed, and also to entertain very erroneous impressions regarding protection having been hitherto afforded to their brethren in Morocco by the foreign representatives.

I said that he was quite correct in stating that I have done all in my power to bring about the abolition of irregular protection afforded by the foreign representatives to the Mohammedan and Jewish subjects of the Sultan, but that this measure, if carried into execution, would only affect about 1,500 wealthy Jews, including their families, and in no way affected the 200,000 who formed the” Hebrew population of Morocco, and who had never enjoyed the advantages of foreign protection; moreover, that the Moorish Government had volunteered to agree, on the withdrawal of foreign protection to those Mohammedans and Jews who had been irregularly protected in past years, that when these persons might happen to be prosecuted at Moorish tribunals in criminal or civil cases, that notice should be given to the consul of the nation which had formerly protected them, in order that he might be present, and watch that no unjust decision was arrived at which might appear to be of a vindictive character in consequence of the party accused having enjoyed in past years foreign protection.

I observed that the protection afforded by foreign representatives to Moorish subjects, who were not bona fide in the service of foreign governments or of diplomatic or consular officers, was contrary to treaty stipulations; that protected natives were subject solely to the jurisdiction of foreign consular officers; that they were exempted from all service to the State, and paid no taxes to the Sultan; and that they received the support of those representatives who protected them in the claims they might happen to bring forward against this government or Moorish subjects; that the Moors and the Jews who had irregularly obtained protection were generally selected from the wealthier portion of the population; that I was not surprised to learn that the associations of Jews in European capitals received reports from their protected brethren in Morocco, who are in general respectable, wealthy, and educated persons, leading them to believe that a great calamity would befall the Jews in general if the protection afforded to them was withdrawn.

This I said, is very natural on their part, for they are exempted from all contributions and taxes due to the Moorish Government, and they obtained the support of their protectors in cases of claims which the Moorish Government is compelled by menace or dictatorial language to pay without an impartial inquiry; but these advantages, as I have said before, do not benefit the 200,000 Jews who are not protected, but, on the contrary, give rise to strong feelings of hatred on the part of those Mohammedans who may have suffered from the arbitrary decision given against them through the influence of a foreign representative, and that crying cases of injustice had occurred which had aroused strong feelings of animosity on the part of Mohammedans.

I informed M. Löwy that the treaties of Great Britain and Spain with Morocco alone stipulated that Moorish subjects in the employment of foreign diplomatic and consular officers are entitled to be exempted from the jurisdiction of the Moorish authorities; that the old French and other treaties stipulated not only that Moorish subjects employed by foreign officers, but also foreigners themselves, were to be subject to the jurisdiction of Moorish tribunals, though the consul was to be present at the trials.

That the abuse of irregular protection had increased greatly during the last twenty years, as the other foreign representatives had claimed, on account of clauses in their respective treaties which entitled them to be regarded as agents of the most favored nations, the privileges in the British and Spanish treaties, and on this plea had inserted in their lists Moors and Jews who were not bona fide in their service; that these abuses were increasing, and had become so intolerable of late years that the Sultan and his government had raised the present question, and had demanded that protection should be restricted to the concessions made in treaties with Morocco.

I informed M. Löwy that ever since my appointment in Morocco, in 1845, I had never turned a deaf ear to any reasonable representation which had been made to me from time to time by the Jewish elders at Tangier or other towns in behalf of their brethren who were declared to be oppressed or ill-treated by the Moorish governors or other authorities in the interior, and that I had frequently used my good offices with the view of checking or mitigating acts of injustice, and also of obtaining reparation.

That the late and present Sultan and their ministers had never refused to admit my officious interference in such cases, though they had frequently informed me that they felt less hesitation in doing so, as they knew I adhered strictly to treaty stipulations, and did not afford protection to any Moorish subjects who were not entitled to it. I said that I had rarely troubled Her Majesty’s Government with reports of the success of my mediation, except in cases where I had been instructed by them to use my good offices; but there were many proofs in the archives of the legation of the active part I had taken when I considered that an act of cruelty or tyranny justified my interference.

I observed to M. Löwy that, if the association desired the welfare of their brethren in general, and not merely the continuance of an abusive system of protection to some 1,500 persons, who were enjoying protection contrary to right and law, they ought to raise their voice against these abuses, and that, when all foreign representatives respected the rights of the Sultan, as an independent sovereign, to govern his own subjects, they would find themselves in the same advantageous position I held vis-à-vis the Sultan and his government, that we (the foreign representatives) should then be all enabled to act in concert, and come forward as the representatives of civilization and humanity, to use our good offices with this government on behalf of oppressed Jews, or even to declare, in case our representations were disregarded, that outrages or cruel acts of tyranny towards that oppressed race would not be tolerated by the civilized governments of the world.

The Moorish Government would then have no grounds, no excuse for pointing to the irregular protection afforded Jews by the foreign representatives, or of refusing to listen to their friendly representations.

M. Löwy having alluded to certain disabilities and humiliations which the Jews of Morocco have to submit to, such as that of having to take off their shoes in the Mahommedan quarter, I observed that the Jews of Morocco had been an oppressed race during many centuries, and were treated as their brethren had been treated in ancient times in England and other parts of Europe; that a great change had been brought about by the extension of commerce and the presence of foreign consuls at the outports and residence generally of Europeans in Morocco, and also by the occasional visits of Christian ministers to the Moorish court.

That I remembered the time when Jews, even the native interpreters of the representatives, had to take off their shoes on passing a mosque at Tangier; that I had been the first to put a stop to this some thirty-three years ago, and that now Jews rode where they pleased, even before the mosques, and were generally in a better position than the Mohammedan population, for I never heard of a case during the last twenty years where a Jew had been imprisoned or punished by a local authority at Tangier, except at the demand of a foreign consul. They paid no taxes, and were not subject to forced labor by the government.

That the position of the Jews at the Moorish ports had greatly changed for the better, and it was very rare that any case of injustice or cruelty towards them had been brought of late years under my notice; but I admitted that similar important changes had not taken place as regards the Jewish population at the cities of Fez, Mequinez, and Morocco; that it was my opinion that we should look rather to the gradual improvement of the country through commerce to rectify this evil than to seek for reforms through the representations of foreign governments or their agents, unless a favorable opportunity presented itself when a foreign representative visits the court to point out to the Sultan that he would gain the good-will of the British and other foreign governments by proofs that His Majesty took an active interest in the welfare of the Jewish subjects by checking the arbitrary acts and injustice of his officers.

I observed that the Sultan Mulai Hassan was a humane and just man, but he would not have much power of control over his fanatical subjects if he attempted to introduce measures which would place his Jewish subjects on the same footing as the Mohammedans; that it would be most unadvisable and even dangerous for the representatives of the powerful governments of Europe to resort to pressure or peremptory demands in such matters, for the Sultan might finally be induced to give way, apprehending the consequences of turning a deaf ear to the demands of foreign governments, and royal edicts might be issued for the removal of certain disabilities or laws which affect prejudicially his Jewish subjects, and a fanatical spirit might be roused amongst the Mohammedans which at any moment might produce an outbreak involving the safety of the lives and property of thousands of innocent men, women, and children, and the Sultan would find himself powerless to prevent the outrages which might be committed.

I said that I should, therefore, deprecate the policy of too active an interference in such matters, and rather trust, as I have said, to the gradual march of civilization, brought about by commerce and the presence of Europeans in this country.

No. 328. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 328.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, December 13, 1879.

Sir: Her Majesty’s Government has been informed that the Austro-Hungarian Government has received a communication from the minister of the United States stating that the Government of Nicaragua has begged that certain documents in the archives of the United States relating to the question in dispute between Nicaragua and Great Britain should be laid before the arbitrator, but that the Government of the United States does not consider itself justified in handing over these documents merely on the request of one party, but is ready, in case the arbitrator think the requests of the Government of Nicaragua justifiable, to examine at once what documents would have to be sent over for the purpose proposed.

The Marquis of Salisbury has instructed me to express to you the sense entertained by Her Majesty’s Government of the friendly conduct of your government in this matter.

His lordship has conveyed to the Austro-Hungarian Government his opinion that any application of the Government of Nicaragua to that of the United States for papers which the former may think will be of use to it in the arbitration, is a matter entirely between those two governments, and does not affect in any way either the arbitrator or Her Majesty’s Government, although the course taken by the Governments of the United States and of Austria-Hungary has been dictated by friendly intentions as regards Her Majesty’s Government.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

No. 329. Mr. Hay to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 329.
Mr. Hay to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, December 20, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 13th instant, referring to the communication of the minister of the United States at Vienna to the Austro-Hungarian Government in relation to the application made by the Government of Nicaragua, that certain documents in the archives of the United States relating to the question in dispute between Nicaragua and Great Britain should be laid before the arbitrator, and to the unwillingness of the United States to hand over the documents in question on the request of one party, and to its readiness to examine what documents would have to be sent over for the purpose proposed in ease the arbitrator should think the request of the Government of Nicaragua justifiable.

You state, furthermore, that the Marquis of Salisbury has conveyed to the Austro-Hungarian Government his opinion that any application of the Government of Nicaragua to that of the United States for papers which the former may think would be of use to it in the arbitration is a matter entirely between those two governments, and does not affect in any way either the arbitrator or Her Majesty’s Government.

In reply, I have to inform you-that this Department, upon learning the views of the Marquis of Salisbury, as stated in your note, and as also communicated to the arbitrator by Her Majesty’s chargé d’affaires at Vienna, sent forward a number of papers relating to the question in dispute between Great Britain and Nicaragua to the minister of the United States at Vienna, to be laid before the arbitrator.

I have, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 330. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 330.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, January 21, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith, for the information of the Government of the United States, copy of a letter and of its inclosures addressed by the inspector of fisheries for British Columbia to the Canadian commissioner of fisheries, relating to trespass committed on certain of the inshore fishing grounds in that province by a United States vessel, the schooner Emily Stephenson, Henderson master, of Astoria, Oregon, 68 tons register.

I have deemed it right to make you acquainted with these circumstances, thinking that it may perhaps appear expedient that such instructions should be given to the authorities of the United States in the State of Oregon and in Washington Territory as would lead them to warn citizens of the United States against a repetition of trespasses similar to the one alluded to in the inclosed correspondence.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THOENTON.

[Inclosure 1.]

Rosebank, Victoria, British Columbia,
November 15, 1879.

Sir: During my tour of inspection on the northwest coast in July, I learned that an American schooner had some time previously visited the Goletas channel and there fished for halibut. As the provisions of the Washington treaty are construed not to apply to this province, and in effect our people are debarred from all fishing privileges in the narrow waters on the American side, the proceeding was clearly in violation of the locally existing fishery regulations.

After much inquiry I have ascertained the following particulars:

Schooner Emily Stephenson, Henderson master, of Astoria, Oregon, 68 tons register, visited Newitly (Newiti of map) early in May; proceeded to Knight’s Inlet and there procured a supply of ice; then fished and filled up with halibut at Newitly Bar. Is reported to have returned in September, and again taken a load of halibut.

On application at the custom-house I am informed that at no time during the past season has this vessel entered or cleared in Victoria. The customs law having thus been equally violated, I have communicated to the collector in Victoria whatever information I have obtained.

I append copy of a letter from Mr. Robert Hunt, agent of the Hudson’s Bay Company at Fort Rupert, in reply to my request for information on the subject. I also append a tracing which, applied to Tratch’s map sent by me to the department last year, will indicate the relative position of the localities referred to. I have not yet been able to meet the Mr. Douglas referred to by Mr. Hunt, but will forward his deposition as soon as obtained.

I beg that you will submit the foregoing statement of facts for the information of the minister, and that I may have instruction for my future guidance in the event of the recurrence of the irregularity complained of.

I have, &c.,

ALEX. C. ANDERSON,
Inspector of Fisheries, British Columbia.

[Inclosure 2.]

Mr. Hunt to Mr. Anderson.

Fort Rupert, British Columbia,
October 25, 1879.

Sir: I am in receipt of your letter of the 14th instant. The schooner that was at Newitly, fishing halibut, was called the Emily Stephenson, of Astoria, 68 tons register; the captain’s name was Henderson. They were at Newitly about the 3d or 4th May, and then went to Knight’s Inlet to get ice, which they found and took onboard as much as was wanted. Then came back to Newitly, and fished the halibut at Newitly Bar. They caught all they wanted for the first cargo in about three weeks. The fish taken were from 50 to 200 pounds each (so I was told). That was the first trip that they made.

Should you require more information on the subject I should refer you to Captain Douglas, of the schooner Triumph, of Victoria. He was the one that piloted them to Knight’s Inlet, and also found hooks, lines, bait, &c., and assisted them all the time they were fishing. Captain Douglas told me that himself, and also said that if he had not helped them they would have got no halibut. I have heard from the Indians that the same schooner was at Newitly some time, I think, in September, and got another cargo of halibut, but Captain Douglas was not with them this last time, neither did they go to Knight’s Inlet for ice. They seemed to have brought all that was required with them the last time they came.

I am, &c.,

ROBERT HUNT.

No. 331. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 331.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, February 3, 1880.

Sir: Referring to the extended correspondence which I have had the honor to hold with you respecting the systems of wrecking on the great lakes, and with especial relation to the earnest advocacy by this government of a large international policy which may allow the wrecking and life-saving appliances of the United States and of the Dominion of Canada to be freely and mutually availed of for the relief of vessels in distress within the jurisdiction of either, I have now the honor to transmit, for your information and perusal, copy of a letter from my colleague of the Treasury Department, with its inclosed reports from customs officers stationed at Wilson and Olcott in the district of Suspension Bridge, New York, relative to certain Canadian vessels which went ashore on Lake Ontario during the month of November last, and to the assistance rendered to them by Canadian tugs.

It is not my desire to renew discussion upon the several heads of arguments already so fully treated of in our correspondence heretofore and in the reports of the Dominion council which you have been so good as to transmit to me from time to time, but rather to show that this government is not only desirous, but has already proceeded, to carry out the principle of reciprocity in facilitating aid to disabled vessels, of whatever flag. The case of the Jane McCloud is, in particular, notable. That schooner went ashore at the mouth of the Six Mile Creek, near Wilson, on the morning of November 2 last, and was towed off by a Canadian tug, which latter was not only not detained and heavily fined, but was permitted to accomplish her humane work without her name even being ascertained. I need scarcely advert to the treatment which an American tug might, under similar circumstances, have met with in the waters of the Dominion, inasmuch as past correspondence has served to familiarize both of us with that aspect of the subject, and to make clear the difficulty which in such a case, or indeed in almost any case, might attend the exercise of the discretionary power of deciding whether life or property was or was not imminently endangered within the meaning of the recent explanatory circular of the Dominion Government.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure.]

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts.

Treasury Department,
December 27, 1879.

Sir: Referring to former correspondence on the subject of the wrecks of Canadian vessels on our coasts, I have the honor to inclose herewith, for your information, a copy of the reports from customs officers stationed at Wilson and Olcott, in the district of Suspension Bridge, N. Y., relative to certain Canadian vessels which went ashore on Lake Ontario during the month of November last, and to the assistance rendered them by Canadian tugs.

These reports were sent to the department by the collector of customs at Suspension Bridge.

Very respectfully,

JOHN SHERMAN,
Secretary.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Sherman’s letter of December 27, 1879.]

Mr. Kenney to Mr. Nichols.

Olcott, Niagara County, New York,
December 13, 1879.

Dear Sir: Your letter of the 9th instant at hand, and contents noted.

In reply, will say there have been two schooners partially stranded at this port; both Canadian. The Gold Hunter, Captain Lundy commanding, grounded between piers inside harbor on November 3, and was considerably damaged; was unloaded of her cargo of coal, some 300 tons, and assisted by the tug C. P. Morey, of Oswego, and taken away by the tug Neelon, of Port Dalhousie, on November 10, 1879.

On December 5, 1879, the Wave Crest, of Toronto, struck east pier at this port and went ashore east of piers, where she was scuttled, and after a few hours’ delay was got off and into harbor; was loaded with the coal left here by Gold Hunter, and started for Toronto. When outside of piers, swung around and went ashore west of west pier. After throwing some seventy-five to one hundred tons coal overboard, was hauled back to pier, and got back into harbor, where she remained until December 9, when the tug Samuel Perry, of St. Catharines, came and towed her away.

Any further information you may desire will be cheerfully sent you.

In the season of 1879 there have been seven American and eleven foreign vessels put in this port on account of weather.

Very respectfully, yours,

HENRY KENNEY,
Deputy Collector.

[Inclosure 2 in Mr. Sherman’s letter of December 27, 1879.]

Mr. Stockwell to Mr. Nichols.

Wilson, December 12, 1879.

Sir: In reply to yours of the 9th instant, I have to report that the only vessel which has put into this port on account of bad weather was the schooner J. J. Hill, of Youngstown, commanded by Capt. Henry Bunn.

That vessel put into this port for shelter on the night of November 1, and also in the afternoon of November 12; was not disabled, and had no assistance. The schooner Jane McCloud, a British vessel, commanded by F. McPherson, with a cargo of coal, bound from Oswego to Toronto, went ashore at the mouth of the Six-mile Creek on the morning of November 2; said vessel was pulled off and towed into port by a Canadian tug; name unknown to me.

The schooner St. Andrews, also a British vessel, commanded by Samuel Rogers, went ashore about the same time about two miles east of the mouth of the creek, with a cargo of coal, bound from Oswego to Toronto. This vessel was pulled off and towed into port by a tug from Buffalo, as I am informed. The cargoes of both vessels were saved.

I was told by the captains of these vessels that if there had been a light-house at this port they could have put in here for shelter, and would have done so.

Yours, respectfully,

R. STOCKWELL,
Deputy Collector.

No. 332. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 332.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, February 19, 1880.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence with, regard to the incursions of the Sioux Indians from Canada into the territory of the United States, and particularly to my note of the 14th of November last, on the subject, I now have the honor to state that information has reached this Department to the effect that Sitting Bull and all the hostile Sioux Indians, with the exception of 30 lodges, were, in December last, on this side of the Canadian line, well armed, and provided with an abundance of ammunition.

Although no intelligence has been received, as yet, of any actual hostilities committed by the Indians in question, and although no immediate occasion may arise for the use of military force to restrain them, yet the circumstances require me to give you a timely intimation of the condition of affairs, so that due attention may be paid by Her Majesty’s Government to the movements of these Indians, who have now entered the United States from British territory, fully armed and prepared for the commission of warlike acts.

It may occur at any time that if the military forces of the United States should be obliged to meet these movements of the Sioux Indians under Sitting Bull as hostile incursions, Her Majesty’s Government would need to determine whether it would bar by force the escape of these Indians to asylum across the line, or disarm them and confine them to the interior.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 333. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 333.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, February 27, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acquaint you with the purport of a communication which I have just received from my colleague, the Secretary of War, wherein he informs me that, on the 3d instant, a war party of Uncapapa Indians, coming from the north of the Canada line, attacked a camp of two citizens on Powder River; that the marauders were promptly pursued by a small detachment of cavalry, and, after resistance on their part during which a cavalryman and an Indian were killed, the remaining Indians, three in number, were taken prisoners; that it was found that the Indians had left Sitting Bull’s camp for a raiding expedition, and that the prisoners, being deemed to be not only guilty of a felony, but also of murder in resisting the officers who sought to arrest them for that felony, will be held amenable to civil process, and turned over to the civil authorities for trial.

As these predatory incursions are, unhappily, of so frequent occurrence as to give rise to lively solicitude for the safety of the persons and property of peaceful dwellers near the border, it behooves this government to neglect no means, moral as well as material, for their exemplary repression, and to invoke to that end whatever aid may be rendered by its friendly neighbors on the other side of the border. To that end, I have the honor to suggest that the fate encountered by these Indians, and the grave civil charges to which their felonious depredations render them liable, might be made public by the authorities of the Dominion among the Indians within their jurisdiction, in order to discourage similar incursions from that quarter in future.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EYARTS.

No. 334. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 334.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, February 28, 1880.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence concerning the regulations governing the transportation of merchandise to, from, and through the British possessions of North America, and particularly to your note of the 11th of July, 1878, suggesting that a previous announcement should be made by each government to the other of any proposed changes in the regulations in question, I now have the honor, in accordance with a request received from my colleague, the Secretary of the Treasury, to submit for the consideration of Her Majesty’s Government a copy of proposed regulations relative to the transportation in question, which, if adopted, will supersede those now in force. The printed copy of the proposed regulations inclosed herewith contains certain marginal annotations made by the Treasury Department for the purpose of facilitating the understanding of the exact character of the changes suggested. The letters “S S” in the marginal notes refer to the decisions of the Treasury Department, of which copies of those referred to are likewise transmitted herewith.

In transmitting these documents to me the Secretary of the Treasury observes that he deems this a fitting time to revise the regulations in question, as to form, and, as far as necessary, as to substance, inasmuch as they will, as revised, when adopted, constitute a part of the general regulations of the Treasury relative to customs, commerce, and navigation now in process of revision.

I am requested to direct particular attention to articles 31, 42, and 43 of the proposed regulations as requiring the approval of Her Britannic Majesty’s Government in pursuance of Article XXX of the treaty of Washington.

I am furthermore requested to say that the changes which have been made since the adoption of the treaty regulations of March 30, 1875, have been embodied in the proposed regulations, as well as certain other modifications which are noted below. A comparison of the proposed regulations with those now in force will show that while many changes are made in phraseology no material ones are suggested in the subject-matter except as hereinafter specified. Such a comparison will be facilitated by the cross-references which are made on the margins of the copies of the present and proposed regulations herewith inclosed, indicating corresponding articles, and the several changes made.

The modifications in matters of substance, as pointed out by the Secretary of the Treasury, will be found in the proposed regulations in article 3;

Article 5;

Article 13, in the portion which permits cording, sealing, and branding of goods to be done on the dock, if it can be done with safety to the revenue;

Article 14, which embodies a general rule in relation to bonded goods;

Article 15, in that portion which is contained in the sentence commencing with the words “such packages as do not agree”;

Article 19, in the last part of the first paragraph relating to the effects of persons going to Manitoba;

Article 20, second paragraph, the object of which is to inform the customs officers as to who is the consignee for exportation; the last sentence of the third paragraph, and the last paragraph;

Article 26;

Article 31, second paragraph, which is one of those submitted for approval, as above mentioned, and which is thought by the Secretary of the Treasury to be necessary, in view of the condition under which goods are shipped from Calais in transit through New Brunswick;

Article 32, as to sealing cars at the frontier port of departure, and as to impressing on the manifest the number or device of the seal, the verification of the contents of the car by a comparison of the manifest with the lading being omitted;

Article 33, in so far as it permits the collector’s certificate upon the manifest to be based upon the examining officer’s return;

Article 42, first paragraph, which, as modified, conforms more precisely, in the opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury, to the language of Article XXX of the treaty of Washington;

Article 43, last clause of the first paragraph;

The Secretary of the Treasury, furthermore, desires that the attention of Her Majesty’s Government may be called to the following additional particulars, namely:

Article 3 of the regulations now in force has been omitted as unnecessary, being merely a statement embodied elsewhere in the general customs regulations of the ordinary proceedings incident under the law to entries of all merchandise imported into the United States;

The requirement of the oath prescribed in article 7 of the present regulations is omitted;

The return of the inspector certificate to the collector at the port of shipment, as required in article 15, last clause of the fourth paragraph, is dispensed with, being considered unnecessary by the Secretary of the Treasury;

The time for which the export bond is taken on goods for Pembina is reduced to sixty days, in view of the present increased facilities for communication with that place;

The recommendation to foreign shippers, contained in the seventh paragraph of article 24 of the present regulations, is omitted from the proposed regulations as unnecessary;

The third paragraph of article 35 of the present regulations is a general rule applicable to all entries for withdrawal from warehouse, and is considered by the Secretary of the Treasury unnecessary in the proposed regulations;

The second paragraph of article 36 of the regulations now in force is modified by the omission of the provision in relation to the several copies of the entry, it being provided that a manifest instead of an entry is to be sent with the goods, and the copies of the entry are disposed of under article 15 of the proposed regulations, which embodies a general rule of the Treasury Department in relation to the disposition of the copies of all entries;

The forms are omitted from the body of the regulations in accordance with the general plan of the revision of the customs regulations adopted by the Secretary of the Treasury, and are placed together by themselves; and in cases where the forms themselves indicate the purposes for which they are designed, and the character of the proceedings to be taken, they are not described in the regulations, but simply referred to by their numbers.

Finally, the Secretary of the Treasury desires that the attention of Her Majesty’s Government may be called to the circumstance that in 1874 the regulations now in force, except as subsequently amended, were presented for the consideration of Her Majesty’s Government in a body, without separating those pro visions which were strictly under the treaty from those which were not, whereas in the proposed regulations such a separation is made, the portion which relates to matters not coming under the treaty of Washington being found in the supplement, except that articles 79 to 92 of the supplement which relate to the importation of goods under consular seal may, in the opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury, be considered as a part of the treaty regulations, so far as they are applied by article 21 of the proposed regulations, to merchandise in transit.

In view of the fact that the proposed regulations submitted herewith are a part of a general revision of the customs regulations of the Treasury Department now in progress, I am desired by my colleague, the Secretary of the Treasury, to invite the early consideration of this subject by Her Majesty’s Government.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Note.—Inclosures omitted on account of their length.

No. 335. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 335.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, March 13, 1880.

Sir: With reference to your note of the 4th of November ultimo,* in relation to the conference proposed to be held at Madrid for the consideration of the question of the foreign protection of native Moors in the Empire of Morocco, I have the honor to inform you that, in response to that suggestion and to the invitation of the Spanish Government, it has been decided to authorize Mr. Fairchild, the United States minister at Madrid, to act as the representative of the United States in such conference, and that suitable instructions for his guidance in the premises will be forthwith sent to him.

Accepting your kind offer to famish further details of the negotiations which have for some time been carried on at Tangier, from the documents which are in your possession, I beg that you will, with your accustomed courtesy, place them in my hands as speedily as may be conveniently practicable for the needful information of Mr. Fairchild.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

* Ante, p. 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327].

No. 336. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 336.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, March 25, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to state that there has appeared in the public prints a telegram from Ottawa, Canada, to the effect that it is now understood that a very important concession has been obtained from Her Majesty’s Government, and that American cattle will be accorded the privilege of transit through Canada, from one American port to another, with the additional privilege of stopping for rest and other accommodations at some place in Canada.

I will esteem it a great favor if you will have the kindness to ascertain, for the information of this Department and tliat of the Secretary of the Treasury, to whom the facts of the case will be promptly conveyed, whether the statement so made is correct; and, if so, whether the privilege granted by the Canadian Government includes the shipment of cattle through Canada, from ports of the United States, to Canadian seaboard ports for exportation.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 337. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hay. No. 337.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Hay.

Washington, March 29, 1880.

Sir: In accordance with an instruction which I have received from the Marquis of Salisbury, I have the honor to invite the attention of the Government of the United States to a representation which has been made by the committee of Lloyds’ with regard to the frequent losses by fire of cotton-laden ships which occur at ports of the United States, especially at Charleston and New Orleans, such disasters occurring generally whilst the vessels are still in port fully loaded.

Lloyds’ agents, who have been appealed to in the matter, attribute these fires, especially at Charleston and New Orleans, to incendiarism or gross carelessness, and the committee have asked that the attention of the authorities of the United States may be called to the frequency of these fires, which cause a great loss of property on both sides of the ocean.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

No. 338. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 338.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, April 17, 1880. (Received April 17.)

Sir: With reference to your note of the 25th ultimo, copy of which I transmitted to the Governor-General of Canada, I now have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a report of a committee of the privy council for Canada, which I have received from his excellency, from which it will be seen that negotiations are now proceeding, with a fair hope of success, upon the question of American cattle being allowed to pass through Canada from one American port to another.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure in Sir Edward Thornton’s note to Mr. Evarts of April 17.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by His Excellency the Governor-General on the 12th April, 1880.

On a dispatch from Her Majesty’s minister at Washington, transmitting copy of a note which he has received from Mr. Evarts requesting him to ascertain whether the newspaper statement recently published is true, to the effect that a very important concession has been obtained from Her Majesty’s Government, and that American cattle will be accorded the privilege of transit through Canada, from one American port to another, with the additional privilege of stopping for rest and other accommodations at some place in Canada, the honorable the minister of agriculture, to whom said , dispatch with inclosure has been referred, reports that negotiations are going on with the imperial authorities, with a fair chance of success, to permit the transit through Canada, under very stringent regulations, with the privilege of stopping to rest, of American cattle forwarded from one United States port to another, but that there are at present no hopes of being permitted to ship American cattle from Canadian ports to Europe, without rendering the Dominion liable to being scheduled.

The committee recommend that a copy of this minute, when approved, be transmitted to Sir Edward Thornton, for the information of the United States Government.

Certified.

J. O. COTÉ,
Clerk Privy Council, Canada.

No. 339. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 339.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, April 23, 1880. (Received April 24.)

Sir: In compliance with an instruction which I have received from the Marquis of Salisbury, I have the honor to inform you, with reference to previous correspondence respecting the adoption by the various maritime states of the international regulations for the prevention of collisions at sea, that, in consequence of representations on behalf of the various fishing interests of Great Britain, it has been decided by the president of the board of trade and the first lord of the admiralty to suspend the operation of article 10 of these regulations until the 1st of September, 1881.

I inclose copies of the Queen’s order in council, which has been passed with the above object.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure in Sir Edward Thornton’s note of April 23, 1880.]

At the Court at Windsor, the 24th day of March, 1880.

Present, the Queen’s Most Excellent Majesty in council.

Whereas by “The Merchant Shipping Act Amendment Act, 1862,” it was enacted that on and after the first day of June, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, or such later day as might be fixed for the purpose by order in council, the regulations contained in the table marked C, in the schedule to the said act, should come into operation and be of the same force as if they were enacted in the body of the said act; but that Her Majesty might from time to time, on the joint recommendation of the admiralty and the board of trade, by order in council, annul or modify any of the said regulations, or make new regulations in addition to or in substitution therefor; and that any alterations in or additions to such regulations made in manner aforesaid should be of the same force as the regulations in said schedule;

And whereas, by the same act, it was further provided that whenever it should be made to appear to Her Majesty that the government of any foreign country was willing that the regulations for preventing collisions contained in table C, in the schedule to the said act, or such other regulations for preventing collisions as are for the time being in force under the said act, should apply to the ships of such country when beyond the limits of British jurisdiction, Her Majesty might, by order in council, direct that such regulations should apply to the ships of the said foreign country, whether within British jurisdiction or not; and it was further provided by the said act that whenever an order in council had been issued applying any regulation made by or in pursuance of the said act to the ships of any foreign country, such ships should, in all cases arising in any British court, be deemed to be subject to such regulation, and should, for the purpose of such regulation, be treated as if they were British ships;

And whereas, by an order in council made in pursuance of the said recited act, and dated the ninth day of January, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, Her Majesty was pleased to direct that there should be substituted for the regulations contained in the schedule to the said act certain regulations appended to the said order, and that the said appended regulations should, on and after the first day of June, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, apply to French ships, whether within British jurisdiction or not;

And whereas, by several orders in council subsequently made, Her Majesty was pleased to direct that the regulations appended to the said recited order should apply to ships of the countries specified in the said orders, whether within British jurisdiction or not; and whereas, by order in council, dated the thirtieth day of July, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-eight, Her Majesty was pleased to make certain additions to the regulations appended to the said first recited order in council;

And whereas, by order in council, dated the fourteenth day of August, One thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine, Her Majesty, on the joint recommendation of the admiralty and the board of trade, was pleased to direct that on and after the first day of September, one thousand eight hundred and eighty, the said regulations and the additions thereto should be annulled, and that there should be substituted therefor the new regulations contained in the first schedule thereto, and that the same should, from and after the first day of September, one thousand eight hundred and eighty, apply to ships of the countries mentioned in the said second schedule thereto, whether within British jurisdiction or not;

And whereas article numbered nine of the regulations appended to the said recited order in council of the ninth day of January, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, is as follows, that is to say:

Art. 9. Open fishing boats and other open boats shall not be required to carry the side lights required for other vessels, but shall, if they do not carry such lights, carry a lantern having a green slide on the one side and a red slide on the other side, and on the approach of or to other vessels such lantern shall be exhibited in sufficient time to prevent collision so that the green light shall not be seen on the port side nor the red light on the starboard side.

Fishing vessels and open boats, when at anchor or attached to their nets and stationary, shall exhibit a bright white light.

Fishing vessels and open boats shall, however, not be prevented from using a flareup in addition, if considered expedient.

And whereas the article numbered ten of the said new regulations, contained in the first schedule of the said recited order in council of the fourteenth day of August, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine, which said article is to be in substitution for the said recited article numbered nine, is as follows, that is to say:

Art. 10. (a) Open fishing boats and other open boats, when under way, shall not be obliged to carry the side lights required for other vessels, but every such boat shall in lieu thereof have ready at hand a lantern with a green glass on the one side and a red glass on the other side, and on the approach of or to other vessels, such lantern shall be exhibited, in sufficient time to prevent collision, so that the green light shall not be seen on the port side, nor the red light on the starboard side.

(b) A fishing vessel and an open boat when at anchor shall exhibit a bright white light,

(c) A fishing vessel, when employed in drift-net fishing, shall carry on one of her masts two red lights in a vertical line, one over the other, not less than three feet apart.

(d) A trawler at work shall carry on one of her masts two lights, in a vertical line, one over the other, not less than three feet apart; the upper light red, and the lower green; and shall also either carry the side lights required for other vessels, or, if the side lights cannot be carried, have ready at hand the colored lights, as provided in article 7, or a lantern with a red and green glass, as described in paragraph (a) of this article.

(e) Fishing vessels and open boats shall not be prevented from using a flare-up, in addition, if they desire to do so.

(f) The lights mentioned in this article are substituted for those mentioned in the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth articles of the convention between France and England, scheduled to the British sea fisheries act, 1868.

(g) All lights required by this article, except side lights, shall be in globular lanterns, so constructed as to show all round the horizon.

And whereas the admiralty and the board of trade have jointly recommended to Her Majesty that the operation of the said recited article numbered ten of the new regulations contained in the first schedule of the said order in council of the fourteenth day of August, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine, shall be suspended until the first day of September, one thousand eight hundred and eighty-one, and that, in lieu thereof and in substitution therefor, the recited article numbered nine, of the regulations appended to the said order in council of the ninth day of January, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, shall continue and remain in force until the said first day of September, one thousand eight hundred and eighty-one:

Now, therefore, Her Majesty, by virtue of the powers vested in tier by the said recited act, and by and with the advice of her privy council, is pleased to direct that the operation of the said recited article numbered ten of the new regulations contained in the first schedule of the said order in council of the fourteenth day of August, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine, shall be suspended until the first day of September, one thousand eight hundred and eighty-one, and that, in lieu thereof and in substitution therefor, the said recited article numbered nine, of the regulations appended to the said order in council of the ninth day of January, one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, shall continue and remain in force until the said first day of September, one thousand eight hundred and eighty-one.

C. L. PEEL.

No. 340. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 340.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, May 14, 1880.

Sir: In compliance with an instruction which I have received by telegraph from Earl Granville, Her Majesty’s principal secretary of state for foreign affairs, I have the honor to convey through you to the Government of the United States the sincere and cordial thanks of Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Her Majesty’s Government, for its generous and friendly conduct, in having dispatched the United States ship Constellation loaded with provisions which were so much needed for the relief of the distressed subjects of Her Majesty in Ireland, and which, besides being a substantial aid to them in their affliction, have been accepted by all Her Majesty’s subjects as a proof of the friendly feelings entertained towards them by the Government and citizens of the United States.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

No. 341. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 341.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, May 25, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 21st of January last, transmitting for the information of this government a copy of a letter and of its Inclosures, addressed by the inspector of fisheries of British Columbia to the Canadian commissioner of fisheries, in relation to an alleged trespass committed on certain of the inshore fishing grounds of that province by an American vessel, the schooner Emily Stephenson.

In reply I have to inform you that I have communicated the contents of your note to my colleague, the Secretary of the Treasury, with the suggestion that the attention of shipmasters on the Pacific coast be called to the fact that the privilege of fishing cannot be claimed by citizens of the United States under the treaties between the United States and Great Britain.

I may add with regard to the incident to which your note relates, that the circumstances set forth in its inclosures do not show that the Emily Stephenson, on the occasion in question, interfered with any private rights or fishing industry. It is, therefore, thought by this Department that a casual instance of fishing like that referred to in your note, without raising any claim of right on the part of citizens of the United States, or conflict of authority with the officials of British Columbia, should be considered, upon the mere fact of the halibut having been swimming within the shore line of jurisdiction, as quite a pardonable liberty. Probably the Emily Stephenson regarded the fishing as open in the sense that it was at the time wholly unoccupied and unclaimed as exclusive.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 342. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 342.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, June 8, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to state that Mr. Thomas C. Anderson, of Kentucky, an extensive breeder of short-horned cattle, has brought to the attention of this Department the fact that a number of citizens of Canada have expressed a desire to visit Kentucky this season for the purpose of purchasing cattle there for breeding purposes, providing arrangements could be made to allow them to be taken home. Mr. Anderson suggests that, as the region west of the Aleghany mountains is free from cattle disease, the Canadian authorities could, without risk, grant the desired privilege. He says moreover, that there are now in the Western States nearly three thousand short-horned cattle advertised for sale, many of which would be bought by Canadians if they could take their purchases home.

In view, therefore, of the important mutual interests involved in this matter, I beg to submit to Her Majesty’s Government to consider the practicability of so modifying the rules regulating the importation of cattle into Canada as to permit short-horned cattle raised west of the Alleghany Mountains to enter the Dominion unobstructed, for breeding purposes.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 343. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 343.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 9, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of yesterday’s date respecting the expediency of so modifying the rules regulating the importation of cattle into Canada as to permit short-horned cattle raised west of the Alleghany Mountains to enter the Dominion of Canada unobstructed, for breeding purposes.

I am forwarding a copy of your note to the governor-general of the Dominion, with a request that the attention of the Canadian Government may be invited to this important subject, and I shall also transmit a copy of it to Earl Granville.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

No. 344. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 344.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 12, 1880.

Sir: The negotiations which have been long carried on between the governments of Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, Great Britain, and Italy, with a view to bring about the formation of a commission of liquidation for the settlement of the Egyptian debts, have resulted, on the 31st of March last, in the inclosed decree* of the Khedive, and in the signature of the declaration of which the text is likewise inclosed.

The course which those governments have followed in this matter is explained by the very importance of the interests which they have in Egypt; indeed, their subjects own almost the whole of the debt, and it was natural that representatives of the immense majority of the holders of credits should be preferred in the composition of the commission of liquidation.

The two documents which are inclosed will show you what are the attributes of this commission, and the authority with which it will be invested for the greatest benefit of the creditors, whether large or small, whose interests are confided to its prudence. You will observe at the same time that, in order to give it a public testimony of confidence, and to insure the conclusion of the business with which it is charged, the powers who signed the declaration have resolved to give force of law to the decisions which the commission shall have arrived at.

As these decisions, however, should be equally applied to those creditors who may belong to other nationalities, the five cabinets have deemed it expedient to request those powers who have concurred in establishing the legal administration of Egypt, by participating in the establishment of the mixed tribunals, to give their adherence, as they themselves have done, to the work undertaken, with their support, by the Government of the Khedive. Independently of the motives of good understanding and of general order which induce them to take this step, they have considered that, as the very fact of the liquidation cannot fail to bring with it the rescission of the original contracts, it is necessary that the Egyptian tribunals should receive from the governments an authorization to apply as law, with respect to all the parties interested, the result of the labors of the commission of liquidation. The five powers hope that their example will bring with it the assent of those states which are less involved than themselves in the financial difficulties of Egypt, but which, nevertheless, are interested in the regular conduct of affairs in that country.

In directing me to submit to you these considerations, ray government has instructed me to convey to you its desire to obtain the adhesion of the Government of the United States to the above-mentioned joint declaration. It does not doubt that, appreciating the advantages which the proposed liquidation will offer to all interests, the cabinet of Washington will willingly associate itself with an undertaking of which the conditions, having been discussed between the powers who are more particularly affected by the inconveniences of the situation to which it was desired to bring a remedy, present all the guarantees of justice and impartiality which can be desired.

I shall feel obliged if you will be good enough to acquaint me, as soon as it may be in your power, with the views of the Government of the United States upon this subject.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

* For the text of this decree, see Mr. Farman’s dispatch No. 381, of April 5, 1880, under correspondence with Turkey, post.

No. 345. Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 345.
Mr. Evarts to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, June 16, 1880.

Sir: Referring to your note of the 29th of March last, in reference to the frequent losses by fire of cotton laden ships at the ports of Charleston and New Orleans, and to the subsequent correspondence on that subject, I now have the honor to transmit herewith for your information a copy of a proclamation issued by his excellency the governor of Louisiana, offering a reward of $500 for the apprehension of each person who may be found guilty of acts of incendiarism against vessels in the port of New Orleans.

I furthermore have the pleasure of informing you that the lieutenant-governor of Louisiana, in communicating the above-mentioned proclamation to this Department, in a letter dated the 8th instant, says that the authorities of the city of New Orleans are making zealous efforts to bring the offenders in question to justice; that the New Orleans Cotton Exchange and the insurance companies are earnestly co-operating with the authorities; that the police and criminal courts have been duly active and vigilant$ that numerous arrests have resulted in consequence; that one of the worst of the offenders has already been tried, convicted, and sentenced, and that such developments have been made .as to render it probable that the guilt of the incendiarism complained of will be fixed upon a few disreputable persons.

The lieutenant-governor, in conclusion, in view of what the authorities have already accomplished, expresses the opinion that no further apprehension of incendiary fires on vessels laden or loading with cotton in the port of New Orleans need be felt.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure.]

Proclamation by the governor of Louisiana.

State of Louisiana, Executive Department,
New Orleans, May 14, 1880.

Whereas it has been made known to me that fires, supposed to be by the hands of incendiaries, have recently occurred on board of ships laden or loading with cotton in this port, as follows:

British ship Charles, loading with cotton for Havre, lying at Post 22, first district, port of New Orleans, took fire on January 16, 1880, at 3 a.m. Cargo on board at time of fire, 3,513 bales cotton.

British ship Hectanooga, loading with cotton for Havre, lying at Post 19, first district, port of New Orleans, took fire on January 31, 1880, in the morning. Cargo on board at time of fire, 2,880 bales cotton.

American ship John Watt, loading with cotton for Queenstown, for orders, lying at Post 34, first district, port of New Orleans, took fire on March 11, 1880, at 6.30 a.m. Cargo on board at time of fire, 4,036 bales cotton.

British ship Iron Cross, loading with cotton for Liverpool, lying at Sixth street, fourth district, port of New Orleans, took fire on April 22, 1880,. at 8.30 p.m. Cargo-on board at time of fire, 1,507 bales cotton.

And whereas such fires inflict incalculable damage upon the commerce of this port:

Now, therefore, I have thought proper to issue this my proclamation offering a reward of five hundred dollars for the apprehension of each of the persons found guilty of the atrocious acts of incendiarism against the above-named vessels or that may be committed on any cotton-laden vessels. This proclamation to remain in full force and effect for the term of six months.

Witness my signature and the seal of the State of Louisiana, at the city of New Orleans, this 14th day of May, A. D. 1880.
LOUIS A. WILTZ,
Governor of Louisiana.

By the governor:
Oscar Arroyo,
Assistant Secretary of State.

No. 346. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 346.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 17, 1880.

Sir: In compliance with an instruction which I have received from Earl Granville, I have the honor to inform you that the British vice-consul at Port-au-Prince, Hayti, has reported the erection of two lighthouses in the Bay of Port-au-Prince, and the establishment of light dues in connection therewith.

As it appears that the light dues to be levied on foreign merchant ships will be double the amount of those to be levied on Haytian vessels, Mr. Stuart has been instructed to urge that British ships should be put on the same footing as Haytian in this respect, and to endeavor to secure the co-operation of his foreign colleagues in any representations which he may make to the Haytian Government on the subject. Earl Granville has therefore instructed me to bring the matter to the attention of the Government of the United States, and to ask if it be willing to take steps in support of the action which Her Majesty’s Government has taken with a view to securing the equal treatment of vessels of all flags, that it would address similar instructions to its representatives at Port-au-Prince.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THORNTON.

No. 347. Mr. Hay to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 347.
Mr. Hay to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, June 19, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 17th instant, inviting the attention of this government to the discriminating light dues now levied at Port-au-Prince by the Government of Hayti, on foreign merchant vessels.

In reply, I beg to inform you that the light dues to which your note relates formed the subject of a recent dispatch from the minister resident of the United States at Port-au-Prince, and that his representations in regard to the matter correspond substantially with those which you state Her Majesty’s Government has received. This government regards the light dues now levied by the Haytian Government at Port-au-Prince as unjust and injurious to the commercial interests of the foreign powers concerned, and the President is, therefore, quite willing to co-operate with Her Majesty’s Government in making all proper efforts, which may be found practicable, to induce the Haytian Government to place vessels of all flags upon an equal footing in respect to the light dues in question. An instruction in this sense will accordingly be given to the minister resident of the United States at Port-au-Prince, with as little delay as possible.

I have, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 348. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 348.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 19, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 16th instant, relating to the frequent losses by fire of cotton-laden ships at the ports of Charleston and New Orleans. I am much gratified to learn the vigorous measures which have been taken by the governor of the State of Louisiana and the authorities of New Orleans for the repression of the crime of incendiarism on board of those vessels. It will give me great pleasure to bring to the knowledge of Her Majesty’s Government the contents of the proclamation issued by his excellency on the 14th ultimo, with a view to the punishment of the crime and to prevent its repetition.

I have, &c.,

EDW’D THOENTON.

No. 349. Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts. No. 349.
Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, June 28, 1880.

Sir: With reference to your note of the 8th instant I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of a report of the privy council of Canada, which has been forwarded to me by the governor-general of Canada, relating to the desire of several Canadians to purchase cattle in Kentucky for breeding purposes, if they can be allowed to be taken into Canada.

I shall also forward copy of the inclosed report of Her Majesty’s Government.

I have, &c.,

ED W’D THORNTON.

[Inclosure.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general, on the 21st day of June, 1880.

The committee of council have had under consideration a note dated 8th June, 1880, transmitted by Sir E. Thornton from Mr. Evarts, respecting the wish of several Canadians to purchase cattle in Kentucky, for breeding purposes, provided arrangements can be made to allow them to be taken into Canada.

The honorable the minister of agriculture, to whom said note has been referred, reports that the action of the Canadian Government is to a very large extent influenced by the imperial act respecting diseases of animals, and the action under it which has been taken by the veterinary department of Great Britain.

That the consideration of Canadian interests, in view of the imperial law and orders in council, is to prevent Canada from being scheduled and Canadian cattle from being slaughtered at the port of entry in England.

That the difficulty in the way of carrying out the request or’ Mr. Evarts is the fact that the orders issued under the imperial contagious diseases (animals) act treat the United States as one country, without making any provision for lines of demarkation between the Eastern and Western States.

That the whole of the United States is therefore treated in England as a diseased country, and importations into Canada from any part are inconsistent with the privilege now enjoyed, of allowing the ports of Great Britain to remain open for the entry of Canadian cattle alive. The great importance to Canada of the unimpeded continuance of the trade in cattle makes the prohibition complained of, if not a necessity, at least a paramount interest.

That the cattle shipped from Canada among which pleuro-pneumonia was found to exist, were taken on board the railway train at Buffalo, N. Y.

That if a line, however, were drawn between the infected States of the East and those of the West, which are believed to be free from disease, and regulations framed of such a nature as to prevent cattle from the East going to the West, he, the minister, is of opinion that provisions might be adopted to admit of the importation into Canada of cattle from the Western States.

That any action in this direction, however, would be dependent upon a relaxation of imperial orders under the act referred to, of such a nature as not to make the scheduling of Canada a consequence.

The committee submit the views above stated for your excellency’s approval, and recommend that a copy of this minute when approved be transmitted to Sir E. Thornton for the information of the United States.

Certified.

J. O. COTÉ,
Clerk Privy Council, Canada.

No. 350. Mr. Hay to Sir Edward Thornton. No. 350.
Mr. Hay to Sir Edward Thornton.

Department of State,
Washington, June 29, 1880.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence in relation to the revised international regulations for the prevention of collisions at sea, and particularly to your note of the 8th of October last, proposing the 1st of September next as a suitable date for the taking effect of the revised regulations in question, I now have to inform you that the executive branch of this government does not consider it expedient to take any further action in regard to this matter at present, owing to the fact that the whole subject is now before Congress.

* * * * * * *

Congress having adjourned without completing its consideration of this important matter, any action of the executive branch of this government in regard to it must of necessity be deferred until after the reassembling of the national legislature in December next. Meanwhile this country must be considered as outside of the proposed international regulations until such time as Congress may see fit to take action upon the subject.

I have, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 351. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond. No. 351.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond.

Department of State,
Washington, July 30, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of Sir Edward Thornton’s note of the 12th ultimo, in relation to the proposed commission of liquidation for the settlement of the Egyptian debts, which has resulted from the negotiations carried on for some time between the Governments of Great Britain, Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, and Italy, and have given the most considerate attention to the statements therein presented respecting the Khedival decree of March 31, last, and the declaration of the same date signed by the representatives of the five powers above mentioned, of which documents you kindly furnish me with copies.

It appears from those documents, taken conjointly with your statements, that the five powers, whose subjects own nearly the whole of the Egyptian debt, have organized among themselves a commission of liquidation for the benefit of the creditors, whether large or small, whose interests are confided to its prudence; that the same powers have united in a declaration to the end of giving force of law to the decisions which the commission shall have arrived at; that the five cabinets are desirous that the decisions of the commission should hold applicable with like force to creditors belonging to powers which, while not represented in the preliminary negotiations for the commission, or in the commission itself, have concurred in establishing the legal administration of Egypt by participating in the establishment of the mixed tribunals; that to this end the adherence of such powers to the work of the commission is requested, in order that those tribunals may have unimpeded jurisdiction over cases of rescinded contracts and other questions which may arise under the operations of the commission; and, that you are instructed by your government to ask the formal adhesion of that of the United States to the joint declaration referred to. Hence you ask that I will acquaint you, so soon as it may be in my power, with the views of this government upon the subject.

The important question to which the attention of this government is thus called had already had careful consideration, based upon the application directly made to it by that of his highness the Khedive through the United States agent at Cairo, and also upon the approaches made to it by that of France in the sense of obtaining the adhesion of the United States to the scheme. The first results of that consideration were not, on the whole, favorable to the concurrence of the United States in the proposal of the foreign powers, and the expressed opinion of the Department was that the United States Government did not feel called upon to accept, in advance, as binding upon its citizens, the action of a commission in the organization of which neither it nor they had had any part. Although, so far as was known, the interests of American citizens, concerned in contracts and like engagements with the Egyptian Government, were not so numerous or important as to make participation in the organization of the commission an indispensable requisite, yet it was regarded as proper to leave undecided, for the time being at least, the question of the acceptability of such action as that commission might hereafter take so far as concerned its operation upon the rights of citizens of the United States, and this view was strengthened by the natural desire of the United States to take no action which, on the one hand, might be tantamount to enforcing its own procedure and remedies, in conjunction with other powers, upon the Khedival Government in matters of its own internal economy, and, on the other, might forego the reservation of the rights of United States citizens, in their direct relations to the Egyptian Government, in case the disparagement of such rights should call for diplomatic representations in their defense.

In leaning to the adoption of such a course on the part of the United States, it was, however, entirely foreign to the purposes of this government to interfere with, or embarrass in any way, the financial relations of the Khedive toward the other powers, or the adjustment, by whatever means it and they might determine, of such obligations as might have arisen and become matters of dispute or compromise between them. It was not perceived that the attitude of discreet reserve, which thus so properly commended itself to this government in respect of a matter wherein it, as a government, had no direct concern, and wherein the interests of its citizens were amply guarded by the direct relations it maintains so happily with the Government of the Khedive, could be regarded as interfering with the entire freedom of that government to make any administrative adjustment of its financial relations with governments having representation in such administration.

While holding these views, therefore, and expressing them frankly through the medium of its diplomatic representation at Cairo, the Government of the United States held itself ready to receive and consider in the most friendly spirit any indications which the Khedive’s Government might present of embarrassment caused to it on this account.

Matters being in this state, advices from the representative of the United States at Cairo were received, exhibiting the apparent interest of the Egyptian Government itself in the solutions reached by the commission of liquidation, and soliciting in the most unequivocal and earnest manner the concurrence of the United States in order to remove the embarrassments winch it was represented would flow from the attempt on the part of the Khedive Government to apply, through the tribunals, the decisions of the commission without the adhesion of the powers represented in the organization of those tribunals; and these considerations induced this government to waive its reserve and accord its adhesion to the administrative plan upon which the Government of his highness the Khedive seemed to put so much value.

The diplomatic agent of the United States at Cairo was accordingly instructed, on the 17th instant, by telegraph, to give the adhesion of this government if that of Egypt regarded it as material to the scheme, and I am since in receipt of advices that he has done so.

Expressing my pleasure in being thus enabled to return a full and, as I trust, a satisfactory response to your note,

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Note.—An identical communication was addressed, the same day, to the representatives of Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, and Italy.]

No. 352. Mr. Drummond to Mr. Hay. No. 352.
Mr. Drummond to Mr. Hay.

Windsor, Vt., August 20, 1880.

Sir: I am instructed by Earl Granville to acquaint you that Her Majesty’s Government have had under their consideration a circular from the Egyptian minister for foreign affairs, dated the 30th of May, and addressed to the representatives of the powers interested in the proposed revision of the constitution of the tribunals of the reform in Egypt, and of their procedure and of the codes of law which they administer.

In this circular his excellency states that the period of five years, for which the tribunals were instituted, expires on the 31st of January next, and that the Egyptian Government desire to continue them for a further period of five years, but that, experience having shown the necessity of certain modifications in the existing system, they invite the representatives of the powers to obtain authority from their respective governments to represent them on a commission which should meet at Cairo under the presidency of the minister of justice.

His excellency suggests that each of the representatives should also be authorized to name a delegate or assistant commissioner, and that the commission should have power to nominate a sub-committee on whom would devolve the duty of preparing the proposals to be submitted to-their consideration.

Her Majesty’s Government have duly considered these suggestions, and, although they are not prepared to adopt them exactly in their present form, they readily accept in principle the proposal of the Egyptian Government that an international commission should be appointed without delay to consider and report to the powers on the changes which may be called for in the constitution of the tribunals of the reform, and in their procedure, and in the law administered by them.

Her Majesty’s Government are of opinion that the commission should be composed of delegates (two in number) from each of the powers represented on the second international commission, which sat at Constantinople in 1873, namely, Great Britain, Germany, Austria, Belgium, the United States, France, Italy, Holland, Russia, and Sweden, and that these delegates should have authority to add to their number delegates of any other power interested, if it should hereafter appear to the governments represented on the commission expedient so to do.

The commission should be under the presidency of the chief delegate of his highness the Khedive.

As regards the appointment of a committee, Her Majesty’s Government are disposed to consider that this is a matter of detail for which no special provision is necessary, and which it would seem preferable to leave to the judgment and discretion of the commission.

Her Majesty’s Government are quite willing to accede to the proposition that the commission should assemble and commence its labors at Cairo on the 1st of November next, but, inasmuch as its labors must necessarily occupy a considerable time, Her Majesty’s Government agree that it should be empowered to extend the present quinquennial period for which the tribunals are established for a term of one year without prejudice to the immediate application of any reforms which the powers, on the recommendation of the commission, may desire to introduce in the existing arrangements.

Should such extension of the quinquennial period prove insufficient, the commission should have power to renew such extension from time to time, with the assent of the powers, for such term as may seem reasonable.

Her majesty’s agent at Alexandria has been instructed to communicate to the Egyptian Government the views of Her Majesty’s Government, as above explained, in reply to their circular of the 30th of May, and, in now submitting them to you, I am to state that Her Majesty’s Government would be gratified to learn that they meet with the concurrence and will receive the support of the Government of the United States.

I have, therefore, the honor to request that you will be good enough to acquaint me, for the information of Her Majesty’s Government, with the views of your government in relation to this matter.

I have, &c.,

VICTOR DRUMMOND.

No. 353. Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts. No. 353.
Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Windsor, Vt., August 24, 1880.

Sir: In accordance with instructions received from Earl Granville, I have the honor to inform you that the board of trade have pointed out to his lordship that the course proposed to be adopted by the United States Government, as mentioned in your note addressed to me on the 27th of June last, in respect to the new regulations for preventing collisions at sea, may and probably will lead to difficulties between United States ships and British ships after the date fixed for bringing the new rules into operation. At present, according to English law, if the case were brought into a British court, it would be decided according to the new rules. But if the order in council has to be altered, and the name of the United States as agreeing to the new rules is to be omitted, there will be no rules by which the case can be governed, as the old rules will be at an end. Similar inconveniences will probably arise in the United States.

I have therefore been instructed by Earl Granville to transmit the inclosed copy of the order in council* for the information of the Government of the United States, and to express a hope that they may be disposed to carry out the new rules until and unless the Government of the United States after Congress meets should think that the new rules require alteration. In that case, any points they may then raise can be carefully considered and submitted to the various powers. This course would avoid inconvenience and would not pledge the United States as to the future, since they could withdraw at any time.

In submitting the above to the favorable consideration of the United States Government, I have the honor to request that I may be favored with the views they may be pleased to take thereupon at as early an opportunity as possible.

I have, &c.,

VICTOR DRUMMOND.

* For the text of the above order vide Mr. Hoppin’s dispatch No. 95, of November 4, 1879, page 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], ante.

No. 354. Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts. No. 354.
Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Saratoga, August 26, 1880.

Sir: In accordance with the instructions of Earl Granville, I have the honor to inform you that the Queen, my august sovereign, has signified her gracious pleasure that, on the occasion of the breaking up of the arctic discovery ship Resolute, at Chatham dock-yard, a piece of furniture constructed from a portion of the timbers of that vessel should be presented to the President of the United States, in grateful acknowledgment of the restoration of the vessel in 1856, as a free gift to Her Majesty by the President and people of the United States. A writing-table has therefore been made for this purpose, with an appropriate inscription.

Whilst bringing this desire of the Queen through you to the President’s knowledge, I have the honor to request that you will inform him also that Her Majesty has been graciously pleased to present to Mrs. Grinnell a writing-table, made from the same vessel, as a memorial of the disinterested kindness and great exertions of her late husband, Mr. H. Grinnell, in assisting in the search after Sir John Franklin.

I shall be obliged if you will inform me of the name of the port in the United States to which it will be most convenient for this piece of furniture, to be presented to the President, to be dispatched.

I have, &c.,

VICTOR DRUMMOND.

No. 355. Mr. Hay to Mr. Drummond. No. 355.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Drummond.

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 26th ultimo, in which you informed the Department of the gracious intention of Her Majesty, on the breaking up of the arctic discovery ship Resolute at Chatham dock-yard, to present to the President a writing-table, made from the timbers of that vessel, in acknowledgment of the restoration of the same in 1856, as a free gift to Her Majesty by the President and people of the United States.

Observing, in reply, that the agreeable contents of your note will be made known to the President on his return from the West, and that the port of New York will be a convenient one at which to receive the gift, I profit by this occasion, sir, to again assure you of my very high consideration.

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 356. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond. No. 356.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond.

Department of State,
Washington, September 6, 1880.

Sir: Referring to previous correspondence on the subject of the revised international regulations for the prevention of collisions at sea, I have now the honor to inclose for your information two printed copies of General Order N6. 253, on this subject, emanating from the Navy Department.

In communicating this order, the Acting Secretary of the Navy states that in his opinion the issue of a general order, making it obligatory for all United States naval vessels to navigate the high seas in conformity with the law of the sea, is a proceeding fully within the authority of the Secretary of the Navy, and that it is necessary to issue such an order for the protection of commerce.

While treating upon this subject, I have to inform you that I have just received a letter from the Treasury Department, in reply to the questions raised by you in your note of the 24th ultimo, to the effect that that department has carefully considered the subject of your communication, and has come to the conclusion that it has no power to formally authorize the adoption, by the commercial marine of the United States, of the new international rules of the road for preventing collisions at sea, so long as the provisions of section 4233 of the Revise Statutes remain unchanged by the action of Congress. That department has, however, in order to harmonize matters so far as it can, and still be consistent with the law governing the subject, given notice to the press of the embarrassments to which American vessels will be liable in cases of collision with the vessels of other nationalities by not conforming to the new regulations, and has suggested that a compliance by vessels of the United States with these regulations while navigating foreign waters will not entail any penalties upon them on their return to this country. That department is further constrained to say that before it can take any further step in recognition of the new regulations, it will be necessary to await the action of Congress.

I have, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in Mr. Evarts’ note of Sept. 6, 1880.]

Regulation for preventing collisions at sea.

Navy Department,
Washington, D. C., July 16, 1880. General Order No. 253.]

A revised code of “Regulations for preventing collisions at sea” having been approved by nearly all the maritime nations of the world, and adopted by them, to go into effect on the 1st September, 1880, thus becoming an integral part of the law of the sea, it is hereby adopted for the naval service of the United States, to go into effect on the above-mentioned date, in so far as the navigation of naval vessels outside of United States territorial waters is concerned. Within the waters of the United States, naval vessels will be guided by the regulations for preventing collisions as specified in section 4233 of the United States Revised Statutes.

Navy Department General Order No. 34, dated May 4, 1864, and forming Appendix No. 2 of the United States Naval Regulations, is hereby rescinded j and the precepts of the revised regulations and of the United States statutes, hereto appended,* will be strictly complied with in accordance with the above specifications.

A careful examination and comparison of the appended codes is enjoined upon all officers of the Navy, especially of those parts of the revised regulations which are printed in italics, as it is in them that the modifications from the old rules exist.

WM. N. JEFFERS,
Acting Secretary of the Navy.

* The appendices above referred to consist of section 4233 of the Revised Statutes of the United States and the Revised International Regulations, arranged in parallel columns. For the text of the latter vide Mr. Hoppin’s No. 95, of November 4, 1879 pages 468–472 [Pgs. 468–472 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301], supra.

No. 357. Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts. No. 357.
Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Lenox, September 7, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note dated yesterday, inclosing two printed copies of Genera! Order No. 253, on the subject of the revised international regulations for the prevention of collisions at sea, as issued by the Navy Department.

With respect to the manner in which the Treasury Department has acted in the matter, according to the information with which you have been good enough to furnish me, I feel sure Her Majesty’s Government will, on my bringing it to their notice, be much gratified at the attention paid to their wishes, as expressed to you in my note of the 24th ultimo, and the endeavors shown by the Treasury Department to harmonize matters so far as they possibly can do so consistently with the provisions of section 4233 of the Revised Statutes.

I have, &c.,

VICTOR DRUMMOND.

No. 358. Mr. Hay to Mr. Drummond. No. 358.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Drummond.

Department of State,
Washington, October 26, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note which, by direction of Earl Granville, you addressed to this Department on the 20th of August last, in relation to the modification and continuance of the tribunals of the reform in Egypt, after the expiration of the existing quinquennial period on the 1st of February next.

The circular of the Egyptian minister of foreign affairs, of May 30, 1880, to which his lordship refers, was received by this government in due course, and has had the attention which is due on the part of the United States, as one of the parties to the original scheme of constituting the tribunals of the reform which it is now proposed to change by means of a deliberative commission to be appointed ad hoc. The result of a detailed examination has led this government to conclusions which are, in the main, identical with those of Her Majesty’s Government, as communicated to you by Earl Granville. It accepts, in principle, the proposal of the Khedival Government, that an international commission of delegates from the several powers which joined in the institution of the existing tribunals, should, with as little delay as possible, consider and report to the powers upon such modifications as may appear to be expedient or necessary in the constitution of the tribunals of the reform, and in their procedure and their administration of the law, as well as in the law itself as framed by them, so long as such modification shall place the judicial administration of Egypt on a basis no less favorable than the present one for securing to citizens of the United States in His Higihness’s dominions the same impartial justice they enjoyed under the exercise of judicial functions by the diplomatic and consular officers of the United States in those dominions previous to the institution of the reform tribunals.

This government will, therefore, appoint, at as early a day as possible, two delegates, one of whom shall be principal and the other associate, with the same functions as like adjunct delegates of the other powers to represent the United States in the proposed commission.

This government shares the views of that of Her Britannic Majesty with respect to the future admission, if it be found expedient, of delegates of other powers than those which united in establishing the existing judicial system of Egypt. It likewise concurs in the opinion that the formation of a subcommittee is a matter properly within the discretion of the commission itself.

The question of the extension of the present quinquennial period to cover the time which may possibly elapse before the modifications to be adopted can become operative, being, so far as the United States are concerned, one for the discretion of the executives, this government is prepared in this matter also to accede to the proposal of the government of His Highness the Khedive. The question of the appointment of the present foreign judges to like places in the reorganized tribunals, being properly one for the consideration of each of the appointing powers, it is conceived that no rigid rule should be adopted by the commission with respect to such appointments. It may thus be expedient to provide that the continuance of the present judges through whatever extended term may be requisite before the proposed modifications can take effect, shall not necessarily imply renewal of their existing contracts with the Egyptian Government for a fixed quinquennial or other period, but shall be simply for the time needful to effect the contemplated changes.

The agent of the United States at Cairo will be forthwith instructed in the sense of the views now communicated to you for the information of Her Majesty’s Government.

I have, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 359. Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts. No. 359.
Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 1, 1880.

Sir: With reference to your note to Sir Edward Thornton of the 19th of April last, inquiring on behalf of your honorable colleague, the Secretary of the Treasury, whether American vessels laden with American products are allowed by the authorities of the Dominion of Canada to unlade at any points in their districts which Canadian collectors may designate, or whether they are compelled to unlade at ports of entry in such districts, I have the honor to transmit to you, herewith, copy of a report of the privy council for Canada, embodying a memorandum of the minister of customs, which contains the information desired by the Secretary of the Treasury.

I have, &c.,

VICTOR DRUMMOND.

[Inclosure.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general, on the 23d day of October, 1880.

On a dispatch, No. 29, of 20th of April, 1880, from Sir Edward Thornton, transmitting copy of a note and of its inclosure, which he has received from Mr. Evarts, inquiring whether United States merchant vessels are allowed to discharge their cargoes at places in Canada designated by Canadian collectors of customs, not being ports of entry:

The honorable the minister of customs, to whom this dispatch with inclosure has been referred, reports that there is no restriction in this respect upon United States vessels which does not equally apply to Canadian vessels.

That the act 40 Vic, cap. 10, section 8, provides that goods shall not be unladen from any vessel except after due entry, and at some place at which an officer of customs is appointed to attend, or for which a sufferance has been granted by the collector or other proper officer of customs, and that this provision applies equally to vessels of all nations.

The committee recommend that a copy of this minute, when approved, be forwarded to Sir Edward Thornton.

Certified.

J. O. COTÉ,
Clerk Privy Council Canada.

No. 360. Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts. No. 360.
Mr. Drummond to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, November 20, 1880.

Sir: Sir Edward Thornton, in his note to you of March 1 last, informed you that he would transmit to his excellency the Marquis of Lorne a copy of the documents contained in your note to him of the 28th of February last, relating to the regulations governing the transportation of merchandise to, from, and through the Dominion of Canada.

His excellency the governor-general of Canada has forwarded to me a copy of a report of a committee of the privy council of the dominion on this matter, a copy of which I inclose herewith, and I have much pleasure in informing you that the regulations as proposed by the United States Government have been approved by the privy council, and by his excellency the governor-general.

I have, &c.,

VICTOR DRUMMOND.

[Inclosure.]

Copy of a report of a committee of the honorable the privy council for Canada, approved by his excellency the governor-general, on the 16th day of November, 1880.

The committee of council have had under consideration the dispatch of Sir E. Thornton, dated Washington, March 1, 1880, relative to the regulations for the transportation of merchandise to, from, and through the Dominion of Canada, and also the dispatch of Sir M. E. Hicks Beach, of the 31st March, No. 97, on the same subject.

The honorable the minister of customs, to whom the dispatches with the proposed regulations have been referred, reports that, having carefully considered said regulations, he is of opinion that they may be approved.

The committee recommend that the proposed regulations be approved accordingly.

Certified.

J. O. COTÉ,
Clerk Privy Council Canada.

Correspondence with the Government of Great Britain in regard to the Alleged Outrage upon American Fishermen at Fortune Bay, Newfoundland.Correspondence with the Government of Great Britain in regard to the Alleged Outrage upon American Fishermen at Fortune Bay, Newfoundland.

[361] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1879.

[362] . Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, August 13, 1879. (Received August 28.)

[363] . Mr. Seward to Mr. Hoppin.

Department of State, Washington, August 28, 1879.

[364] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, November 22, 1879. (Received December 4.)

[365] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, November 25, 1879. (Received December 6.)

[366] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, November 28, 1879. (Received December 10.)

[367] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin.

Washington, February 5, 1880.

[368] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, February 7, 1880. (Received February 24.)

[369] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, February 10, 1880. (Received February 24.)

[370] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, February 14, 1880. (Received February 24.)

[371] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, February 14, 1880. (Received February 25.)

[372] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin.

Washington, February 26, 1880.

[373] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, February 27, 1880. (Received March 13.)

[374] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, March 9, 1880. (Received March 22.)

[375] . Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, April 6, 1880. (Received April 19.)

[376] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, London, October 28, 1880. (Received November 9.)

No. 361. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh. No. 361.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Welsh.

Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1879. No. 347.]

Sir: You will readily understand that the pressure of current business, especially during the regular and special sessions of Congress, has prevented so immediate attention to the claims of the Fortune Bay fishermen, as definitely laid before me in their proofs completed during the session, as would enable me to give, in reply, a full consideration to the dispatch of Lord Salisbury of the date of November 7, 1878, in reply to mine to you of 28th September, 1878.

But other and stronger reasons have also induced me to postpone until now any discussion of the questions arising out of the occurrences to which these dispatches referred.

It so happened that the transactions of which certain citizens of the United States complain were brought fully to the attention of the government about the same time at which it became my duty to lay before Her Britannic Majesty’s Government the views of the United States Government as to the award then recently made by the Commission on the Fisheries, which had just closed its sittings at Halifax. While the character of the complaint and the interests of the citizens of the United States rendered it necessary that the subject should be submitted to the consideration of Her Britannic Majesty’s Government at the earliest possible moment, in order to the prevention of any further and graver misunderstanding and the avoidance of any serious interruption to an important industry, I was exceedingly unwilling that the questions arising under the award and those provoked by the occurrences in Newfoundland should be confused with each other, and least of all would I have been willing that the simultaneous presentment of the views of this government should be construed as indicating any desire on our part to connect the settlement of these complaints with the satisfaction or abrogation of the Halifax award.

I also deemed it not unadvisable in the interests of such a solution as I am sure is desired by the good sense and good temper of both governments that time should be allowed for the extinguishment of the local irritation, both here and in Newfoundland, which these transactions seem to have excited, and that another fishing season should more clearly indicate whether the rights to which the citizens of the United States were entitled under the treaty were denied or diminished by the pretensions and acts of the colonial authorities or whether their infraction was accidental and temporary. As soon as the violence to which citizens of the United States had been subjected in Newfoundland was brought to the attention of this Department, I instructed you, on 2d March, 1878, to represent the matter to Her Britannic Majesty’s Government, and upon such representation you were informed that a prompt investigation would be ordered for the information of that government.

On August 23, 1878, Lord Salisbury conveyed to you, to be transmitted to your government, the result of that investigation, in the shape of a report from Captain Sulivan, of Her Majesty’s ship Sirius. In furnishing you with this report, Lord Salisbury, on behalf of Her Britannic Majesty’s Government, said: You will perceive that the report in question appears to demonstrate conclusively that the United States fishermen on this occasion had committed three distinct breaches of the law, and that no violence was used by the Newfoundland fishermen, except in the case of one vessel, whose master refused to comply with the request which was made to him that he should desist from fishing on Sunday in violation of the law of the colony and of the local custom, and who threatened the Newfoundland fishermen with a revolver, as detailed in paragraphs 5 and 6 of Captain Sulivan’s report.

The three breaches of the law thus reported by Captain Sulivan and assumed by Lord Salisbury as conclusively established, were: 1. The use of seines and the use of them also at a time prohibited by a colonial statute. 2. Fishing upon a day—Sundays—forbidden by the same local law; and 3. Barring fish in violation of the same local legislation. In addition Captain Sulivan reported that the United States fishermen were, contrary to the terms of the treaty of Washington— Fishing illegally, interfering with the rights of British fishermen and their peaceable use of that part of the coast then occupied by them and of which they were actually in possession—their seines and boats, their huts and gardens and land granted by government being situated thereon.

Yours, containing this dispatch and the accompanying report, was received on 4th September, 1878, and on the 28th of the same month you were instructed that it was impossible for this government duly to appreciate the value of Captain Sulivan’s report until it was permitted to see the testimony upon which the conclusions of that report professed to rest. And you were further directed to say that, putting aside for after-examination the variations of fact, it seemed to this government that the assumption of the report was that the United States fishermen were fishing illegally, because their fishing was being conducted at a time and by methods forbidden by certain colonial statutes; that the language of Lord Salisbury, in communicating the report with his approval, indicated the intention of Her Britannic Majesty’s Government to maintain the position that the treaty privileges secured to United States fishermen by the treaty of 1871 were held subject to such limitations as might be imposed upon their exercise by colonial legislation; and “that so grave a question in its bearing upon the obligations of this government under the treaty, makes it necessary that the President should ask from Her Majesty’s Government a frank avowal or disavowal of the paramount authority of provincial legislation to regulate the enjoyment by our people of the inshore fishery, which seems to be intimated, if not asserted, in Lord Salisbury’s note.”

In reply to this communication, Lord Salisbury, 7th November, 1878, transmitted to you the depositions which accompanied Captain Sulivan’s report, and said: In pointing out that the American fishermen had broken the law within the territorial limits of Her Majesty’s domains, I had no intention of inferentially laying down any principles of international law, and no advantage would, I think, he gained by doing so to a greater extent than the facts in question absolutely require. * * * Her Majesty’s Government will readily admit—what is, indeed, self-evident—that British sovereignty, as regards those waters, is limited in its scope by the engagements of the treaty of Washington, which cannot be modified or affected by any municipal legislation.

It is with the greatest pleasure that the United States Government receives this language as “the frank disavowal” which it asked “of the paramount authority of provincial legislation to regulate the enjoyment by our people of the inshore fishery.”

Removing, as this explicit language does, the only sericus difficulty which threatened to embarrass this discussion, I am now at liberty to resume the consideration of these differences in the same spirit and with the same hopes so fully and properly expressed in the concluding paragraph of Lord Salisbury’s dispatch. He says: It is not explicitly stated in Mr. Evarts’s dispatch that he considers any recent acts of the colonial legislature to be inconsistent with the rights acquired by the United States under the treaty of Washington. But if that is the case, Her Majesty’s Government will, in a friendly spirit, consider any representations he may think it right to make upon the subject, with the hope of coming to a satisfactory understanding.

It is the purpose, therefore, of the present dispatch to convey to you, in order that they may be submitted to Her Britannic Majesty’s Government, the conclusions which have been reached by the Government of the United States as to the rights secured to its citizens under the treaty of 1871 in the herring fishery upon the Newfoundland coast, and the extent to which those rights have been infringed by the transactions in Fortune Bay on January 6, 1878.

Before doing so, however, I deem it proper, in order to clear the argument of all unnecessary issues, to correct what I consider certain misapprehensions of the views of this government contained in Lord Salisbury’s dispatch of 7th of November, 1878. The secretary for foreign affairs of Her Britannic Majesty says: If, however, it be admitted that the Newfoundland legislature have the right of binding Americans who fish within their waters by any laws which do not contravene existing treaties, it must be further conceded that the duty of determining the existence of such contravention must be undertaken by the governments, and cannot be remitted to the discretion of each individual fisherman. For such discretion, if exercised on one side, can hardly be refused on the other. If any American fisherman may violently break a law which he believes to be contrary to treaty, a Newfoundland fisherman may violently maintain it if he believes it to be in accordance with treaty.

His lordship can scarcely have intended this last proposition to be taken in its literal significance. An infraction of law may be accompanied by violence which affects the person or property of an individual, and that individual may be warraned in resisting such illegal violence, so far as it directly affects him, without reference to the relation of the act of violence to the law which it infringes, but simply as a forcible invasion of his rights of person or property. But that the infraction of a general municipal law, with or without violence, can be corrected and punished by a mob, without official character or direction, and who assume both to interpret and administer the law in controversy, is a proposition which does not require the reply of elaborate argument between two governments whose daily life depends upon the steady application of the sound and safe principles of English jurisprudence. However this may be, the Government of the United States cannot for a moment admit that the conduct of the United States fishermen in Fortune Bay was in any—the remotest degree—a violent breach of law.

Granting any and all the force which may be claimed for the colonial legislation, the action of the United States fishermen was the peaceable prosecution of an innocent industry, to which they thought they were entitled. Its pursuit invaded no man’s rights, committed violence upon no man’s person, and if trespassing beyond its lawful limits could have been promptly and quietly stopped by the interference and representations of the lawfully constituted authorities. They were acting under the provisions of the very statute which they are alleged to have violated, for it seems to have escaped the attention of Lord Salisbury that section 28 of the title of the consolidated acts referred to contains the provision that “Nothing in this chapter shall affect the rights and privileges granted by treaty to the subjects of any state or power in amity with Her Majesty.” They were engaged, as I shall hereafter demonstrate, in a lawful industry, guaranteed by the treaty of 1871, in a method which was recognized as legitimate by the award of the Halifax Commission, the privilege to exercise which their government had agreed to pay for. They were forcibly stopped, not by legal authority, but by mob violence. They made no resistance, withdrew from the fishing grounds, and represented the outrage to their government, thus acting in entire conformity with the principle as justly stated by Lord Salisbury himself, that— If it be admitted, however, that the Newfoundland legislature have the right of binding Americans who fish within their waters by any laws which do not contravene existing treaties, it must be further conceded that the duty of determining the existence of such contravention must be undertaken by the governments, and cannot be remitted to the judgment of each individual fisherman.

There is another passage of Lord Salisbury’s dispatch to which I should call your attention. Lord Salisbury says: I hardly believe, however, that Mr. Evarts would in discussion adhere to the broad doctrine, which some portion of his language would appear to convey, that no British authority has a right to pass any kind of laws binding Americans who are fishing in British waters; for if that contention be just, the same disability applies a fortiori to any other powers, and the waters must be delivered over to anarchy.

I certainly cannot recall any language of mine in this correspondence which is capable of so extraordinary a construction. I have nowhere taken any position larger or broader than that which Lord Salisbury says: Her Majesty’s Government will readily admit what is, indeed, self evident, that British sovereignty, as regards these waters, is limited in its scope by the engagements of the treaty of Washington, which cannot be affected or modified by any municipal legislature.

I have never denied the full authority and jurisdiction either of the imperial or colonial governments over their territorial waters, except so far as by treaty that authority and jurisdiction have been deliberately limited by these governments themselves. Under no claim or authority suggested or advocated by me could any other government demand exemption from the provisions of British or colonial law, unless that exemption was secured by treaty; and if these waters must be delivered over to anarchy, it will not be in consequence of any pretensions of the United States Government, but because the British Government has, by its own treaties, to use Lord Salisbury’s phrase, limited the scope of British sovereignty. I am not aware of any such treaty engagements with other powers, but if there are, it would be neither my privilege nor duty to consider or criticise their consequences where the interests of the United States are not concerned.

After a careful comparison of all the depositions furnished to both governments, the United States Government is of opinion that the following facts will not be disputed:

1. That twenty-two vessels belonging to citizens of the United States, viz, Fred P. Frye, Mary M., Lizzie and Namari, Edward E. Webster, W. E. McDonald, Crest of the Wave, F. A. Smith, Hereward, Moses Adams, Charles E. Warren, Moro Castle, Wildfire, Maud and Erne, Isaac Rich, Bunker Hill, Bonanza, H. M. Rogers, Moses Knowlton, John W. Bray, Maud B. Wetherell, New England, and Ontario, went from Gloucester, a town in Massachusetts, United States, to Fortune Bay, in Newfoundland, in the winter of 1877–’78, for the purpose of procuring herring.

2. That these vessels waited at Fortune Bay for several weeks (from about December 15, 1877, to January 6, 1878); for the expected arrival of schools of herring in that harbor.

3. That on Sunday, January 6, 1878, the herring entered the bay in great numbers, and that four of the vessels sent their boats with seines to commence fishing operations, and the others were proceeding to follow.

4. That the parties thus seining were compelled, by a large and violent mob of the inhabitants of Newfoundland, to take up their seines discharge the fish already inclosed, and abandon their fishery, and that in one case, at least, the seine was absolutely destroyed.

5. That these seines were being used in the interest of all the United States vessels waiting for cargoes in the harbor, and that the catch undisturbed would have been sufficient to load all of them with profitable cargoes. The great quantity of fish in the harbor, and the fact that the United States vessels if permitted to fish would all have obtained full cargoes, is admitted in the British depositions.

If the Americans had been allowed to secure all the herrings in the bay for themselves, which they could have done that day, they would have filled all their vessels and the neighboring fishermen would have lost all chance on the following week day. (Deposition of James Sarwell.)

The Americans by hauling herring that day, when the Englishmen could not, were robbing them of their lawful and just chance of securing their share in them; and further, had they secured all they had barred, they would, I believe, have filled every vessel of theirs in the bay. (Deposition of John Chutt.)

See also affidavits of the United States captains.

6. That in consequence of this violence all the vessels abandoned the fishing-grounds, some without cargoes, some with very small cargoes, purchased from the natives, and their voyages were a loss to their owners.

7. That the seining was conducted at a distance from any land or fishing privilege or the occupation of any British subject. (See affidavits of Willard G. Rode, Charles Doyle, and Michael B. Murray.)

8. That none of the United States vessels made any further attempts to fish, but three or four which were delayed in the neighborhood purchased small supplies of herring. (See British depositions of John Saunders and Silas Fudge, wherein is stated that the United States vessels only remained a few days, and that after January 6 no fish came into the harbor.)

All the United States affidavits show that the United States vessels were afraid to use their seines after this, and that they left almost immediately, most of them coming home in ballast.

The provisions of the treaty of Washington (1871), by which the right to prosecute this fishery was secured to the citizens of the United States, are very simple and very explicit.

The language of the treaty is as follows: XVIII. It is agreed by the high contracting parties that in addition to the liberties secured to the United States fishermen by the convention between the United States and Great Britain, signed at London on the 20bh day of October, 1818, of taking, curing, and drying fish on certain coasts of the British North American colonies therein defined, the inhabitants of the United States shall have, in common with the subjects of Her Britannic Majesty, the liberty for the term of years mentioned in Article XXXIII of this treaty to take fish of every kind, except shell-fish, on the sea coast and shores and in the bays, harbors, and creeks of the provinces of Quebec, &c.

XXXII. It is further agreed that the provisons and stipulations of Articles XVIII to XXV of this treaty, inclusive, shall extend to the colony of Newfoundland, so far as they are applicable.

Title XXVII, chapter 102, of the consolidated acts of Newfoundland, provides: Section 1. That no person shall take herring on the coast of Newfoundland by a seine or other such contrivance, at any time between the 20th day of October and the 12th day of April, in any year, or at any time use a seine except by way of shooting and forthwith hauling the same.

Sec. 2. That no person shall at any time, between the 20th day of December and the 1st day of April, in any year, catch or take herring with seines of less than 2⅜ inches mesh, &c.

Sec. 4. No person shall, between the 20th day of April and the 20th day of October, in any year, haul, catch, or take herring or other bait for exportation, within one mile, measured by the shore or across the water, of any settlement situated between Cape Chapeau Rouge and Point Enragée, near Cape Ray.

The act of 1876 provides that— No person shall, between the hours of twelve o’clock on Saturday night and twelve o’clock on Sunday night, haul or take any herring, caplin, or squid, with net, seine, bunts, or any such contrivance for the purpose of such hauling or taking.

It seems scarcely necessary to do more than place the provisions of the treaty and the provisions of these laws in contrast, and apply the principle so precisely and justly announced by Lord Salisbury as self-evident, “that British sovereignty, as regards those waters, is limited in its scope by the engagements of the treaty of Washington, which cannot be modified or affected by any municipal legislation.” For it will not be denied that the treaty privilege of “taking fish of every kind, except shell-fish, on the sea coast and shores, and in the bays, harbors, and creeks” of Newfoundland, is both seriously “modified” and injuriously affected by municipal legislation, which closes such fishery absolutely for seven months of the year, prescribes a special method of exercise, forbids exportation for five months, and, in certain localities, absolutely limits the three-mile area, which it was the express purpose of the treaty to open.

But this is not all. When the treaty of 1871 was negotiated, the British Government contended that the privilege extended to United States fishermen of free fishing within the three-mile territorial limit was so much more valuable than the equivalent offered in the treaty that a money compensation should be added to equalize the exchange. The Halifax Commission was appointed for the special purpose of determining that compensation, and, in order to do so, instituted an exhaustive examination of the history and value of the colonial fisheries, including the herring fishery of Newfoundland.

Before that commission, the United States Government contended that the frozen-herring fishery in Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, the very fishery now under discussion, was not a fishery, but a traffic; that the United States vessels which went there for herring always took out trading permits from the United States custom-house, which no other fishermen did; that the herring were caught by the natives in their nets and sold to the vessels, the captains of which froze the herrings after purchase, and transported them to market, and that consequently this was a trade, a commerce beneficial to the Newfoundlanders, and not to be debited to the United States account of advantages gained by the treaty. To this the British Government replied, that whatever the character of the business had been, the treaty now gave the United States fishermen the right to catch as well as purchase herring; that the superior character of the United States vessels, the larger capacity and more efficient instrumentality of the seines used by the United States fishermen, together with their enterprise and energy, would all induce the United States fishermen to catch herring for themselves, and thus the treaty gave certain privileges to the United States fishermen which inflicted upon the original proprietor a certain amount of loss and damage, from this dangerous competition, which., in justice to their interests, required compensation. The exercise of these privileges, therefore, as stated in the British case, as evidenced in the British testimony, as maintained in the British argument, for which the British Government demanded and received compensation, is the British construction of the extent of the liberty to fish in common, guaranteed by the treaty.

Mr. Whiteway, then attorney general of Newfoundland, and one of the British counsel before the commission, said in his argument: And now one word with regard to the winter herring-fishery in Fortune Bay. It appears that from 40 to 50 United States vessels proceed there between the months of November and February, taking from thence cargoes of frozen herring of from 500 to 800 or 1,000 barrels. According to the evidence, these herrings have hitherto generally been obtained by purchase. It is hardly possible, then, to conceive that the Americans will continue to buy, possessing as they now do the right to catch.

The British case states the argument as to the Newfoundland fisheries in the following language: It is asserted on the part of Her Majesty’s Government that the actual use which may be made of this privilege at the present moment is not so much in question as the actual value of it to those who may, if they will, use it. It is possible, and even probable, that the United States fishermen may at any moment avail themselves of the privilege of fishing in Newfoundland inshore waters to a much larger extent than they do at present; but even if they should not do so, it would not relieve them from the obligation of making the just payment for a right which they have acquired subject to the condition of making that payment. The case may be not inaptly illustrated by the somewhat analogous one of a tenancy of shooting or fishing privileges; it is not because the tenant fails to exercise the rights which he has acquired-by virtue of his lease that the proprietor should be debarred from the recovery of his rent.

There is a marked contrast to the advantage of the United States citizens between the privilege of access to fisheries the most valuable and productive in the world and the barren right accorded to the inhabitants of Newfoundland, of fishing in the exhausted and preoccupied waters of the United States, north of the 39th parallel of north latitude, in which there is no field for lucrative operations, even if British subjects desired to resort to them; and there are strong grounds for believing that year by year, as United States fishermen resort in greater numbers to the coasts of Newfoundland, for the purpose of procuring bait and supplies, they will become more intimately acquainted with the resources of the inshore fisheries and their unlimited capacity for extension and development. As a matter of fact United States vessels have, since the Washington treaty came into operation, been successfully engaged in these fisheries; and it is but reasonable to anticipate that as the advantages to be derived from them become more widely known larger numbers of United States fishermen will engage in them.

A participation by fishermen of the United States in the freedom of these waters must, notwithstanding their wonderfully reproductive capacity, tell materially on the local catch, and, while affording to the United States fishermen a profitable employment, mist seriously interfere with local success. The extra amount of bait also which is required for the supply of the United States demand for the bank fishery must have the effect of diminishing the supply of cod for the inshores, as it is well known that the presence of that fish is caused by the attraction offered by a large quantity of bait fishes, and as this quantity diminishes the cod will resort in fewer numbers to the coast.

The effect of this diminution may not in all probability be apparent for some years to come, and whilst United States fishermen will have the liberty of enjoying the fisheries for several years in their present teeming and remunerative state, the effects of overfishing may, after their right to participate in them has lapsed, become seriously prejudicial to the interests of the local fishermen.

II. The privilege of procuring bait and supplies, refitting, drying, transshipping, &c.

Apart from the immense value to United States fishermen of participation in the Newfoundland inshore fisheries must be estimated the important privilege of procuring bait for the prosecution of the bank and deep-sea fisheries, which are capable of unlimited expansion. With Newfoundland as a basis of operations, the right of procuring bait, refitting their vessels, drying and curing fish, procuring ice in abundance for the preservation of bait, liberty of transshipping their cargoes, &c., an almost continuous prosecution of the bank fishery is secured to them. By means of these advantages, United States fishermen have acquired by the treaty of Washington all the requisite facilities for increasing their fishing operations to such an extent as to enable them to supply the demand for fish food in the United States markets, and largely to furnish the other fish markets of the world, and thereby exercise a competition which must inevitably prejudice Newfoundland exporters. It must be remembered, in contrast with the foregoing, that United States fishing craft, before the conclusion of the treaty of Washington, could only avail themselves of the coast of Newfoundland for obtaining a supply of wood and water, for shelter, and for necessary repairs in case of accident, and for no other purpose whatever. They therefore prosecuted the bank fishery under great disadvantages, notwithstanding which, owing to the failure of the United States local fisheries, and the consequent necessity of providing new fishing grounds, the bank fisheries have developed into a lucrative source of employment to the fishermen of the United States.

That this position is appreciated by those actively engaged in the bank fishery is attested by the statement of competent witnesses, whose evidence will be laid before the commission.

And in the reply of the British Government, referring to the same Newfoundland fisheries, is the following declaration: As regards the herring fishery on the coast of Newfoundland, it is availed of to a considerable extent by the United States fishermen, and evidence will be adduced of large exportations by them in American vessels, particularly from Fortune Bay and the neighborhood, both to European and their own markets.

The presence of the United States fishermen upon the coast of Newfoundland, so far from being an advantage, as is assumed in the answer, operates most prejudicially to Newfoundland fishermen. Bait is not thrown overboard to attract the fish, as asserted, but the United States bank-fishing vessels, visiting the coast in such large numbers as they do for the purpose of obtaining bait, sweep the coast, creeks, and inlets, thereby diminishing the supply of bait for local catch and scaring it from the grounds, where it would otherwise be an attraction for cod.

In support of these views, the most abundant testimony was produced by the British Government, showing the extent of the United States herring fishery, the character and construction of the seines used, the time when the vessels came and left, and the employment of the native fishermen by the United States vessels. And it follows unanswerably that upon the existence of that fishery between the months of October and April (the very time prohibited by the colonial law), and upon the use of just such seines as were used by the complainants in this case (the very seines forbidden by the colonial law), and because the increasing direct fishery of the United States vessels was interfering with native methods and native profits, the British Government demanded and received compensation for the damages thus alleged to proceed from “the liberty to take fish of every kind” secured by the treaty.

This Government cannot anticipate that the British Government will now contend that the time and method for which it asked and received compensation are forbidden by the terms of the very treaty under which it made the claim and received the payment. Indeed, the language of Lord Salisbury justifies the Government of the United States in drawing the conclusion that between itself and Her Britannic Majesty’s Govenment there is no substantial difference in the construction of the privileges of the treaty of 1871, and that in the future the colonial regulation of the fisheries with which, as far as their own interests are concerned, we have neither right nor desire to intermeddle, will not be allowed to modify or affect the rights which have been guaranteed to citizens of the United States.

You will therefore say to Lord Salisbury that the Government of the United States considers the engagements of the treaty of 1871 contravened by the local legislation of Newfoundland, by the prohibition of the use of seines, by the closing of the fishery with seines between October and April, by the forbidding of fishing for the purpose of exportation between December and April, by the prohibition to fish on Sunday, by the allowance of nets of only a specified mesh, and by the limitation of the area of fishing between Gape Bay and Cape Chapeau Bouge. Of course, this is only upon the supposition that such laws are considered as applying to United States fishermen; as local regulations for native fishermen, we have no concern with them. The contravention consists in excluding United States fishermen during the very times in which they have been used to pursue this industry, and forbidding the methods by which alone it can be profitably carried on. The exclusion of the time from October to April covers the only season in which frozen herring can be procured, while the prohibition of the seines would interfere with the vessels, who, occupied in cod-fishing during the summer, go to Fortune Bay in the winter, and would consequently have to make a complete change in their fishing gear, or depend entirely upon purchase from the natives for their supply. The prohibition of work on Sunday is impossible under the conditions of the fishery. The vessels must be at Fortune Bay at a certain time, and leave for market at a certain time. The entrance of the schools of herring is uncertain, and the time they stay equally so. Whenever they come they must be caught, and the evidence in this very case shows that after Sunday, the 6th of January, there was no other influx of these fish, and that prohibition on that day would have been equivalent to shutting out the fishermen for the season.

If I am correct in the views hitherto expressed, it follows that the United States Government must consider the United States fishermen as engaged in a lawful industry from which they were driven by lawless violence at great loss and damage to them; and that as this was in violation of rights guaranteed by the treaty of Washington, between Great Britain and the United States, they have reasonable ground to expect at the hands of Her Britannic Majesty’s Government proper compensation for the loss they have sustained. The United States Government of course desires to avoid an exaggerated estimate of the loss which has been actually sustained, but thinks you will find the elements for a fair calculation in the sworn statements of the owners, copies of which are herewith sent. You will find in the printed pamphlet which accompanies this, and which is the statement submitted to this Department on behalf of twenty of the vessels, the expense of each vessel in preparation for the fishery and her estimated loss and damage. The same statement with regard to the two vessels New England and Ontario, not included in this list of twenty, you will find attached hereto, thus making a complete statement for the twenty-two vessels which were in Fortune Bay on the 6th January, 1878, and the Government of the United States sees no reason to doubt the accuracy of these estimates. I find upon examining the testimony of one of the most intelligent of the Nowfoundland witnesses called before the Halifax Commission by the British Government, Judge Bennett, formerly Speaker of the Colonial House, and himself largely interested in the business, that he estimates the Fortune Bay business in frozen herring, in the former years of purchase, at 20,000 to 25,000 barrels for the season and that it was increasing, and this is confirmed by others.

The evidence in this case shows that the catch which the United States fishing fleet had on this occasion actually realized was exceptionally large, and would have supplied profitable cargoes for all of them. When to this is added the fact that the whole winter was lost and these vessels compelled to return home in ballast; that this violence had such an effect on this special fishery that in the winter of 1878–’79 it has been almost entirely abandoned, and the former fleet of twenty-six vessels has been reduced to eight, none of whom went provided with seines, but were compelled to purchase their fish of the inhabitants of Newfoundland, the United States Government is of opinion that $105,305.02 may be presented as an estimate of the loss as claimed, and you will consider that amount as being what this Government will regard as adequate compensation for loss and damage.

In conclusion, I would not be doing justice to the wishes and opinions of the United States Government if I did not express its profound regret at the apparent conflict of interests which the exercise of its treaty privileges appears to have developed. There is no intention on the part of this government that these privileges should be abused, and no desire that their full and free enjoyment should harm the colonial fishermen. While the differing interests and methods of the shore fishery and the vessel fishery make it impossible that the regulation of the one should be entirely given to the other, yet if the mutual obligations of the treaty of 1871 are to be maintained, the United States Government would gladly co-operate with the Government of Her Britannic Majesty in any effort to make those regulations a matter of reciprocal convenience and right; a means of preserving the fisheries at their highest point of production, and of conciliating a community of interest by a just proportion of advantages and profits.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Appendix A to No. 347.]

Messrs. Foster and Trescott to the Secretary of State.

To the Hon. The Secretary of State:

Sir: We have to acknowledge the receipt of Lord Salisbury’s replies to your communications in reference to the attack upon the United States fishing-vessels in Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, with the affidavits inclosed.

After the most careful examination of these affidavits and a scrutinizing review of the affidavits made by the United States fishermen in support of their complaint, we cannot discover any facts or contradictions which discredit their history of the transaction.

There seems to be no dispute as to the following facts:

1. That twenty-two vessels, viz: Fred. P. Frye, Mary M., Lizzie and Namari, Edward E. Webster, W. E. MacDonald, Crest of the Wave, F. A. Smith, Hereward, Moses Adams, Charles E. Warren, Moro Castle, Wildfire, Maud and Erne, Isaac Rich, Bunker Hill, Bonanza, H. M. Rogers, Moses Knowlton, John W. Bray, Maud B. Wetherell, New England, and Ontario, went from Gloucester to Fortune Bay in the winter of 1877–’78 for the purpose of procuring herring, as was their usual custom, and a they were entitled to do under the treaty of 1871.

2. That previous to that winter the United States fishermen had always purchased their herring of the Newfoundlanders, paying them in money or provisions, and a large and profitable trade had sprung up between the Americans and the inhabitants. The value of this trade to the inhabitants of Newfoundland clearly appears in the following extract from the British case before the Halifax Commission:

“It is not at all probable that, possessing as they now do the right to take herring and caplin for themselves on all parts of the Newfoundland coasts, they will continue to purchase as heretofore, and they will thus prevent the local fishermen, especially those of Fortune Bay, from engaging in a very lucrative employment, which formerly occupied them during a portion of the winter season for the supply of the United States market.”

Furthermore, in the affidavits of the Newfoundland fishermen forwarded by Lord Salisbury, it is plainly admitted that the only way in which the local fishermen can dispose of their herring is by selling them to the Americans.

In January, 1878, however, for the first time, the American vessels carried with them larger seines, in order to take their own herring and save the expense of purchasing from the Newfoundlanders.

Captain Malonson, of the schooner Crest of the Wave, in his affidavit, says:

“The Newfoundland fishermen have for years been in the habit of selling all the herring to American vessels. I have been there eight years, and I have always bought my herring or engaged the Newfoundlanders to take them for me, paying them in cash. This has been the universal practice of American vessels. This year we carried the large mackerel seines we used in summer for taking mackerel. These seines will take from two to five thousand barrels at a haul, and the herring are better taken in this way. As most of the Newfoundlanders fish with gill-nets, our manner of seining would take away from them the monopoly of the herring trade.”

The truth of Captain Malonson’s affidavit, and that of the other American captains, is shown by the British affidavits:

“The Americans never used a seine before that day; they always employed the English to use their seines, and bought fish from the English.” (Deposition of John Saunders.)

“The Americans do not bar fish. This was the first time I ever knew them to do so. They usually buy the fish from the Newfoundlanders, and also barter flour and pork for them.” (Deposition of Mark Bolt.)

“We all consider it to be the greatest loss to us for the Americans to bring those large seines to catch herring. The seines will hold 2,000 or 3,000 barrels of herring, and if the soft weather continues, they are obliged to keep them in the seines for sometimes two or three weeks until the frost comes, and by this means they deprive the poor fishermen of the bay of their chance of catching any with their small nets, and thus, when they have secured a sufficient quantity of their own, they refuse to buy of the natives.” (Deposition of John Tharnelly.)

“They would have probably frightened the rest away, and it would have been useless for the English to stay, for the little left for them to take they could not have sold.” (Deposition of John Cluett.)

The evidence offered by Her Majesty’s Government before the Halifax Commission fully bears out the above affidavits and shows that previously to 1877 the so-called Newfoundland herring fishery was merely a purchase by the Americans of fish caught by the Newfoundlanders, and no attempt had ever been made by the Americans to take the fish themselves; that in the winter of 1877–’78 the American vessels, taking advantage of their rights under the treaty of Washington, carried down with them seines in order to take their own herring, and that the consequent loss of a valuable trade to the inhabitants, as foreseen by the British agent at the Halifax Commmission, had taken place.

3. That these vessels waited for several weeks (from about December 15, 1877, to January 6, 1878) for the expected arrival of schools of herring in Fortune Bay.

4. That on Sunday, January 6, 1878, the herring entered the bay in great numbers, and that four of the vessels sent their boats with seines to commence fishing operations, and the others were proceeding to follow.

5. That the parties thus seining were compelled, by a large and violent mob of the inhabitants of Newfoundland, to take up their seines, discharge the fish already inclosed, and abandon their fishery; and that in one case, at least, the seine was absolutely destroyed. Both the British and American affidavits give substantially the same account of this transaction.

6. That these seines were being used in the interest of all United States vessels waiting for cargoes in the harbor, and that the catch undisturbed would have been sufficient to load them all with profitable cargoes. The great quantity of fish in the harbor, and the fact that the American vessels, if permitted to fish, would have all obtained full cargoes, is admitted in the British deposition.

“If the Americans had been allowed to secure all the herrings in the bay for themselves, which they could have done that day, they would have filled all their vessels, and the neighboring fishermen would have lost all chance on the following week day.” (Deposition of James Searwell.)

“The Americans, by hauling herring that day, when the Englishmen could not, were robbing them of their lawful and just chance of securing their share in them; and, further, had they secured all they had barred, they would, I believe, have filled every vessel of theirs in the bay.” (Deposition of John duett.)

See also the affidavits of the American captains.

7. That in consequence of this violence all the vessels abandoned the fishing grounds; some without cargoes, some with very small cargoes purchased from the natives, and that their voyages were a loss to their owners.

8. That the seining was conducted at a distance from any land or fishing privilege in the occupation of any British subject. (See affidavits Willard G. Rode, Charles Dagle, and Michael B. Murray.)

9. That none of the vessels of the United States made any further attempts to fish, but three or four which were delayed in the neighborhood purchased small supplies of herring. (See British depositions of John Saunders and. Silas Fudge, wherein it is stated that the American vessels only remained a few days, and that after January 6 no fish came into the harbor.) All the American affidavits show that the United States vessels were afraid to use their seines after this, and that they left almost immediately, most of them coming home in ballast.

10. That this violence has had such an effect on this special fishing industry that in the present winter of 1878–’79 it has been almost entirely abandoned, and last winter’s fleet of twenty-six (26) has been reduced to eight (8), and none of these have gone provided with seines, but they will all be compelled to purchase their fish of the inhabitants of Newfoundland. (See statement of the collector of the port of Gloucester.)

In support of these facts we append hereto— 1. A list of the vessels whose owners we represent.

2. The affidavits of the masters and crews of the same vessels.

3. Sworn statements of the owners as to the actual expenses of each vessel upon the interrupted voyage, the average profit of their previous voyages, and the loss of cargoes consequent upon their forcible expulsion in this case.

4. Statements of the collector of the port of Gloucester, giving the number of vessels engaged in the Newfoundland herring-fishery in the winters of 1877–’78 and 1878–’79.

In the dispatch of Lord Salisbury, dated August 23, 1878, the British Government assert that “the United States fishermen on this occasion had committed three distinct breaches of the law,” as stated in the report of Captain Sullivan, viz: “1. That the Americans were using seines for catching herring on the 6th of January, 1878, in direct violation of Title XXVII, chapter 102, section 1, of the consolidated statutes of Newfoundland, viz: ‘No person shall haul or take herring by or in a seine or other such contrivance on or near any part of the coast of this colony or of its dependencies, or in any of the bays, harbors, or other places therein, at any time between the 20th day of October and the 25th day of April.’

“2. That the American captains were setting and putting out seines and hauling and taking herring on Sunday, the 6th of January, in direct violation of section 4, chapter 7, of the act passed 26th April, 1876, entitled ‘An act to amend the law relating to the coast fisheries,’ viz: ‘No person shall between the hours of twelve o’clock on Saturday night and twelve o’clock on Sunday night haul or take any herring, caplin, or squid with net, seines, bunts, or any such contrivance for the purpose of such hauling or taking.’

“3. That they were barring fish in direct violation of the continuance of the same act, Title XXVII, chapter 102, section 1, of the consolidated statutes of Newfoundland, ‘or at any time use a seine or other contrivance for the catching or taking of herrings, except by way of shooting and forthwith hauling the same.’”

Leaving to your own consideration the general question whether or not colonial legislatures can enact any laws or local regulations which will in any way control or limit the United States fisherman while pursuing his avocation under the treaty of Washington, we desire to call your attention to the full text of the laws alleged to be infringed (copies of which, as well as of an amendment passed April, 1877, are herewith inclosed).

Title XXXVII, chap. 102, of the consolidated acts of Newfoundland, provides— “Section 1. That no person shall take herring on the coast of Newfoundland by a seine or other such contrivance at any time between the 20th day of October and the 12th day of April in any year, or at any time use a seine except by way of shooting and forthwith hauling the same.

“Sec. 2. That no person shall, any time between the 20th day of December and the 1st day of April, in any year, catch or take herring with seines of less than 2f inches mesh, &c.

“Sec. 4. No person shall, between the 20th day of April and the 20th day of October, in any year, haul, catch, or take herring or other bait for exportation within one mile, measured by the shore or across the water, of any settlement situated between Gape Chapeau Rouge and Point Enragée, near Gape Ray.”

Section 28 provides that—

“Nothing in this chapter shall affect the rights and privileges granted by treaty to the subjects of any state or power in amity with Her Majesty.”

The twenty-eighth section of this act is not referred to by Captain Sulivan in his report, and seems to have escaped the notice of Lord Salisbury. The enforcement of this act would deprive us of all the privileges which the British Government valued so highly, and for which the United States has paid the immense sum of five million five hundred thousand dollars, one million of which is understood to be allowed to Newfoundland.

By sections 1 and 2 we are prohibited from securing herring in any way from October to April, and limited as to the manner and method of fishing at all other times of the year. The American fishing vessel, being employed in the mackerel fishery in the summer and in the herring fishery in the winter, uses the same seines for both, and cannot and should not be compelled to comply with local regulations as to the size, shape, and manner of using these seines, whether they are or are not just and proper when applied to the native fishermen living near the fishing grounds. But it appears, from Captain Sulivan’s report and from the British depositions that these laws were unknown as well as unenforced in Fortune Bay.

There is another section of this act which does not concern the present case, but which, if enforced, would almost totally deprive the United States cod-fishing vessels of their rights under the treaty of 1871. The right to obtain fresh bait on the coast of Newfoundland for use on the Grand Banks during the summer months was claimed by the British Government to be of immense value to our fishermen, and was so considered by the arbitrators in making their award. But section 4 prohibits the taking of bait for exportation during the summer months for a long distance along the southern coast of the island, comprising the whole of Placentia Bay, the nearest and most favorite resort of our fishermen from the Grand Banks after bait. It is true this law has not as yet been enforced, but there is no guaranty that it may not be at any time. During the past session the Newfoundland legislature have had under consideration a law prohibiting the sale of bait to the American fishermen, and placing a heavy duty on all ice sold to them for the purpose of preserving bait.

The section IV, act of April 26, 1876, quoted by Lord Salisbury and Captain Sulivan, is as follows:

“No person shall between the hours of twelve o’clock on Saturday night and twelve O’clock on Sunday night haul or take any herring, caplin, or squid, with nets, seines, bunts, or any such contrivance, or set or put out any such net, seine, bunt, or contrivance for the purpose of such hauling or taking.”

This law only prohibits the taking of certain kinds of fish on Sunday, viz, herring, caplin, or squid, and does not apply to cod or halibut, which the British evidence before the Halifax Commission endeavored to show were taken almost entirely within a short distance from the shore. By the amendment of 1877, this act was extended so as to apply to the taking of all fish for bait.

We deem it unnecessary to add to this statement any discussion as to the principles involved in Lord Salisbury’s dispatches. The only fact to which we would further ask your attention is, that the very use of the fisheries for which we now contend was admitted to be ours under the treaty by the British Government before the Halifax Commission, and made the basis of the award of that tribunal.

The language of the treaty is as follows:

“It is agreed by the high contracting parties that in addition to the liberties secured to the United States fishermen by the convention between the United States and Great Britain, signed at London on 20th day of October, 1818, of taking, curing, and drying fish on certain coasts of the British North American colonies therein defined, the inhabitants of the United States shall have, in common with the subjects of Her Britannic Majesty, the liberty, for the term of years mentioned in Art. XXXIII of this treaty, to take fish of every kind except shell-fish on the sea-coast and shores, and in the bays, harbors, and creeks of the provinces of Quebec,” &c.

It must be borne in mind that “liberty in common” has been valued by the Halifax Commission at $5,500,000, and the price of its enjoyment has been paid. That award and that payment were made upon the representation of the British Government that the treaty gave certain privileges to the United States fishermen, the exercise of which inflicted upon the original proprietor a certain amount of loss and damage which in justice to their interests required such compensation. This exercise, therefore, as stated in the British case, as evidenced in the British testimony, as maintained in the British argument, for which the British Government demanded and received compensation, is the British construction of the extent of “the liberty in common” guaranteed by the treaty.

The British case states the argument as to the Newfoundland fisheries in the following language:

“It is asserted on the part of Her Majesty’s Government that the actual use which may be made of this privilege at the present moment is not so much in question as the actual value of it to those who may, if they will, use it. It is possible, and even probable, that the United States fishermen may at any moment avail themselves of the privilege of fishing in Newfoundland inshore waters to a much larger extent than they do at present; but even if they should not do so, it would not relieve them from the obligation of making the just payment for a right which they have acquired subject to the condition of making that payment. The case maybe not inaptly illustrated by the somewhat analogous one of a tenancy of shooting or fishing privileges; it is not because the tenant fails to exercise the rights which he has acquired by virtue of his lease that the proprietor should be debarred from the recovery of his rent.

“There is a marked contrast, to the advantage of the United States citizens, between the privilege of access to fisheries the most valuable and productive in the world and the barren right accorded to the inhabitants of Newfoundland of fishing in the exhausted and preoccupied waters of the United States north of the 39th parallel of north latitude, in which there is no field for lucrative operations, even if British subjects desired to resort to them , and there are strong grounds for believing that year by year, as United States fishermen resort in greater numbers to the coasts of Newfoundland for the purpose of procuring bait and supplies, they will become more intimately acquainted with the resources of the inshore fisheries and their unlimited capacity for extension and development. As a matter of fact, United States vessels have, since the Washington treaty came into operation, been successfully engaged in these fisheries; and it is but reasonable to anticipate that, as the advantages to be derived from them become more widely known, larger numbers of United States fishermen will engage in them.

“A participation by fishermen of the United States in the freedom of these waters must, notwithstanding their wonderfully reproductive capacity, tell materially on the local catch, and, while affording to the United States fishermen a profitable employment, must seriously interfere with local success. The extra amount of bait also which is required for the supply of the United States demand for the bank fishery must have the effect of diminishing the supply of cod for the inshores, as it is well known that the presence of that fish is caused by the attraction offered by a large quantity of bait fishes, and as this quantity diminishes the cod will resort in fewer number to the coast. The effect of this diminution may not in all probability be apparent for some years to come, and whilst United States fishermen will have the liberty of enjoying the fisheries for several years in their present teeming and remunerative state, the effects of overfishing may, after their right to participate in them has lapsed, become seriously prejudicial to the interest of the local fishermen.

“II. The privilege of procuring bait and supplies, refitting, drying, transshipping, &c.

“Apart from the immense value to United States fishermen of participation in Newfoundland inshore fisheries must be estimated the important privilege of procuring bait for the prosecution of the bank and deep-sea fisheries, which are capable of unlimited expansion. With Newfoundland as a basis of operations, the right of procuring bait, refitting their vessels, drying and curing fish, procuring ice in abundance for the preservation of bait, liberty of transshiping their cargoes, &c., an almost continuous prosecution of the bank fishery is secured to them. By means of these advantages United States fishermen have acquired by the treaty of Washington all the requisite facilities for increasing their fishing operations to such an extent as to enable them to supply the demand for fish food in the United States markets, and largely to furnish the other fish markets of the world, and thereby exercise a competition which must inevitably prejudice Newfoundland exporters. It must be remembered, in contrast with the foregoing, that United States fishing craft before the conclusion of the treaty of Washington could only avail themselves of the coast of Newfoundland for obtaining a supply of wood and water, for shelter, and for necessary repairs in case of accident, and for no other purpose whatever; they therefore prosecuted the bank fishery under great disadvantages, notwithstanding which, owing to the failure of the United States local fisheries and the consequent necessity of providing new fishing grounds, the bank fisheries have developed into a lucrative source of employment to the fishermen of the United States. That this position is appreciated by those actively engaged in the bank fisheries is attested by the statements of competent witnesses, whose evidence will be laid before the commission.”

And in reply of the British Government, refer ing to the same Newfoundland fisheries, is the following declaration:

“As regards the herring fishery on the coast of Newfoundland, it is availed of to a considerable extent by the United States fishermen, and evidence will be adduced of large exportations by them in American vessels, particularly from Fortune Bay and the neighborhood, both to European and their own markets.

“The presence of United States fishermen upon the coast of Newfoundland, so far from being an advantage, as is assumed in the answer, operates most prejudically to Newfoundland fishermen. Bait is not thrown overboard to attract the fish, as asserted, but the United States bank fishing vessels, visiting the coast in such large numbers as they do for the purpose of obtaining bait, sweep the coast, creeks, and inlets, thereby diminishing the supply of bait for local catch, and scaring it from the grounds where it would otherwise be an attraction for cod.”

In support of these views, the most abundant and complete testimony was produced by the British Government, showing the extent of the United States herring fishery, the character and construction of the seines used, the time when the vessels came and left, and the employment of the native fishermen by the United States vessels. And it follows unanswerably that upon the existence of that fishery between the months of October and April, and upon the use of just such seines as were used by the complainants in this case, and because the increasing direct fishery of the United States vessels was interfering with native methods and native profits, the British Government demanded and received compensation for the damages thus alleged to proceed from “the liberty in common to take fish of every kind” secured by the treaty. With what justice can the British Government now contend that the time and the method for which they asked and received compensation are forbidden by the terms of the very treaty under which they made the claim and received the payment?

In conclusion, and in reference to the suggestion of Lord Salisbury that the United States fishermen were bound to abstain from the use of the fishery until due representation had been made to Her Britannic Majesty’s Government, we would say, without argument as to the correctness of any such assumption, that as a fact this is just what the United States fishermen did. They were engaged in the prosecution of a lawful industry, in a method which was recognized as lawful by the award of the Halifax Commission, the privilege to exercise which their government had agreed to pay for. They were forcibly stopped, not by legal authority, but by mob violence. They made no resistance; withdrew from the fishing grounds; represented the outrage to their government; have not returned to Newfoundland, and are waiting in perfect confidence that the government will vindicate their rights, and see that just compensation is made for their losses.

Respectfully,

DWIGHT FOSTER,

WM. HENRY TRESCOT,
Counsel for Claimants.

Annexes to the foregoing letter of Messrs. Foster and Trescot.

A.

List of vessels.

No. Vessels. Owners.

1. Fred. P. Frye Brown, Seavy & Co.

2. Mary M. Brown, Seavy & Co.

3. Lizzie and Namari John F. Wonson & Co.

4. Edward E. Webster Dennis and Ayer.

5. William E. Donald William Parsons, 2d, & Co.

6. Creast of the Wave William B. Coombs.

7. F. A. Smith Plummer & Friend.

8. Hereward James Mansfield’s Sons.

9. Moses Adams Samuel Lane & Bro.

10. Charles E. Warren Peter Smith.

11. Moro Castle Hardy & Allen.

12. Wildfire Andrew Leighton.

13. Maud and Effie W. H. Gardner & S. G. Bole.

14. Isaac Rich Walen & Allen.

15. Bunker Hill Walen & Allen.

16. Bonanza H. C. Allen.

17. Moses Knowlton John Low.

18. H. M. Rogers Rowe & Jordan.

19. John W. Bray J. F. Wonson & Co.

20. Maud B. Wetherell Geo. Dennis & Co.

B.

Expenses and claims.

No. Vessels. Expenses. Claims.

1. Fred D. Frye $1,700 00 $3,700 00

2. Mary M 2,180 53 5,680 50

3. Lizzie and Namari 3,133 65 5,564 40

4. Edward E. Webster. 1,754 50 4,654 50

5. William E. MacDonald. 2,153 95 4,953 95

6. Creast of the Wave 2,619 04 4,619 04

7. F. A. Smith 2,495 50 4,895 50

8. Hereward 3,800 00 5,748 05

9. Moses Adams 1,586 05 4,586 05

This vessel also makes an additional claim for value of herring in her net, beside her full cargo 4,000 00

10. Charles E. Warren 2,180 00 4,680 00

11. Moro Castle 2,153 18 4,134 19

12. Wildfire 1,530 97 6,309 82

13. Maud and Effie 2,379 13 4,379 13

14. Isaac Rich 1,150 09 2,491 09

15. Bunker Hill 1,217 50 2,677 00

16. Bonanza 2,855 94 3,022 17

17. Moses Knowlton 2,661 60 5,356 60

18. H. M. Rogers 1,946 13 5,876 30

19. John W. Bray 2,714 52 3,589 07

20. Maud B. Wetherell 2,618 64 2,521 34

C.

statements of losses.

1. Schooner Fred. P. Frye.

This vessel was chartered by Brown, Seavy & Co. for a trip to Fortune Bay for herring, in January, 1878.

They paid the owners of the schooner for the charter $800 00

Expenses of the voyage, crew’s wages, provisions, &c., amounted to. 1,350 00

Making the amount actually paid out in cash 2,150 00

Credit partial cargo of herring sold 450 00

1,700 00

Add probable profit calculated from preceding trips 2,000 00

3,700 00

BROWN, SEAVEY & CO.,

By WM. SEAVEY.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Suffolk, ss:

December 28, 1878.

Then personally appeared the above-named William Seavey and made oath that the foregoing statement by him subscribed was true, before me.

ALFEED D. FOSTER,
Notary Public.

2. Schooner Mary M.

Bill of expense on a voyage to Newfoundland for herring from December 6, 1877, to February 26, 1878.

Dr.

Ship stores $295 35

Lumber at Lahave 85 25

Custom-house fees 58 75

Ballast 58 50

Officers’ and crew’s wages 677 68

Insurance 525 00

Cargo for trade 400 00

Riggers’ and blacksmith bill 80 00

Average profits of Newfoundland voyages made by schooner Mary M., Captain Murray, for ten seasons (except the year 1876) 2,180 53

3,500 00

5,680 50

Cr.

By return cargo $200 00

5,480 50

MICHAEL B. MURRAY.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Personally appeared M. B. Murray and made oath to the truth of the statement signed by him, before me.

[seal.] AARON PARSONS, N. P.

3. Schooner Lizzie and Namari.

Actual expense of voyage to Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, January, 1878.

Port charges $44 26

Store account 273 01

Outfits for voyage 1,245 48

Charter of vessel 683 33

Wood and coal 22 30

Crew’s wages 526 34

Captain’s wages 273 06

Insurance on outfits 65 87

3,133 65

Profit compared with previous years 3,000 00

6,135 65

Deduct merchandise and cash returned 569 25

5,564 40

This vessel was hired by us, and we actually paid in cash the amount placed in the above account as charter.

JOHN F. WONSON & CO.

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Personally appeared Frank A. Wonson, a member of the firm of J. F. Wonson & Co., and made oath to the truth of the statement signed by him.

Before me.

[l. s.] AARON PARSONS, N. P.

4. Schooner Edward E. Webster.

Expenses, actual money paid out in voyage to Fortune Bay, January, 1878.

Captain, mate, and crew’s wages $720 00

Insurance 560 00

Ballast 60 00

Lumber for platform and stage 62 50

Provisions 250 00

Refitting in Newfoundland 100 00

1,754 50

A preceding trip of this vessel to Fortune Bay for herring in the year 1875 netted 5,400 00

The expenses were 2,500 00

Leaving a profit of 2,900 00

This vessel was driven off without obtaining any herring, and her voyage resulted in a loss of— (1.) The actual expenses 1,754 50

(2.) Profit on voyage, provided the vessel did no better than the previous year 2,900 00

4,654 50

DENNIS & SON.

Per J. G. DENNIS.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 20, 1878.

Then personally appeared the above-named George Dennis and made oath to the truth of the foregoing statement before me.

ALFRED D. FOSTER,
Notary Public.

5. Schooner William E. MacDonald.

Actual expenses, money paid out for trip to Fortune Bay, January, 1878:

Store bill 297 83

Railway and carpenter 34 86

Sailmaker 465 50

Painting. 34 76

Blacksmith 4 45

Captain’s bill 159 98

Wages 670 50

Insurance 412 00

Sundry bills 74 07

Total actual expenses 2,153 95

Probable profit, calculated on an average of preceding years 2,800 00

Total loss 4,953 95

WM. PARSONS, 2d, &c.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Personally appeared William Parsons, 2d, and made oath the statement made and signed by him is true.

Before me,

[l. s.] AARON PARSONS, N. P.

6. Schooner Crest of the Wave.

Actual expenses of the trip to Fortune Bay for herring in the month of January, 1878:

Total loss 4,953 95

Store bill $575 19

Crew’s wages 674 00

Insurance 350 00

Outfit for vessel, &c 944 85

Ballast 75 00

2,619 04

The probable profit on a trip for herring to Newfoundland, calculated from preceding years $2,000 00

Add actual expenses 2,619 04

4,619 04

WILLIAM B. COOMBS.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 20, 1878.

Then personally appeared the above named William B. Coombs and made oath that the foregoing statement by him subscribed was true.

Before me,

ALFRED D. FOSTER,
Notary Public.

7. Schooner F. A. Smith.

Actual expenses of voyage to Fortune Bay for herring, in January, 1878; money paid out:

Captain and crew’s wages $710 00

Insurance 470 00

Ballast 55 00

Lumber 60 50

Provisions 260 00

Refitting at Newfoundland 90 00

1,645 50

This vessel was hired for the trip and $850.00 was actually paid for the charter 850 00

2,495 50

Profit of a fair average voyage, calculated on previous voyages 2,400 00

4,895 50

JOSEPH FRIEND.

GEORGE W. PLUMMER.

B. T. FRIEND.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 20, 1878.

Then personally appeared the above-named Joseph Friend and made oath that the foregoing statement by him subscribed was true.

Before me,

ALFRED D. FOSTER,
Notary Public.

8. Schooner Hereward.

The actual expenses of this vessel in the voyage to Fortune Bay, in January, 1878 were: Outfit for voyage $1,900 00

Wages four months 1,000 00

Provisions 400 00

Outfit for vessel, fitting out, &c 400 00

Insurance 600 00

4,300 00

Less part of outfit returned 500 00

3,800 00

If this vessel had made a fairly prosperous voyage, her profit would have been 2,000 00

5,800 00

Less small amount of herring brought back 62 00

5,748 00

A seine was carried down by this vessel which was destroyed by the natives who were hired to set it.

JAMES MANSFIELD & SONS,

By ALFRED MANSFIELD.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 20, 1878.

Then personally appeared the above-named Alfred Mansfield and made oath that the foregoing statement by him subscribed was true.

Before me,

ALFRED D. FOSTER,
Notary Public.

9. Account of the schooner Moses Adams’ herring voyage to Newfoundland in 1877.

Outfits for voyage $1,003 83

Cash paid out in British Provinces for sundries 110 00

Cash paid for herring 199 00

Insurance 549 60

Wages paid captain and crew 744 87

82,607 30

Cash received for herring sold 1,021 25

1,586 05

Probable profit if arrived home with a full cargo 3,000 00

4,586 05

Value of herring lost by mob tripping the seine which would have been sold to other vessels waiting to purchase 4,000 00

Total loss to the schooner caused by the mob 8,586 05

memorandum.

This schooner’s seine was filled with herring when the mob tripped it, and they then endeavored to destroy the seine, but were prevented by the captain and crew, at the peril of their lives.

We had this schooner built for mackerel fishing in summer, and Newfoundland herring fishing in winter. She is all furnished with herring seines and boats for such business, but having been deprived the privilege of seining herring in Newfoundland, and by mobs, we have been obliged to abandon the enterprise, causing a great loss to us.

SAMUEL LANE & BRO.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

January 3, 1879.

Sworn to before me this 3d day of January, A. D. 1879.

[seal.] AARON PARSONS,
Notary Public.

10. Expenses of the schooner Chas. E. Warren on a voyage to Newfoundland in the winter of 1877–’78.

Outfits.

160 hogsheads salt $270 00

900 barrels 700 00

Outfits for voyage 1,400 00

Crew’s wages 1,400 00

Insurance 250 00

Port charges 30 00

4,050 00

400 barrels herring (cash paid) 560 00

4,610 00

Deduct return cargo:

800 barrels herring 2,400 00

30 hogsheads salt 30 00

2,430 00

Expense, loss 2,180 00

500 barrels herring 2,500 00

Net loss 4,680

PETER SMITH.

State of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 14, 1878.

Personally appeared Peter Smith, and made oath to the truth of the foregoing account signed by him.

Before me.

[seal.] AARON PARSONS,
Notary Public.

11. Schooner Moro Castle.

Store bill, &c $191 46

Crew’s wages 521 72

Ballast 30 00

Insurance 420 00

Cargo or outfits 990 00

2,153 18

Profit 1874-’75 1,981 01

4,134 19

Schooner Moro Castle, Newfoundland voyage, 1877–’78.

MCKENZIE, HARDY & CO.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

December 12, 1878.

Personally appeared S. N. Hardy, and made oath to the truth of above statement before me.

[seal.] AAEON PARSONS,
Notary Public.

Account of Newfoundland voyage schooner Moro Castle, 1874–’75.

Store bill $183 01

Outfits 1,080 55

Customs fees, &c 14 50

Oakes V. Stevens’ bill 2 97

Baskets 6 80

Bill of ballast 11 20

Bill of lumber 5 65

Shovels 2 50

J. G. Tarr & Bro’s bill 20 17

Wood and coal 21 50

Telegraphing 3 36

Insurance 420 00

Crew’s wages 479 65

Captain’s wages 315 00

Capt. Nass’ bill 174 68

Expenses to New York 14 00

Use of chain 15 00

Commission on sales 550 00

3,320 34

Cr.

For sales of herring, &c 5,301 55

1,981 01

12. Schooner Wildfire.

Actual expenses in voyage to Fortune Bay in January, 1878.

Wages of captain and crew $628 27

Insurance 570 00

Ballast 58 00

Lumber and cost of erecting platform and stage 70 37

Provisions 204 33

1,530 97

The last preceding voyage of this vessel to Fortune Bay, January, 1875, she brought back a cargo of herring, which sold for 6,414 70

The expenses of that trip were 1,535 85

Leaving a profit of 4,878 85

As this vessel was driven away by the people of Newfoundland without obtaining a load of herring, the voyage resulted in a loss of— (1.) Money actually paid as expenses $1,530 97

(2.) Estimated profit, if the vessel did no better than last year 4,878 85

6,309 82

ANDREW LEIGHTON.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 20, 1878.

Then personally appeared the above-named Andrew Leighton, and made oath that the foregoing statement by him subscribed was true.

Before me.

ALFRED D. FOSTER,
Notary Public.

13. Schooner Maud and Effie.

Actual expenses as paid out on account of voyage to Fortune Bay, January, 1878.

Port charges, Newfoundland $20 40

Store account 253 16

Outfits for voyage 1,405 02

Lumber for scaffold 15 00

Ballast 40 00

Crew’s wages 650 00

Captain’s wages 375 00

Pilotage, Halifax 10 00

Insurance 375 00

Wood and coal 20 00

Railway 19 55

Loss on seine and gear 150 00

3,333 13

Deduct merchandise and cash returned 954 00

Loss on voyage 2,379 13

On account of the disturbance made by the British fishermen of Fortune Bay, in January, 1878, resulted in a loss, as follows: Loss on voyage as expenses $3,379 13

Profit on voyage as should have been, as compared with previous years 2,000 00

Making an actual loss of 5,379 13

Gloucester Fish Company.

WILLIAM H. GARDNER.

SAMUEL G. POOL.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 2, 1878.

Then personally appeared the above-named W. H. Gardner and Samuel Pool, and made oath that the foregoing statement by them subscribed was true.

Before me.

ALFRED D. FOSTER,
Notary Public.

14. Schooner Isaac Rich.

Newfoundland Trip, January, 1878.

Wages $795 80

Insurance 400 00

Store bill 213 71

Salt 322 88

Cash 103 23

Bill of herring 120 22

Cargo for trade 1,030 25

2,986 09

Sale of herring, 918 barrels, at $2 1,836 00

1,150 09

The cargo of the vessel had been contracted for at $3 per barrel, but on account of the delay they only brought $2 per barrel, leaving a loss of $918 00

Full cargo would have been 1,200 barrels, but on account of the disturbance did not obtain but 918, leaving a deficiency 282, which would have cost $423, were sold for $846, a loss of 428 00

2,491 09

MICHAEL WALEN.

Massachusetts,
Essex:

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Personally appeared Michael Walen, and made oath to the truth of the two foregoing statements signed by him.

Before me.

[l. s.] AARON PARSONS,
Notary Public.

15. Schooner Bunker Hill.

Newfoundland Trip, January, 1878.

Wages $797 25

Insurance 450 00

Salt 375 00

Cash 413 00

Cargo for trade 954 20

Store bill 190 05

3,179 50

Sale of 981 barrels of herring, at $2 1,962 00

1,217 50

The cargo of the vessel had been contracted for at rate of $3 per barrel, but on account of the dealy they brought $2 barrel, leaving a loss of 981 00

Full cargo would have been 1,300 barrels, but on account of disturbance did not obtain but 981 barrels, leaving a deficiency of 319, which would have cost $478.50, were sold for $957, leaving a loss of 478 50

Total 2,677 00

WALEN & ALLEN.

16. Schooner Bonanza.

The actual expenses of this vessel, including cash paid for wages on the voyage to Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, tor herring, in January, 1878, were $2,855 94

The last preceding trip of this vessel to Fortune Bay netted by sales of herring 4,606 25

The expenses of the trip were 3,465 02

Leaving a profit of 1,141 23

This vessel was driven off in 1878, and only obtained a partial cargo— (1.) Actual expense, 1878 $2,855 94

(2.) Profit on voyage provided the vessel did no better than on her previous voyage 1,141 23

3,997 17

Deduct value of partial cargo 975 00

Leaving a loss of 3,022 17

JOSEPH O. PROCTOR,
For self and other owners.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 21, 1878.

Personally appeared Joseph O. Proctor, and made oath to the truth of the above statement.

Before me.

[seal.] AARON PARSONS,
Notary Public.

17. Schooner Moses Knowlton.

Actual expenses of the trip to Fortune Bay for herring in the year 1877–’78: Wages of crew 1834 60

Ballast 100 00

Light-money 27 00

Store bill, provisions for crew, &c 350 00

Lumber for stage and fitting vessel 350 00

1,661 60

I am not the owner of this vessel, but hired her for this trip, paying for the charter 1,000 00

Actual expenses 2,661 60

Add probable profit, calculated average of previous years 3,000 00

Loss on trip. 5,661 60

Credit 180 barrels purchased of the inhabitants of Newfoundland (spoilt by delay) 305 00

5,356 60

JOHN LOW.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, Mass., December 23, 1878.

Personally appeared said John Low, and made oath to the truth of the foregoing statement signed by him before me.

[seal.] AARON PARSONS,
Notary Public.

18. Schooner Herbert M. Rogers.

Actual expenses, money paid out on account of voyage to Fortune Bay, January, 1878.

Customs 14 10

Store account 222 83

Outfit for voyage 1,278 00

Lumber for platform 6 00

Crew’s wages 613 65

Captain’s wages 360 00

Insurance 362 60

Wood and coal 17 50

Railway 18 50

Mainmast and setting up rigging 168 00

Use of chronometer 15 00

3,066 18

Deduct proceeds of the few barrels of herring brought back 1,120 00

Actual loss of voyage 1,946 18

In the last voyage to Fortune Bay the same vessel netted 6,285 70

The actual expenses were 2,355 53

Leaving a profit on the voyage of 3,930 17

The trip of January, 1878, to Fortune Bay, on account of the disturbance made by the British fishermen, resulted in a loss of— (1) Actual expenses $1,946 13

(2) Profit on the voyage provided the vessel did no better than in the previous year 3,930 17

5,876 30

ROWE & JORDAN,
Owners and Agents.

By WILLIAM H. JORDAN.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 2, 1878.

Then personally appeared the aforesaid William H. Jordan, and made oath that the foregoing statement by him subscribed was true, before me.

ALFRED D. FOSTER,
Notary Public.

19. Schooner John W. Bray.

Statement of trip to Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, January, 1878.

expense.

Port charges $46 32

Store account 227 18

Outfits for voyage 1,013 07

Wood and coal 20 14

Insurance 350 00

Crew’s wages 681 14

Captain’s wages 301 67

Loss on two lines and gear 175 00

2,714 52

Profit compared with previous years 2,400 00

5,114 52

Proceeds from part cargo of herring brought home 1,525 45

Balance 3,589 07

JOHN F. WONSON & CO.

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Personally appeared F. A. Wonson, a member of the firm of J. F. Wonson & Co., and made oath to the truth of the statement signed by him.

Before me,

[l. s.] AARON PARSONS, N. P.

20. Schooner Maud B. Wetherell.

Actual expenses of trip to Newfoundland for herring in January, 1878.

Store bill $205 00

Crew’s wages 821 72

Ballast 60 00

Insurance 475 00

Salt 325 48

800 barrels 600 00

Duties on barrel Newfoundland 60 00

Labor 45 76

Harbor dues 25 68

2,618 64

total expenses.

By the attack made by the inhabitants upon the seines, the captain was forced to purchase his herring for $1,179 20

This vessel was fitted out for 1,200 barrels; she was able to obtain only 800 in all.

Actual expenses $2,618 64

Money paid for fish 1,179 20

Loss of profit on 400 barrels, at $2 800 00

4,597 84

Credit:

By proceeds of hearing sold 2,067 50

Making a total loss of 2,521 34

GEORGE DENNIS & CO.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Personally appeared George Dennis, and made oath to the truth of the above statement signed by him.

Before me.

[seal.] AARON PARSONS,
Notary Public.

D.

Affidavits in reply.

Gloucester, December 10, 1878.

I, Charles Dagle, master of the American schooner Lizzie and Namari, of Rockport, district of Gloucester, do, on oath, depose and say, that I know Mr. Bolt, who resided in a hut or shanty near Tickle Beach, Newfoundland; that I was there on the 6th of January, 1878, and saw the hostile acts of the British fishermen. Mr. Bolt’s hut is about 150 yards back from the beach. I have been to Newfoundland fourteen successive years, and never heard of any persons claiming any rights on the beach, everybody using it in common. The three huts there are in the nature of squatter property, used only in the winter. Mr. Bolt never made any claim that I knew of; and the American seines were not used within 300 yards of Bolt’s place, except where the seines were hauled on the beach by British fishermen and destroyed. The seines that were obliged to be taken up were 500 yards or more from Bolt’s place. The seine of the F. A. Smith, Captain McDonald, was one-fourth of a mile away. Mr. Hickey, a resident of Fortune Bay, had his seine nearest to Bolt’s house. Mr. Hickey’s seine was the first seine set on the 6th of January, 1878, and the British fishermen attacked, him as well as the Americans.

CHARLES DAGLE.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 12, 1878.

Personally appeared Charles Dagle, and made oath to the truth of the above statement.

Before me.

[seal.] AARON PARSONS,
Notary Public.

Gloucester, December 10, 1878.

I, Willard G. Poole, master of the American schooner Maud and Effie, of Gloucester, do, on oath, depose and say, that I know Mr. Bolt, and also the location of his hut at Tickle Beach, Newfoundland; that I was there on the 6th of January, 1878, and saw and know of the operations of the American seines; that the hut of Mr. Bolt is fully 150 yards back from high-water mark from the beach; that I never heard or knew of any individual or body of men claiming any peculiar or particular rights on this-beach, nor was any one ever hindered from fishing, except on the occasion of the 6th of January, 1878, to my knowledge; there was no seine used by the Americans at any time on the beach or within 400 yards of Mr. Bolt’s hut, except the seines captured by the British fishermen, which were hauled on to the beach by them (the British fishermen) and cut to pieces and destroyed.

WILLARD G. POOLE.

Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 11, 1878.

Personally appeared before me the within-named Willard G. Poole, who subscribed and made oath that the within statement is true.

ADDISON CENTER,
Justice of the Peace.

I Michael B. Murray, master of the American schooner Mary M., of Gloucester, do, on oath, depose and say that I know Matthew Bolt, at Tickle Beach, Newfoundland; have known him to have a shanty there, and lives there winters, for the past four years. I never heard or knew of Mr. Bolt or any other person claiming any peculiar or particular rights on this beach, nor exercising any authority there, except the action of the mob on the 6th of January, 1878. Mr. Bolt’s shanty is about 150 yards, from high-water mark. The American seines were operated more than 400 feet and due south along the beach from Bolt’s hut.

MICHAEL B. MURRAY.

Massachusetts,
Essex ss:

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Sworn to this 23d day of December, A. D. 1878, before me,

[seal.] AARON PARSONS, N. P.

I, Michael B. Murray, of Gloucester, master of the American schooner Mary M., do hereby, on oath, depose and say that I have invariably made good voyages to Newfoundland, and, with the exception of 1876, have made a clear profit, over and above all expenses, of at least three thousand five hundred dollars for each voyage.

In the year 1875 I made $5,300, clear of all expenses, on my voyage to Newfoundland for herring. In 1874 I made $5,500, clear of all expense.

In the year 1876 I had a cargo of 1,445 barrels of salted herring; was very late in the season, and cleared only $2,000.

MICHAEL B. MURRAY.

Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, December 23, 1878.

Personally appeared M. B. Murray, and made oath to the truth of the above statement.

Before me.

[seal.] AARON PARSONS, N. P.

Gloucester, February 5, 1878.

I, Peter Smith, of Gloucester, master of the American schooner Charles C. Warren, of Gloucester, do, on oath, depose and say that I was at Tickle Beach, Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, on the 6th of January, 1878. That I had been to Labrador, from thence to Bay of Islands, and thence to Fortune Bay, for a load of herring. On the morning of the 6th of January, 1878, herring made their appearance in close proximity to the shore in great abundance. I was provided with two seines with which to take herring, and should have loaded my vessel and others on that day. I had my seine in the boat, and was preparing to use it when the attack was made on the other American seines and I saw them destroyed, and found that the mob of two or three hundred of the British fishermen were determined to destroy every seine, and I did not dare put my seine in the water. After this time I bought of the British fishermen about 400 barrels of herring, paying one dollar and forty cents per barrel. My vessel would carry 1,300 barrels, all of which I could have taken on the 6th of January at little or no cost to myself. I was about a fortnight buying 400 barrels of herring. I consider that my loss was at least $3,000, in addition to the expense of the voyage, by the hostile acts of the British fishermen.

PETER SMITH.

State of Massachusetts,
Essex ss;

Gloucester, December 14, 1878.

Personally appeared Peter Smith, and made oath to the truth of the above statement signed by him.

Before me.

[seal.] AARON PARSONS,
Notary Public.

E.

Official statement of Newfoundland herring fishery.

I, Fitz J. Babson, collector of customs for the district of Gloucester, do certify that the following-named schooners were employed in the Newfoundland herring fishery during seasons of 1877 and 1878.

Tons.

Sch. Herbert M. Rogers 78

Moses Adams 100

John W. Bray 83

Wildfire 109

Edward E. Webster 99

Hereward 90

Bunker Hill 101

Landseer 99

Isaac Rich 92

Ontario 91

New England 86

Frank A. Smith 77

Sch. Wm. E. McDonald 98

Moro Castle 89

Bonanza 137

Jennie A. Stubbs 198

Lizzie and Namari 94

Crest of the Wave 71

Moses Knowlton 111

Maude and Effie 85

Fred. P. Frye 85

Mary M 102

Maud B. Wetberell 108

Cunard 75

Charles C. Warren 109

Bellerophon 86

Vessels employed during season of 1878 and 1879 in Newfoundland fisheries.

Sch. John S. McQuinn 82

Falcon 72

New England 86

Rattler 83

Wildfire 109

Bunker Hill 101

Isaac Rich 92

Centennial 116

Witness my hand and seal this 10th day of January, 1879.
[seal.] F. J. BABSON,
Collector.

[Appendix B to No. 347.]

Messrs. Pew to Mr. Evarts.

Gloucester, Mass., March 7, 1878.

Sir: We herewith send to your Department our claim for loss sustained by us through the destruction of the seines of the American fishing schooners Ontario and New England belonging tons.

The particulars are fully set forth in said claim and the affidavits of the masters and crews of said schooners.

We earnestly hope that the Government of the United States will take such action in the premises as will secure to American vessel-owners, their masters and crews, the right to fish in British waters, granted them by the treaties of Great Britain with the United States. It is a matter of great importance to the fishing interest of New England, and especially to the people of Gloucester. We are not safe in sending vessels to fish in British waters, and, therefore, the rights granted to our people by the Washington treaty are of little value, while the rights granted by the United States to the subjects of Great Britain to bring fish to our markets free of duty is a great damage to our fisheries and of great value to the people of the British provinces.

With the fullest confidence that our application will receive due consideration,

We are, &c.,

JOHN PEW & SON.

P. S.—We also inclose you two printed copies of our petition and accompanying affidavits, thinking they may be a convenience to you.—J. P. & S.

To the honorable William M. Evarts,
Secretary of State:

Respectfully represent John Pew, Charles H. Pew, and John J. Pew, all of Gloucester, county of Essex, and commonwealth of Massachusetts, copartners under the firm style of John Pew & Son, that they are American citizens, and engaged in the fishing business at said Gloucester, and were and are Owners and fitters of fishing vessels.

That they are the sole owners of the American fishing schooners Ontario and New England, of said Gloucester, and were such owners in the months of November, December, and January last past.

That both of said schooners were fitted for the herring fisheries in the month of November, 1877, and for voyages to Newfoundland, and provided with seines for catching herring. That said schooner Ontario, whereof Peter McAulay was master, sailed on the first day of December, 1877, from said Gloucester, and the said schooner New England, whereof John Dago was master, on the twenty-eighth day of November, 1877; that both schooners had a full supply of men and outfits for said voyage. That said schooner Ontario, when she sailed from said Gloucester on said voyage with her outfits and seine, was worth the sum of seventy-five hundred dollars; and the said New England, with her outfits and seine, was then and there of the value of eighty-five hundred dollars. That said schooners both returned to said Gloucester from said voyage, on the seventeenth day of February, without any herring, except that the said Ontario had about fifty barrels purchased by her.

And we further represent that we are informed by the masters and crews of said schooners, and believe the same to be true, that the reason why they returned without any herring and made disastrous voyages is that they arrived at Long Harbor, Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, on or about the sixteenth day of December, 1877, and found herring scarce, and were unable to obtain any considerable quantity of herring; and that the masters and crews of said schooners waited at said Long Harbor until the sixth day of January, 1878, to catch or purchase herring, as they might be able to do; that on said sixth day of said January, “the signs for herring being good,” the masters and crews of both of said schooners joined their purse seines, thereby making a double seine, which was of the value of at least fourteen hundred dollars, and making a seine of about twenty-four hundred feet long and one hundred and fifty feet deep; that the masters and crews of said schooners threw said double seine at said Long Harbor and caught and secured therein a very large quantity of herring, amounting to at least two thousand barrels of herring, and more than sufficient to load both of said schooners.

That at about four o’clock of said sixth day of said January some two hundred men, who belonged about Fortune Bay and had gone ashore from English vessels in said Long Harbor, made a warlike demonstration against the masters and crews of said schooners and seized hold of said double seine, tore it in pieces, and carried it off, and thereby freed all of said herring and prevented the masters and crews of said schooners from obtaining them, and thereby destroyed all hope of their obtaining a cargo for either of said vessels. That of said two hundred men some sixty took hold of said seine and destroyed it, and the others were participating in the destruction of the seine by inciting and encouraging those who were destroying it.

That the masters and crews of said schooners were pursuing their business of catching herring at said Fortune Bay in a lawful manner, and were not in any manner or form interfering with the rights of any party or parties at said Newfoundland, and that the action of said parties in destroying said seine was a most wanton destruction of the property of said firm, and was without the least justification in law or good conscience, and was intended to be a warlike demonstration against the American vessels, their owners, masters, and crews, and to intimidate them and prevent them from prosecuting the herring fisheries in the waters of Newfoundland by catching herring, and thereby compel them to buy herring of the inhabitants of Newfoundland, if they would obtain them, at such prices as said people of Newfoundland might ask for them. That all the American vessels at said Newfoundland on said sixth day of said January were from said Gloucester and were there for herring, and among them were the schooners Moses Adams, Herbert M. Rogers, John W. Bray, F. A. Smith, Hereward, William E. McDonald, Moro Castle, Edward E. Webster, Bonanza, Wildfire, Bunker Hill, and Isaac Rich. That said schooners Ontario and New England were, by reason of the destruction of said seine and the freeing of the herring therein, were both prevented from obtaining cargoes for said schooners.

That after the destruction of said seine, as above set forth, the said parties who had destroyed the same returned to their vessels, and on the evening thereafter, to wit, on the evening of the sixth day of said January, they made a jubilant demonstration, blowing horns, firing guns, and shouting as if celebrating a victory, to impress upon the masters and crews of American vessels in said harbor that they were prepared to stand by and justify what had been done, and that the Americans might expect to be treated in future in the same manner should they attempt to catch herring in Newfoundland waters.

And we further respectfully represent that in view of the treatment of the American fishermen by the British subjects at said Newfoundland, it is wholly unsafe for American vessel owners to fit vessels for and send them to Newfoundland waters to catch herring, and that it is unsafe for American fishermen to attempt to catch fish in said waters, and that the demonstration against the American fishing-vessel owners, masters, and crews is of such a character as to make it a public violation of the rights of the citizens of the United States wishing to catch herring and attempting to catch herring there. That the loss to the said firm by reason of the warlike demonstration of the people of Newfoundland hereinbefore set forth, and the destruction of said seine in the voyages of said two schooners Ontario and New England, amounts to at least the sum of sixty-seven hundred dollars.

In verification of the facts herein set forth, we beg leave to refer to the affidavits of the masters and crews of both of said schooners Ontario and New England herewith submitted.

Wherefore, we respectfully ask that your Department will cause our said damage to be paid by the British Government, and such action to be taken as will secure to American shipowners and fishermen the rights to which they are justly and legally entitled by the laws and treaties of the United States.

And as in duty bound will ever pray.

JOHN PEW.
CHARLES H. PEW.
JOHN J. PEW.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex County, ss:

On this fourth day of March, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and seventy-eight, before me personally appeared John Pew, Charles H. Pew, and John J. Pew, copartners, and made oath that they have read the affidavit hereto annexed, subscribed by them, and know the contents thereof, and that the same is true of their own knowledge, except as to matters which are therein stated to be on their information and belief, and as to those matters they believe them to be true.

Before me.

[seal.] SUMNER D. YORK,
Notary Public.

I, Peter McAulay, of Gloucester, county of Essex, and commonwealth of Massachusetts, master mariner, on oath depose and say that on the first day of December, A. D. 1877. I was master of the fishing schooner Ontario, of said Gloucester, of the burthen of ninety-one tons and twenty-nine one hundredths, and on said first day of said December I sailed on a voyage from said Gloucester to Fortune Bay, on the southwest of Newfoundland, for a cargo of herring, and back to same port of discharge in the United States; that said schooner Ontario was fully fitted for said voyage, and had on board a mate and five men, making in all seven men; that I arrived with said schooner on said voyage at Fortune Bay, Long Harbor, about the sixteenth day of said December; that I found herring very scarce, and up to the sixth day of January, A. D. 1878, had not been able to obtain, by purchase or otherwise, more than fifty barrels of herring.

That on the sixth day of said January, there being “good signs for herring,” and the schooner New England, of said Gloucester, being a fishing schooner from said Gloucester, and provided with seine, which said schooner belonged to the firm of John Pew & Son, of said Gloucester, the same parties to whom the said Ontario belonged, the masters and crews of both of said schooners threw the said seine to catch herring to load both of said schooners.

That said seine, on being thrown, took a large haul of herring, amounting, at least, to two thousand barrels of herring, and more than sufficient to load both of said schooners. That said herring being fully secured in said seine, and said schooners and said seine being at said Long Harbor, this affiant saw about two hundred men on the shore at about four o’clock in the afternoon of said sixth day of said January while the seine was in charge of the masters and crews of said schooners Ontario and New England, make an attack upon said seine in a most violent manner, and tear up and carry off the seine, and thereby let the herring out of said seine, and prevent the masters and crews of said schooners from obtaining any of said herring. That the men who made said attack upon and destroyed said seine prevented the masters and crews of said schooners from protecting said seine, and some sixty of said two hundred men took hold of said seine, while all the rest of them were inciting and encouraging those who had hold of said seine and were destroying it. That the said men so destroying said seine and inciting those destroying it used threats and violence towards both the masters and crews of said schooners and fully overpowered them, so that they could not protect said seine and save the herring therein. That most of said two hundred men landed from boats in the said bay, and were men belonging in and about said Fortune Bay. That said men who made said attack upon said seine and destroyed the same had been fishing with nets during the day and with seines in the same neighborhood, and had taken quite a large quantity of herring.

And this affiant further says that both he and his crew and the master and crew of the schooner New England were pursuing their business in a peaceful and lawful manner, and were not interfering in any manner or form with the rights of any party at said Newfoundland. That the attack upon said seine by said persons from the shore of Fortune Bay was wholly without justification or excuse, and was a warlike demonstration against the American vessels there, which amounted to some fifteen in number, and were all from the said port of Gloucester, among which were the schooners F. A. Smith, Moses Adams, Hereward, William E. McDonald, Moro Castle, Edward E. Webster, Bonanza, Wildfire, Herbert M. Rogers, Bunker Hill, Isaac Rich, and John W. Bray.

That this affiant believes that the only reason of said attack and demonstration by the said persons from the shore was to intimidate the American fishermen there and to prevent them from catching herring, so that the said parties on the shore of Newfoundland might sell herring to the vessels from the United States at a high price and keep the whole control of the herring fisheries in their hands, and wholly deprive the citizens of the United States from prosecuting said fisheries at Newfoundland or obtaining the herring there in any other manner than by purchase.

This affiant believes that it is wholly unsafe for American vessels to catch herring, in the Newfoundland waters; that the people of Newfoundland are belligerent and threatening in their treatment of American fishermen, and seem determined to prevent them from prosecuting their business in Newfoundland waters in any manner which is not satisfactory to the inhabitants thereof. That this affiant, had he not been deprived of his herring in said seine, would have loaded his said schooner Ontario-with herring and returned to Gloucester by about the twenty-fifth of January last past and made a successful voyage, but, by reason of the destruction of said seine and the losing of the herring therein, he was wholly prevented from getting any herring, and obliged to return to Gloucester in ballast, except fifty barrels of herring which he purchased and was unable to purchase more, making thereby a disastrous instead of a profitable voyage. And this affiant says that all he has said with reference to the schooner Ontario is also true of his personal knowledge of the said schooner New England, of which John Dago was master, both schooners arriving at Fortune Bay on the same day, and arrived from said voyage at Gloucester on the same day, and were to act together and did act together in endeavors to obtain cargoes for said; schooners, and were both affected alike by the destruction of said seine and the loss of the herring in the same at the time it was destroyed, as above set forth.

And this affiant further says that on the evening of the said sixth day of said January, after the destruction of said seine, the parties who destroyed it returned to their vessels in said harbor and made a jubilant demonstration, firing guns, blowing; horns, and shouting as if celebrating a victory, to impress upon the masters and crews of the American vessels at said harbor that they were prepared to stand by and justify what had been done, and that the Americans might expect to be treated in future in the same manner should they attempt to catch herring in the Newfoundland waters.

PETER McAULAY.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, February 21, 1878.

Subscribed and sworn to this twenty-first day of February, A. D. 1878.

Before me.

[seal.] SUMNER D. YORK,
Notary Public.

We, Allen McDonald, Daniel Tucker, Peter McKinnon, Charles McNeil, and Robert McDonald, all of Gloucester, in the county of Essex, and commonwealth of Massachusetts, late mariners on board the fishing schooner Ontario, of said Gloucester, an American vessel belonging to John Pew & Son, of said Gloucester, whereof Peter McAulay was and is master, on oath, depose and say:

That we sailed from said Gloucester about the first day of December, eighteen hundred and seventy-seven, to Newfoundland, for herring, and back to a port of discharge in the United States; that we arrived at Newfoundland at a place called Long Harbor, Fortune Bay, about the sixteenth day of December, eighteen hundred and seventy-seven; that on the sixth day of January the seine belonging to the American fishing schooner New England was thrown at said Long Harbor by the master and crew of said schooner Ontario and the master and crew of said schooner New England, acting together, and a large quantity of herring were then and there secured in said seine. That the affidavit of Peter McAulay, this day taken at said Gloucester, before Sumner D. York, a notary public, relative to the destruction of said seine at Long Harbor, on said sixth day of January, by the people of Newfoundland, has been read to us, and the mode and manner of the destruction of said seine, and the conduct of the parties at the time of destroying it and afterwards, and the inability of the masters of said schooners to obtain herring at Newfoundland after the destruction of said seine, are correctly set forth in said affidavit of said McAulay.

ALLEN MCDONALD.

DANIEL his + mark TUCKER.

PETER McKINNON.

ROBERT his + mark MCDONALD.

CHARLES MCNEIL.

Witness to all the signatures.

[seal.] Sumner D. York.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Gloucester, February 21, 1878.

Subscribed and sworn to before me by the above-named Allen McDonald, Daniel Tucker, Peter McKinnon, Robert McDonald, and Charles McNeil.

SUMNER D. YORK,
Notary Public.

I, John Dago, of Gloucester, county of Essex, and commonwealth of Massachusetts, master mariner, on oath, depose and say that I was master of the fishing-schooner New England, of said Gloucester, of eighty-six tons burden or thereabouts, belonging to John Pew & Son, of said Gloucester, on the twenty-eighth day of November last past, and as master sailed with said schooner on said day on a voyage to Newfoundland, for herring, and back to a market in the United States; that her crew consisted of seven men all told, including the master; that she arrived at Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, about the sixteenth day of December, A. D. 1877; that the schooner Ontario, of said Gloucester, belonging to said firm of John Pew & Son, whereof Peter McAuley was then and there master, arrived on the same day; that I had a seine for catching herring for the purpose of loading both of said schooners, and the master and crews of said schooners were to act in company in loading said schooners, and said schooners were near each other in said Fortune Bay at Long Harbor.

I further depose and say that I have read the affidavit of said McAuley, stating the facts relative to the destruction of said seine by the people at said Fortune Bay, coming from the shore, and the loss of the herring in said seine at the time of its destruction, which amounted to at least 2,000 barrels, which were fully secured in said seine at the time of its destruction, and all the facts in said affidavit relating to the destruction of said seine, the mode and manner in which it was done, and the conduct of the people who destroyed it at the time and after it was destroyed, and the loss of the voyages of both of said schooners, and the belligerent spirit manifested by the people of Newfoundland towards American fishermen, and the danger to them of attempting to catch fish in Newfoundland waters, together with all the other facts set forth therein, are, to my personal knowledge, true, except as to the time of the sailing of the said schooner Ontario from Gloucester, she not having sailed from Gloucester on the twenty-eighth day of November, 1877.

JOHN DAGO.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
Essex, ss:

Subscribed and sworn to this twenty-first day of February, A. D. 1878, before me.

[seal.] SUMNER D. YORK.

We, Fred. Morin, Joseph Gray, Fred. Hall, Peter Forrest, Alex. D. Bushee, Edward Phelan, all of Gloucester, county of Essex, and commonwealth of Massachusetts, on oath depose and say:

That we belong to the crew of the American schooner New England, belonging to John Pew & Son, of said Gloucester, whereof John Dago was master, on her late voyage from said Gloucester to Newfoundland for herring. That we sailed from said Gloucester about the 28th day of November, 1877, and arrived at Long Harbor, Fortune Bay, about the sixteenth day of December, 1877. That on the sixth day of January the seine belonging to the said schooner New England was thrown at said Long Harbor by the master of said schooner and the master of the schooner Ontario, of said Gloucester, and the crews of said schooners, and a large quantity of herring secured in said seine. That the affidavit of Peter McAuley relative to the destruction of said seine at Long Harbor on said sixth day of said January, by the people from Newfoundland, and the mode and manner of the destruction of said seine, and the conduct of the parties at the time of destroying it and afterwards, and the inability of the masters of said schooners to obtain herring at said Newfoundland after the destruction of said seine, are correctly set forth in said affidavit of said McAuley, taken this day before Sumner D. York, a notary public, which has been read to us. And we do hereby fully confirm the statements made by him in said affidavit in all particulars except as to the day when he left said Gloucester on said voyage, which is unknown to us. The said schooner Ontario did not leave said port of Gloucester until after said schooner New England sailed on said voyage.

PETER FORREST.

ALEX. D. BUSHEE.

FRED. MORIN.

EDW’D PHELAN.

JOSEPH GRAY.

FRED. HALL.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
County of Essex, ss, city of Gloucester:

On this 23d day of February, A. D. 1878, personally appeared Alex. D. Bushee, Fred. Morin, Edw’d Phelan, Joseph Gray, and Fred. Hall, and were severally sworn to the truth of the foregoing statement by them subscribed before me.

[seal.] CYRUS STORY,
Notary Public.

No. 362. Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts. No. 362.
Mr. Welsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, August 13, 1879. (Received August 28.) No. 347.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your most important dispatch No. 34, of the 1st instant, containing the statement of the claims of the owners of twenty-two fishing vessels for loss and damage arising from the conduct of certain inhabitants of Newfoundland, at Fortune Bay, in January, 1878.

As this instruction did not arrive until yesterday, and as I am to present my letter of recall to Her Majesty to-morrow, I have no time to embody its statements and arguments in a separate note to Lord Salisbury. I think, besides, that it is so full, clear, and convincing in its present shape that I should weaken its force by changing its form.

I have taken the liberty, therefore, to send a copy of it to-day to Lord Salisbury with a note, of which I inclose a transcript.

As the details of the losses contained in the printed pamphlet which accompanied your instruction appeared to me to be important, and as there was not sufficient time to copy them, I have sent the appendix to the pamphlet, and also the original account of the owners of the New England and Ontario, to his lordship for his information, with a request that he should return them to this legation at his entire convenience. I think it desirable that additional copies of these papers should be furnished to us by the Department of State.

I have to add that I have also this day sent to Lord Salisbury the statement of a claim for damages on behalf of the owners of the schooner Mist, agreeably to your instruction No. 346, of the 1st instant.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

[Inclosure in No. 347.]

Mr. Welsh to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, August 13, 1879.

My Lord: I have just received a very important dispatch from Mr. Evarts, stating the claims for damages, amounting to $105,305.02, sustained by certain citizens of the United States, owners of twenty-two vessels, in Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, in the month of January, 1878, which claims have already formed the subjects of a previous correspondence with your lordship.

As the argument for the payment of these by Her Majesty’s Government is presented by Mr. Evarts in a very full, clear, and forcible manner, I have thought it proper to submit his instruction to me in its original form to your lordship, asking for it an early and favorable consideration.

I have, &c.,

JOHN WELSH.

No. 363. Mr. Seward to Mr. Hoppin. No. 363.
Mr. Seward to Mr. Hoppin.

Department of State,
Washington, August 28, 1879. No. 361.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Welsh’s No. 347 of the 13th instant, and to approve the prompt presentation of the claims of the United States fishermen at Fortune Bay, which formed the subject of Mr. Evarts’ No. 347 of the 1st instant.

The additional copies of certain papers connected with the cases, which he thinks it desirable to have transmitted, will be sent as soon as practicable.

I am, &c.,

F. W. SEWARD,
Acting Secretary.

No. 364. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 364.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, November 22, 1879. (Received December 4.) No. 111.]

Sir: Your telegram requesting me to ask the Marquis of Salisbury when to expect an answer in relation to the Fortune Bay claims was brought to this office at a late hour on Thursday evening. Early the next day, the 21st instant, I addressed a note to his lordship, a copy of which I inclose herewith.

I have not yet had a reply, and shall probably be obliged to close this dispatch before one arrives. Whenever it comes I shall immediately send you the substance of it by telegraph, agreeably to your instructions.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in No. 111.]

Mr. Hoppin to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, November 21, 1879. Immediate.]

My Lord: I received last night a cable dispatch from Mr. Evarts, requesting me to ask your lordship when he might expect an answer to Mr. Welsh’s notes of the 13th of August last, in relation to the damages sustained by citizens of the United States in Fortune Bay in January, 1878.

As I am instructed to reply by telegraph I venture to solicit your lordship to give an early answer to Mr. Evarts’s inquiry.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

No. 365. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 365.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, November 25, 1879. (Received December 6.) No. 112.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 111 of the 22d instant, I have the honor to acquaint you that, not having received a reply to my note of the 21st to the Marquis of Salisbury, I went to the foreign office yesterday to obtain in person the information you requested. Neither his lordship, nor Lord Tenterden or Sir Julian Pauneefote, were there; but I saw Mr. Barrington, one of Lord Salisbury’s secretaries, who said that a note was being written in answer to mine, to the effect that the claims of the Fortune Bay fishermen were under consideration, and that a reply to your instruction to Mr. Welsh on that subject would be prepared as soon as practicable. He intimated that Lord Salisbury would come to the office in the evening, and he would convey to him my request for more definite information.

Not having heard from Mr. Barrington at six o’clock, and not venturing to postpone any later my acknowledgment of your telegram, I sent you a cable message. Some time after that was dispatched I had a note from Mr. Barrington, of which I inclose a copy herewith.

You will observe that Lord Salisbury regrets the delay in answering our claims, which he ascribes to the necessity of sending to the governor of Newfoundland for a report that has only just been received, that the subject is having his best attention, but he fears some time must elapse before he can make a communication in regard to it.

I expect a more formal answer to my note, but I shall send you the substance of this by cable to-night, as the importance of the subject and the shortness of the interval before Congress shall meet justify the additional expense.

I beg to remind you of Mr. Welsh’s statement in his No. 347, that by reason of the want of time to make copies he was obliged to send to Lord Salisbury the appendix to the printed pamphlet, and also the original account of the owners of the New England and Ontario. These have not yet been returned from the foreign office, as we requested, and I think it is desirable that duplicates should be supplied to us from Washington in order that our records may be complete.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in No. 112.]

Mr. Barrington to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, November 24, 1879.

Dear Mr. Hoppin: Lord Salisbury desires roe to express his regret that lie should not yet have been able to send a reply to your government in the case of the Fortune Bay claims. It is receiving his best attention, but as it was necessary to refer to the governor of Newfoundland for a report, which has only just been received, he fears some time must elapse before he can make a communication on the subject.

I am yours, very truly,

ERIC BARRINGTON.

An official note to this effect ought to reach you without delay.

No. 366. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 366.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, November 28, 1879. (Received December 10.) No. 113.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 112, of the 25th of November, I have now the honor to inclose Lord Salisbury’s formal answer to my inquiry as to when a reply might be expected from him to your instruction, No. 347 to Mr. Welsh in relation to the claims of the Fortune Bay fishermen. You will observe that he explains his delay in this matter by the necessity of a reference to the authorities of Newfoundland.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in No. 113.]

The Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, November 24, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter marked “Immediate,” of the 21st instant, informing me that you had received on the previous evening a cable dispatch from Mr. Evarts, requesting you to inquire of me when an answer might be expected to Mr. Welsh’s notes of the 13th of August last in relation to the damages sustained by citizens of the United States in Fortune Bay in January, 1878, and I have to state to you in reply that some delay has arisen owing to the necessity of a reference to Newfoundland, but that a communication will be addressed to you in answer to the notes in question at as early a date as possible.

I have, &c.,

SALISBURY.

No. 367. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin. No. 367.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin.

[Telegram.]

Washington, February 5, 1880.

Hoppin, Chargé, London:

(Directing him to inquire at what time an answer in respect of the Fortune Bay claims might be expected, and to express the great chagrin of this government that no answer had already been made.)

EVARTS,
Secretary.

No. 368. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 368.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, February 7, 1880. (Received February 24.) No. 143.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt yesterday of your dispatch in cipher relating to the great delay of the British Government in answering our claim for the Fortune Bay damages. I knew that the Marquis of Salisbury had been seriously ill for some time past at Hatfield, and I ascertained at the foreign office, where I made immediate inquiries, that his illness still continued and that he was not attending to business. I therefore made an appointment with Sir Julian Pauncefote, who is in charge of the foreign office, Lord Tenderden being absent, for an interview to-day. I have just returned from this interview.

I called his attention in the course of it to the fact that our claim was presented as early as the 13th of August; that the Marqius of Salisbury promised on the 16th that it should receive immediate attention; that his lordship assured us on the 24th of November that an answer should be sent at as early a date as possible, and that nearly two months and a half had now elapsed without our having been favored with one. I then expressed the chagrin you felt at this delay, and gave him a copy of the translation of your cipher telegram.

Sir Julian admitted the delay, and said that it arose in part from the importance of the questions involved in the discussion; that after the claim had been received it was thought advisable to consult the authorities in Newfoundland; that some time elapsed before their answer arrived, when the matter was placed in his (Sir Julian’s) hands to prepare a case upon it for submission to the law officers of the Crown; that these gentlemen had the case before them still, the reason for their delay being the great importance of the points involved, and also the accumulation of references in other matters which had been made to them during the recess of Parliament.

Sir Julian promised that he would communicate with them immediately and press for a report, and would send them a copy of your telegram to hasten their action. He said, also, that he should send a copy of this to the Marquis of Salisbury, notwithstanding his physician’s injunctions that his lordship should abstain from all business. Finally he declared that I might expect to receive on Monday, for communication to yourself, something more definite in relation to this matter.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

No. 369. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 369.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, February 10, 1880. (Received February 24.) No. 147.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 143, of the 7th instant, I have the honor to state that up to this time I have not received any further communication from the foreign office as to when we may expect an answer to our Fortune Bay claims, although, as I informed you both by that dispatch and by cable, Sir Julian Pauncefote gave me to understand he should send me more definite information on that point yesterday.

I presume that his silence arises from Lord Salisbury’s continued illness. It is possible a note may arrive after the closing of the bag. Whenever it comes I shall send you the substance of it by cable.

It is proper for me to state, in addition to what I wrote you on Saturday, that Sir Julian Pauncefote intimated that they would probably be able to receive the opinions of the law officers of the Crown very shortly, so that, with the additional delay of reconsidering the matter in the foreign office, we might rely upon having a reply certainly within a month from the present time; but he preferred I should make no positive statement on this point until I should hear from him again.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

No. 370. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 370.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, February 14, 1880. (Received February 24.) No. 150.]

Sir: Referring to my Nos. 143 and 147, of the 7th and 10th instant, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a note which I received late in the evening of the 13th instant from Sir Julian Pauncefote, desiring me to convey to you the regrets of Her Majesty’s Government for their unavoidable delay in answering your note in relation to the Fortune Bay claims. It will be observed that he gives the same reasons for his delay, and announces the same intention to expedite the action of the government here in this matter, which he stated to me at our interview on the 7th instant, and which I had the honor to communicate to you in the dispatches above mentioned and in my telegrams of the 11th and 13th instant.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in No. 150.]

Sir Julian Pauncefote to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, February 12, 1880.

Sir: With reference to the telegram addressed to yon by Mr. Evarts relative to the Fortune Bay question, a copy of which you communicated to me, I have the honor to request that you will convey to Mr. Evarts the regret of Her Majesty’s Government at the delay which has unavoidably occurred in answering the claim of the United States Government. On receipt of the report upon the case, which had been called for from the Government of Newfoundland, it was found necessary to refer certain points to the law officers of the Crown for their opinion, and owing to the great pressure of business after the Parliamentary recess, and on the reopening of the law courts, as well as from the volumnious character of the documents submitted to them, they have been unable up to the present time to complete their examination of the case.

They will be immediately requested to expedite their report, and as early as possible after the receipt of it I shall not fail to make known to you, for communication to your government, the views of Her Majesty’s Government on the question.

I have, &c.,

In the absence of Lord Salisbury:
JULIAN PAUNCEFOTE.

No. 371. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 371.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, February 14, 1880. (Received February 25.)

Dear Mr. Evarts: My attention has just been called to the passage in yesterday’s Times, which I have marked with red pencil, in which a question is asked of the under foreign secretary about the Fortune Bay claims.

I have no time to inclose this in a regular dispatch.

Very respectfully, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in the foregoing.]

House of Commons, Thursday, February 12.

[The Times, Friday, February 13, 1880.]

canadian and newfoundland fisheries.

Mr. Gourley asked whether the claim of the United States Government for $103,000 for damages alleged to have been done by Newfoundland fishermen in Fortune Bay to the Massachusetts fishing fleet had been amicably arranged; what measures were being adopted for the purpose of abrogating or amending clause 33 of the Treaty of Washington relative to the Canadian and Newfoundland inshore fisheries; and whether steps were being taken for the purpose of ascertaining if the proviso of the convention of 1818, which admits American fishermen to enter British North American bays or harbors for the purpose of shelter, repairing damages, and purchase of wood and water, was intended to exclude them from going inshore to traffic, transship fish, purchase stores, mend nets, and hire seamen.

Mr. Bourke. The claim of the United States Government for damages alleged to have been done by Newfoundland fishermen in Fortune Bay is still under the consideration of Her Majesty’s Government. No measures are being adopted for the purpose of abrogating or amending clause 33 of the Treaty of Washington. The extent of the fishing privileges accorded to the United States on the shores of Canada and Newfoundland is laid down in the convention of 1818, and in the Treaty of Washington of 1871. Her Majesty’s Government have not at present found it necessary to make any communication to the United States Government with a view of defining more precisely the exact interpretation of the language of those treaties.

Mr. Gourley said that on an early day he would call attention to the convention of 1818 between this country and the United States relative to fisheries.

No. 372. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin. No. 372.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoppin.

[Telegram.]

Washington, February 26, 1880.

Hoppin, Chargé, London:

(Stating the increased chagrin with which this government learns, from his No. 147, of there being even a possibility of an additional month’s delay, and directing him to urge Her Majesty’s Government to avoid it if possible.)

EVARTS.

No. 373. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 373.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, February 27, 1880. (Received March 13.) No. 156.]

Sir: I received late last evening your telegram, without date, stating that you learned with increased chagrin, from my No. 147, of even a possible further delay of one month in the answer to our Fortune Bay claims, and instructing me to urge its avoidance if possible. I have, accordingly, addressed Lord Salisbury again on this subject, and herewith inclose a copy of my note to his lordship.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in No. 156.]

Mr. Hoppin to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, February 27, 1880.

My Lord: I have the honor to acquaint you that I received from the honorable the Secretary of State, last evening, a further telegram in relation to the delay of Her Majesty’s Government in answering our claims for damages on account of the proceedings at Fortune Bay.

Your lordship will be good enough to remember that on the 7th instant, in the absence of your lordship, I had a conversation with Sir Julian Pauncefote at the foreign office on this subject, and gave him a copy of the cable dispatch I had received from Mr. Evarts the day before.

Afterwards, on the 12th instant, I received from Sir Julian a note in relation to this matter, a copy of which I sent to Mr. Evarts on the 14th, having already telegraphed the substance of it to him on the 13th instant.

During our conversation on the 7th of February, when I pressed Sir Julian Pauncefote for an approximate statement of the time within which we might expect your lordship’s reply to our claims, he intimated that it would certainly be given within a month from that date, and I so informed Mr. Evarts in a dispatch of the 10th of February.

In the cable message which I have now received, Mr. Evarts states that he learns with “increased chagrin,” from my dispatch to him last mentioned, “of even a possible further delay of one month,” and he instructs me to “urge its avoidance if possible.”

I lose no time, therefore, in bringing this subject again to your lordship’s attention, and in expressing the disquiet which Mr. Evarts feels that an answer to these claims which were brought to the notice of Her Majesty’s Government so long ago as the 13th of August last may possibly be still further delayed.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

No. 374. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 374.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, March 9, 1880. (Received March 22.) No. 163.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch, No. 150, of the 14th ultimo, in relation to the delay of the British Government to reply to your note on the subject of the Fortune Bay claims, I have now the honor to inclose a copy of a note of Lord Salisbury, in which it is stated that the report of the law officers of the Crown upon the case has now been received.

I have, &c.

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure in No. 163.]

The Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, March 2, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your communication of the 27th ultimo, informing me that you had on the evening of the preceding day received a further telegram from Mr. Evarts in relation to the delay of Her Majesty’s Government in replying to the claim put forward by the United States Government in connection with the occurrences at Fortune Bay in January, 1878, and I have to state to you with reference thereto that the report of the law officers of the Crown upon the case has now been received, and that therefore the reply of Her Majesty’s Government will be sent with the least possible delay, having regard to the question under consideration.

I have, &c.,

SALISBURY.

No. 375. Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts. No. 375.
Mr. Hoppin to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, April 6, 1880. (Received April 19.) No. 170.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith the copy of a communication which I received from Lord Salisbury yesterday, in reply to Mr. Welsh’s notes of the 13th of August last, in relation to the damages sustained by certain citizens of the United States, owners of twenty-two fishing vessels, in Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, in the month of January, 1878.

It will be observed that the British Government have returned an unfavorable answer to our claims. I sent you an abstract of Lord Salisbury’s letter by cable last evening.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 170.]

The Marquis of Salisbury to Mr. Hoppin.

Foreign Office, April 3, 1880.

Sir: In the note which I had the honor to address to yon on the 12th of February, I explained the reason why a certain time has unavoidably elapsed before Her Majesty’s Government were in a position to reply to Mr. Welsh’s notes of the 13th of August last, in which he preferred, on the part of your government, a claim for $105,305.02 as compensation to some United States fishermen, on account of losses stated to have been sustained by them through certain occurrences which took place at Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, on the 6th of January, 1878. The delay which has arisen has been occasioned by the necessity of instituting a very careful inquiry into the circumstances of the case, to which, in all its bearings, Her Majesty’s Government were anxious to give the fullest consideration, before coming to a decision. Her Majesty’s Government having now completed that inquiry, so far as lies within their power, I beg leave to request you to be so so good as to communicate to your government the following observations on the case.

In considering whether compensation can properly be demanded and paid in this case, regard must be had to the facts as established, and to the intent and effect of the articles of the Treaty of Washington, and the convention of 1818, which are applicable to those facts.

The facts, so far as they are known to Her Majesty’s Government, are disclosed by the affidavits contained in the inclosed printed papers, which, for convenience of reference, have been numbered in consecutive order. Nos. 1 and 2 were received by Her Majesty’s Government from his excellency the governor of Newfoundland. Nos. 3 to 10, inclusive, were attached to the report made by Captain Sulivan, of Her Majesty’s ship Sirius, who was instructed to make an inquiry into the case. These were communicated to Mr. Welsh with my note of the 7th of November, 1878. Nos. 11 to 16, inclusive, are the affidavits of United States fishermen printed in the New York Herald of the 28th of January, 1878, and were received from Her Majesty’s minister at Washington. They have not been received officially from the Government of the United States, but Her Majesty’s Government see no reason to doubt their authenticity. Nos. 17 to 22 were annexed to Mr. Welsh’s note of the 13th of August last.

A careful examination of the above evidence shows that on the day in question a large number of the crews of the United States fishing vessels came on shore and from the beach barred the herrings, the ends of their seines being secured to the shore. That the fishermen of the locality remonstrated against these proceedings, and, upon their remonstrance proving unavailing, removed the nets by force.

Such being the facts, the following two questions arise: 1. Have United States fishermen the right to use the strand for purposes of actual fishing?

2. Have they the right to take herrings with a seine at the season of the year in question, or to use a seine at any season of the year for the purpose of barring herrings on the coast of Newfoundland?

The answers to the above questions depend on the interpretation of the treaties.

With regard to the first question, namely, the right to the strand fishery, I would ob serve that article 1 of the convention between Great Britain and the United States of the 20th of October, 1818, secured to citizens of the United States the right in common with British subjects to take fish of every kind on certain specified portions of the coast of Newfoundland, and to use the shore for the purposes of purchasing wood and obtaining water, and for no other purpose whatever.

Articles XVIII and XXXII of the Treaty of Washington superadded to the above-mentioned privileges the right for United States fishermen to take fish of every kind (with certain exceptions not relevant to the present case) on all portions of the coast of that island, and permission to land for the purpose of drying their nets and curing their fish, “provided, that in so doing they do not interfere with the rights of private property or with British fishermen in the peaceable use of any part of the said coast in their occupancy for the same purpose.”

Thus, whilst absolute freedom in the matter of fishing in territorial waters is granted, the right to use the shore for four specified purposes alone is mentioned in the treaty articles from which United States fishermen derive their privileges, namely, to purchase wood, to obtain water, to dry nets, and cure fish.

The citizens of the United States are thus by clear implication absolutely precluded from the use of the shore in the direct act of catching fish. This view was maintained in the strongest manner before the Halifax Commission by the United States agent, who, with reference to the proper interpretation to be placed on the treaty stipulations, used the following language: “No rights to do anything upon the land are conferred upon the citizens of the United States under this treaty, with the single exception of the right to dry nets and cure fish on the shores of the Magdalen Islands, if we did not possess that before. No right to land for the purpose of seining from the shore; no right to the ‘strand fishery’ as it has been called; no right to do anything except water-borne on our vessels, to go within the limits which had been previously forbidden.”

“So far as the herring trade goes, we could not, if we were disposed to, carry it on successfully under the provisions of the treaty, for this herring trade is substantially a seining from the shore, a strand fishing, as it is called, and we have no right anywhere conferred by this treaty to go ashore and seine herring any more than we have to establish fish-traps.”

Her Majesty’s Government, therefore, cannot anticipate that any difference of opinion will be found to exist between the two governments on this point.

The incident now under discussion occurred on that part of the shore of Fortune Bay which is called Tickle Beach, Long Harbour. On this beach is situated the fishing settlement of Mark Bolt, a British fisherman, who in his evidence, taken upon oath, deposed as follows:

“The ground I occupy was granted me for life by government, and for which I have to pay a fee. There are two families on the beach; there were three in winter. Our living is dependent on our fishing off this settlement. If these large American seines are allowed to be hauled, it forces me away from the place.”

John Saunders, another British fisherman of Tickle Beach, deposed that the United States fishermen hauled their seine on the beach immediately in front of his property.

The United States fishermen, therefore, on the occasion in question, not only exceeded the limits of their treaty privileges by fishing from the shore, but they “interfered with the rights of private property and with British fishermen in the peaceable use of that part of the coast in their occupancy for the same purpose,” contrary to the express provisions of Articles XVIII and XXXII of the Treaty of Washington.

Further, they used seines for the purpose of in-barring herring, and this leads me to the consideration of the second question, namely, whether United States fishermen have the right to take herring with a seine at the season of the year in question, or to use a seine at any season of the year for the purpose of barring herring on the coast of Newfoundland.

The in barring of herring is a practice most injurious, and, if continued, calculated in time to destroy the fishery, consequently it has been prohibited by statute since 1862.

In my note to Mr. Welsh, of the 7th of November, 1878, I stated “that British sovereignty, as regards these waters, is limited in its scope by the engagements of the Treaty of Washington, which cannot be modified or affected by any municipal legislation,” and Her Majesty’s Government fully admit that United States fishermen have the right of participation on the Newfoundland inshore fisheries, in common with British subjects, as specified in Article XVIII of that treaty. But it cannot be claimed, consistently with this right of participation in common with the British fishermen, that the United States fishermen have any other, and still less that they have greater, rights than the British fisherman had at the date of the treaty.

If, then, at the date of the signature of the Treaty of Washington, certain restraints were, by the municipal law, imposed upon the British fishermen, the United States fishermen were, by the express terms of the treaty, equally subjected to those restraints, and the obligation to observe in common with the British the then existing local laws and regulations, which is implied by the words “in common,” attached to the United States citizens as soon as they claimed the benefit of the treaty. That such was the view entertained by the Government of the United States during the existence of the reciprocity treaty, under which United States fishermen enjoyed precisely the same rights of fishing as they do now under the Treaty of Washington, is proved conclusively by the circular issued on the 28th of March, 1856, to the collector of customs at Boston, which so thoroughly expressed the views of Her Majesty’s Government on this point that I quote it here in extenso.

Mr. Marcy to Mr. Peaslee. [circular].

“Department of State,
“Washington, March 28, 1856.

“Sir: It is understood that there are certain acts of the British North American colonial legislatures, and also, perhaps, executive regulations, intended to prevent the wanton destruction of the fish which frequent the coasts of the colonies, and injuries to the fishing thereon. It is deemed reasonable and desirable that both the United States and British fishermen should pay a like respect to such laws and regulations which are designed to preserve and increase the productiveness of the fisheries on those coasts. Such being the object of these laws and regulations, the observance of them is enforced upon the citizens of the United States in the like manner as they are observed by British subjects. By granting the mutual use of the inshore fisheries, neither party has yielded its right to civic jurisdiction over a marine league along its coasts.

“Its laws are as obligatory upon the citizens or subjects of the other as upon its own. The laws of the British Provinces, not in conflict with the provisions of the Reciprocity Treaty, would be as binding upon the citizens of the United States within that jurisdiction as upon British subjects. Should they be so framed or executed as to make any discrimination in favor of British fishermen, or to impair the rights secured to American fishermen by that treaty, those injuriously affected by them will appeal to this government for redress.

“In presenting complaints of this kind, should there be cause for doing so, they are requested to furnish the Department of State with a copy of the law or regulation which is alleged injuriously to affect their rights or to make an unfair discrimination between the fishermen of the respective countries, or with a statement of any supposed grievance in the execution of such law or regulation, in order that the matter may be arranged by the two governments.

“You will make this direction known to the masters of such fishing vessels as belong to your port, in such manner as you may deem most advisable.

“W. L. MARCY.

“Collector of the Customs, Boston”.

I have the honor to inclose a copy of an act passed by the colonial legislature of Newfoundland, on the 27th March, 1862, for the protection of the herring and salmon fisheries on the coast, and a copy of cap. 102 of the consolidated statutes of Newfoundland, passed in 1872. The first section of the act of 1862 prohibited the taking of herring with a seine between the 20th day of October and the 12th day of April, and further prohibited the use of seines at any time for the purpose of barring herring. These regulations, which were in force at the date of the Treaty of Washington, were not abolished, but confirmed by the subsequent statutes, and are binding under the treaty upon the citizens of the United States in common with British subjects.

The United States fishermen, therefore, in landing for the purpose of fishing at Tickle Beach, in using a seine at a prohibited time, and in barring herring with seines from the shore exceeded their treaty privileges, and were engaged in unlawful acts.

Her Majesty’s Government have no wish to insist on any illiberal construction of the language of the treaty, and would not consider it necessary to make any formal complaint on the subject of a casual infringement of the letter of its stipulations which did not involve any substantial detriment to British interests and to the fishery in general.

An excess on the part of the United States fishermen of the precise limits of the rights secured to them might proceed as much from ignorance as from wilfulness; but the present claim for compensation is based on losses resulting from a collision which was the direct consequence of such excess, and Her Majesty’s Government feel bound to point to the fact that the United States fishermen were the first and real cause of the mischief by overstepping the limits of the privileges secured to them, in a manner gravely prejudicial to the rights of other fishermen.

For the reasons above stated, Her Majesty’s Government are of opinion that, under the circumstances of the case as at present within their knowledge, the claim advanced by the United States fishermen for compensation on account of the losses stated to have been sustained by them on the occasion in question is one which should not be entertained.

Mr. Evarts will not require to be assured that Her Majesty’s Government, while unable to admit the contention of the United States Government on the present occasion, are fully sensible of the evils arising from any difference of opinion between the two governments in regard to the fishery rights of their respective subjects. They have always admitted the incompetence of the colonial or the imperial legislature to limit by subsequent legislation the advantages secured by treaty to the subjects of another power. If it should be the opinion of the Government of the United States that any act of the colonial legislature subsequent in date to the Treaty of Washington has trenched upon the rights enjoyed by the citizens of the United States in virtue of that instrument, Her Majesty’s Government will consider any communication addressed to them in that view, with a cordial and anxious desire to remove all just grounds of complaint.

I have, &c.,

SALISBURY.

Appendix A.—Collected affidavits of American fishermen submitted to the British Government.

Appendix B.—Statutes of Newfoundland applicable to the fisheries.

Appendix A.

(1.)

Deposition of Alfred Noel.

Newfoundland, Central District, St. John’s, to wit:

THE examination of Alfred Noel, of St. John’s aforesaid, master mariner, taken upon oath, and who saith:

I am master of the schooner Nautilus of this port, and on the 19th day of December last I was at Long Harbour, in Fortune Bay, in the Nautilus, which was anchored off Woody Island. I had a crew of seven men, and I was there engaged in the herring fishery. There were several American schooners; seven of them were lying off Woody Island, and two French vessels. This island forms the harbour within half-a-mile of the narrows of Long Harbour; and other American schooners and Newfoundland fishing craft were inside Woody Island, which is the inside part of Long Harbour. All the craft there, English and American, were hauling herring in seines and nets, and the Americans were purchasing herring from the English. Every thing went off quietly, and the greatest harmony prevailed until Sunday, the 6th day of January, when about half-past 2 o’clock in the afternoon five seines, belonging to the American schooners, were put into the water by their crews at the beach on the north-east side of Long Harbour. I know two of the captains by name, Dago and Jacobs, belonging to Gloucester, United States, but do not know the names of their schooners. The whole five seines were barred full of herring, when the English crews of the crafts belonging to Fortune Bay ordered them to take their seines up or they would take them up for them; and the Fortune Bay men, finding they would not do as they were requested, then hauled up two of the American seines, but without any damage or injury, and two were at the same time taken up by the Americans; and at the same time a seine belonging to Captain Dago was taken up by the Fortune Bay men, the herring thrown out, and the seine was torn up and destroyed. Before this occurrence on the said Sunday, one of the American schooners had a seine barred with herring on the beach at Long Harbour for seven days, and it was not at any time meddled with by the Fortune Bay men or any one. Some of the Fortune Bay men had nets out in the water on that Sunday, and the same had been there during the week, but none of the Newfoundland fishermen attempted to haul herring on Sunday at any time while I was at Long Harbour. The Americans practice had been until lately to purchase herring from the Newfoundland fishermen in Fortune Bay, but this year and last year the Americans have brought their own seines to haul herring for themselves. The American seines are 30 fathoms deep and 200 fathoms long, whilst those used by our fishermen are 12 to 13 fathoms deep and 120 fathoms long. These American seines are used for barring herring in deep water, such as the Fortune Bay Harbors, viz, Long Harbour, Bay del Nord, and Rencontre. Our fishermen never bar herring, and herring have never been barred in Fortune Bay, to my knowledge, until the Americans brought the large seines I have alluded to into Fortune Bay and used them there to the disadvantage of our fishermen. This mode of barring herring in such harbours as I have mentioned is most destructive and ruinous to the herring fishery in those localities. I do not know the names of the persons who destroyed the seines; there were about eighty vessels from different harbours of Fortune Bay at Long Harbour at the time the seine was destroyed by a great lot of people. I left Long Harbour for St. John’s on the 31st day of January and arrived here on the 4th instant.

ALFRED NOEL.

Sworn before me at St. John’s aforesaid, this 8th day of February, A. D. 1878.

D. H. PROWSE,
J. P. for Newfoundland.

(2.)

Deposition of John Rumsey.

Central District, St. John’s, to wit:

The examination of John Rumsey, of St. John’s, master mariner, taken upon oath, who saith:

On or about the 14th of November last I sailed from St. John’s to Fortune Bay for a cargo of herring. I arrived in Long Harbour, Fortune Bay, about Christmas last. I found about 200 schooners there looking for herring; twelve of the schooners were Americans; my schooner was called the Briton, six hands all told. I got most of my herring between Christmas and the 8th January. Most all the schooners in Long Harbour lay inside of Woody Island. Woody Island is about three miles from the entrance of Long Harbour. On the northern side, rather above the island, there is a fine beach about a mile long. This is the best hauling place in Long Harbour, and most all the herring were taken there. It is only this year and last year that the American schooners have brought down very large seines for catching herring. I have been informed that some of these seines were 250 fathoms long and 35 fathoms deep. The seines which our Newfoundland fishermen use are about 120 fathoms long and from 8 to 13 fathoms deep. In the first week in January there were four or five American schooners who had the beach above mentioned barred for herring. The mode of inbarring for herring is as follows: when a place is selected, generally a smooth beach with deep water outside free from rocks, a party is sent ashore with a long line from one end of the seine; the seine-boat then goes off with the seine, makes, a long sweep, and the other end of the seine is then brought into the beach also; then the crew begin to haul together on both ends of the seine with long seine lines running fore and aft up and down the beach, four or five seines thus barring herring would cover all the hauling ground on this long beach I have spoken of, and would occupy all the best ground for hauling herring in Long Harbour. On the first Sunday in January the beach was barred by four or five large American seines. On that day, after dinner, a large number of people belonging to the crews of the Fortune Bay schooners then in Long Harbour went over to the beach, and I was informed there were 600 or 700 Newfoundland fishermen there. The Americans had barred the herring, and were hauling on their seines on the Sunday morning. The Newfoundland fishermen told the American captains to take up their seines or they would take them up for them. All the American seines were then taken up which were set on a Sunday except one; this one the American captain who owned it refused to take up. The Newfoundland fishermen then hauled it ashore, took the herring out of the seine, and according as they hauled the seine out of the water they tore it up. I saw the seine the next day, Monday, on the beach, and it was completely destroyed; it was an old second-hand seine, and very rotten. I have been for thirteen or fourteen years carrying on the herring fishery in Fortune Bay, and during that time I have never known our Newfoundland fishermen to haul herring on Sunday. If the American fishermen were permitted to bar herring in the way that they were doing at Long Harbour Beach, all the rest of the craft would be deprived of the best place in the harbour to haul herring; and such a mode of fishing for herring is most injurious to the fishery and must in time ruin the herring fishery there. The Americans in hauling their long seines often removed the Newfoundland fishermen’s nets when they came in their way. I have known the Americans last year to have herring barred in for a fortnight. Barring kills a great many herring, and makes those who are barred in very poor. I have seen the bottom covered with dead herring after the seine had been barred for a week. The American schooners heave out their ballast in the channel between Woody Island and the shore, and if not prevented, will soon destroy the anchorage there.

JOHN his + mark RUMSEY.

Sworn before me at St. John’s, this 9th day of February, A. D. 1878, having beent first read over and explained.

D. H. PROWSE,
J. P. for Newfoundland.

(3.)

Deposition of John Saunders.

The examination of John Saunders, of Tickle Beach, Long Harbour, taken upon oath, and who saith:

In January last there were a great number, close on 100, schooners and boats fishing for herring, both American and Newfoundlanders. The Americans were employing the English to haul their seines for them. There were some English schooners who had seines also. One Sunday, I do not know the date, John Hickey laid out a seine, and was told by the English or Newfoundlanders to take it up, as it was Sunday, which he did. The Americans laid out their seines, assisted by the English employed by them. The Newfoundlanders told them to take them up, as it was not legal their fishing on that day, being Sunday; J. McDonald took his up. Jacobs upset his net into Farrel’s seine, who was employed by him. Farrel was barring for the Americans, and was not allowed by Jacobs to haul his seine until the hard weather came. After Jacobs had upset his seine into Farrel’s he took it up to shoot again, and threatened with the revolver any one who interfered. Then they fold McAulay to take his up, but he didn’t, so the people hauled it in and tore it up.

I don’t know any man concerned in the destruction of the net that I could swear to but one, John Pitman, a servant to Samuel Pardy, who was at “Jack Fountain.”

There was no other reason that I know for destroying nets but for fishing on Sunday, and because they would not take them up when they were told. The Americans never hauled a seine before that day; they always employed the English to use their seines, and bought fish from the English. The only reason that the Americans laid their seines out that day was because there were plenty of herring, and no Englishman would haul them, being Sunday, excepting Hickey, who had been compelled to take his seine up.

Q. Where does Philip Farrel live?—A. In Bay-de-North, and so does Thomas Farrel.

Q. Was any obstruction or hindrance placed in the way of the Americans before or after that Sunday?—A. No.

Q. Did they remain in the harbour until the close of the season; until the herring slacked away were any Americans compelled to leave the coast after this circumstance?—A. No; there was nothing to prevent their remaining, and they remained for some days, until the weather became soft, and there were no more herring in the bay. Most of them left, but one American schooner remained about three weeks after that, when another lot of herring came into the bay, and he filled up and went away the next fair wind. Jim Boy was the captain’s name.

Q. Do you know any American of the name of Dago?—A. Yes; he has part in this seine. The Americans hauled their seine on the beach immediately in front of my property.

Q. Do you know the names of the schooners?—A. No.

Q. Do you know the names of the owners of the seine?—A. Yes; Captain Dago and McAulay.

Q. Do you know anything the Americans did by way of revenge?—A. The Americans, in revenge for the destruction of the net, afterwards drifted their vessels all about the bay or river with their anchors hanging, and so hooked and destroyed many nets, about fifty or sixty, I should think. The name of one of these captains was Smith—but I don’t know the name of his vessel—and the other was Pool. We all believe that this was done in revenge. They were pretending to be at anchor, where there was about 50 fathoms of water, but were drifting all over the bay and hooking the nets; there was no weather to cause them to drift. Our small boats were anchored off the beach. We had never any difficulty with the Americans before this, but were always on good terms with them.

JOHN his + mark SAUNDEES.

Sworn before me at Tickle Beach, Long Harbour, this 13th day of June, A. D. 1878.

GEO. L. SULIVAN,
Captain and Senior Officer on the Coast of Newfoundland.

(4.)

Deposition of Mark Bolt.

The examination of Mark Bolt, of Tickle Beach, Long Harbour, taken upon oath, and who saith:

I am a native of Dorsetshire, England. I have been in this country twenty-one years, and have been fishing all that time. I have lived in this neighborhood fourteen or fifteen years, and at Tickle Beach since last fall. The ground I occupy (150 feet) was granted me for life by government, and for which I have to pay a fee There are two families on the beach; there were three in the winter. Our living is dependent on our fishing off this settlement. If these large American seines are allowed to be hauled it forces me away from the place.

One Sunday in January last John Hickey, Newfoundlander, came first and hove his seine out. Five Newfoundlanders came and told him to take it up, and he did not; then others came and insisted upon it, then he took it up. If he had then refused to take it up it would have been torn up.

Then Jacobs, an American, came and laid his seine out and hauled about 100 barrels of herring in the big American seine, and capsized into Tom Farrel’s seine—a Newfoundland fisherman employed by Jacobs and fishing for him.

Philip Farrel was also fishing for the Americans, being master of McAulay’s seine. The Newfoundlanders then capsized Tom Farrel’s seine of fish, who was only fishing for the Americans. After this Jim Macdonald, another American, threw out his seine. Then the people went and told Macdonald that he was not allowed to fish on Sundays, and he must take his seine up; and he took up his seine, and carried it on board his vessel. Jacobs would not allow his seine to be touched, but drew a revolver. They went to McAulay, an American, who had laid his seine out for barring herring; this American also employed a Newfoundlander to lay his seine out. The Newfoundlanders said it should not be done on a Sabbath day, and they resolved to fear up all the seines they could get hold of. They managed to seize McAulay’s and tore it up. They would have torn up any they could have got at if laid out, whether English or American, because it was Sunday. The Americans do not bar fish. This was the first time I ever knew them to do so; they usually buy the fish from the Newfoundlanders, and also barter flour and pork for them, and I have never known anything to complain of against them previous to this.

Q. Did the American schooners continue to fish after the destruction of McAulay’s seine?—A. Yes.

They (the Americans) continued to fish, and left about the usual time, the 10th March. I do not know any reason for the conduct towards the Americans except that they were fishing on Sunday. I do not know what became of the nets that were torn up; it was left on the beach for some days, and then taken away. I do not know who took it away; the Americans, perhaps, but I don’t know.

The Americans were often set afterwards, but not on Sunday; the Americans did not leave off catching herring after this on other days. The English did not prevent the Americans hauling their seines, but the Americans usually employed the English to haul them, as their crews were not sufficient in number, and are not acquainted with the work. The American crews are employed salting and freezing the fish, while the English employed by them with the American seines are catching them. The seine torn up was being worked by an Englishman for McAulay, the American, namely, Philip Farrel.

Jacobs’ seine was in the water a night and a day. I was not aware that it was illegal to haul or catch herring by or in a seine at that time of the year, nor that barring is prohibited at all seasons, nor that the seine must be shot and forthwith hauled, but have heard some reports to that effect.

The nearest magistrate is at St. Jacques, about 25 or 30 miles from this, and there is no means of communicating with him excepting by a sailing boat.

The seine that was destroyed belonged to men called Dago and McAulay, who, I believe, were each of them captains of schooners, but the names of the vessels I do not know.

MARK BOLT.

Sworn before me at Tickle Beach, Long Harbour, this 13th day of June, A. D. 1878.

GEO. L. SULIVAN,
Captain and Senior Officer on the Coast of Newfoundland.

(5.)

Deposition of Richard Hendriken.

The examination of Richard Hendriken, of Hope Cove, Long Harbour, taken upon oath, and who saith:

I have been nine years in Long Harbour. I was here in January last, when the American seine was destroyed. It was destroyed on account of barring herring on Sunday. I was watching their proceedings from the point opposite; they laid their seine out and went to haul it in because the English would not haul it in on Sunday, and the bay was full of fish. The fish would have remained. The Americans generally employ some Englishmen to work with their own crew; they don’t generally lay out their own seines. Captain Dago and Samuel Jacobs would persist in hauling, and hauled once and barred them in Farrel’s net. Farrel was working for him, and had been barring herring for several days—perhaps about a fortnight—by the Americans’ orders. I believe it is illegal to bar herring; it destroys the fish, but we have no power to stop it. It is no good telling a magistrate; the Americans take no notice of them. The nearest magistrate to this place is at Harbour Briton, 25 or 30 miles off. The only thing to let people know what is right and what is wrong is to have a notice board in each harbor, and some heavy fine imposed on law-breakers.

James Tamel is harbor-master.

I don’t know if he is a special constable or not; but Mr. Enburn told me he was to see the Yankees did not heave their ballast over, and that their measures were correct, but they would not listen to him. They hove their ballast overboard, and had tubs 22 inches in depth instead of 16 inches; in these tubs they measured the fish they bought from the Newfoundlanders, and they would not alter them. The fish are sold to the Americans by the barrel. For 100 barrels it is usual to pay for 90, which is considered fair, but a flour barrel cut down to 16 inches in depth is the proper measure; they only cut them to 22 inches or more, and insist on having them filled. The vessels from St. John’s and Halifax always take the proper size tubs, but the Americans constantly overreach us, and choose the most ignorant to deal with, or those who are not so sharp as themselves. They generally otherwise behave well, and we have never had any quarrel with them before, but have always been on good terms. If the natives did not see the laws carried out themselves there might as well be no laws, for there is often no one else to enforce it. It is the only way I know, and it is pretty well understood by both foreigners and natives.

RICHARD his + mark HENDRIKEN.

Sworn before me at Tickle Beach, Long Harbour, this 14th day of June, A. D. 1878.

GEO. L. SULIVAN,
Captain and Senior Officer on the Coast of Newfoundland.

(6.)

Deposition of Ambrose Pope.

The examination of Ambrose Pope, of Stone Cove, Long Harbour, taken upon oath, and who saith:

I was at Tickle Beach on a Sunday in January last. I don’t know the date. I saw the Newfoundlanders hauling a seine and leave it on the beach; it was torn in hauling it on shore. It was evening when I saw the seine hauled on the beach, and it was laying there when I left the beach.

I don’t know if any was carried away. I don’t know anything more about it. The Americans we thought had no right to haul their seines on Sunday.

AMBROSE his+mark POPE.

Sworn before me at Anderson Cove, this 15th day of June, A. D. 1878.

GEO. L. SULIVAN,
Captain and Senior Officer on the Coast of Newfoundland.

(7.)

Deposition of James Tharnell.

The examination of James Tharnell, of Anderson’s Cove, Long Harbour, taken upon oath, and who saith:

I am a special constable for this neighborhood; I did not see anything of the alleged outrage last January, but I heard something about it; I believe some of the men named Pope were on the beach, but which I do not know.

Q. Have you formed any opinion as constable as to the cause of the dispute?—A. Mr. Snellgrove, of the customs, and myself, from what we were informed of the circumstances, were of opinion that the Americans were acting illegally in shooting their seines, but notwithstanding that, nothing would have been said to them for that had it not been on the Sabbath day. The men forbid them hauling seines on the Sabbath day, and told them to take them up or they would take them up for them, and what annoyed them so much was that the Americans drew their revolvers; probably, if it had not been for the threat of the revolvers the seines would only have been taken up, and not torn. They asked him three times to take them up before they did so them selves.

The people were not aware that it was illegal to set the seines that time of the year, and were only prompted to their act by the fact that it was Sunday. We all consider it to be the greatest loss to us for the Americans to bring those large seines to catch herring. The seines will hold 2,000 or 3,000 barrels of herring, and, if the soft weather continues, they are obliged to keep them in the seines for sometimes two or three weeks, until the frost comes, and by this means they deprive the poor fishermen of the bay of their chance of catching any with their small nets, and then, when they have secured a sufficient quantity of their own, they refuse to buy of the natives.

If the Americans had been allowed to secure all the herring in the bay for themselves, which they could have done that day, they would have filled all their vessels, and the neighbouring fishermen would have lost all chance on the following week days. The people believed that they (the Americans) were acting illegally in thus robbing them of their fish. If the natives had not defended themselves by enforcing the law, there was no one else to do it. I was sworn in as a special constable by Mr. Herbert, the magistrate of Harbour-Briton, last October.

On the arrival of the Americans I showed my authority, signed by Mr. Herbert, and they laughed at it, and said it had no stamp, and they didn’t, therefore, recognize it.

I told them the lawful size of a tub—sixteen gallons—and they said they required a brand on it. I have no means of branding tubs; there is no means to brand on the coast, and it is not the custom. I don’t know if it is the custom at St. John’s to brand them. I have cautioned the Americans about throwing ballast out inside Woody Island, where it is very shallow; but they have continually done so notwithstanding up to this. There are now several shallow places there and in the cove, where the Americans have been in the habit of throwing out their ballast, and small vessels now, of twenty-eight to thirty tons, repeatedly ground on this ballast there thrown out by the Americans. I believe there was less thrown out last winter after I spoke to them about it; but I have no power, moral or otherwise, to enforce any rules, and they don’t seem to care much about me.

JAMES his + mark THARNELL.

Sworn before me at Tickle Beach, Long Harbour, this 14th day of June, A. D. 1878.

GEO. L. SULIVAN,
Captain and Senior Officer on the Coast of Newfoundland.

(8.)

Deposition of George Snellgrove.

The examination of George Snellgrove, of St. Jacques, Fortune Bay, taken upon oath, and who saith:

I am sub-collector of customs for the district of Fortune Bay. I went to Long Harbour on the 8th January, two days after the dispute between the Americans and Newfoundland fishermen had taken place.

Captains Jacobs and Dago informed me that an American seine had been taken up by the Newfoundland fishermen on the Sunday previous and destroyed; that the seine belonged to Dago and McAulay, and that they had other seines out, but they had taken them up when they found that the other was destroyed. One of these captains said that the fishermen had threatened to take up the seine if they didn’t themselves. Captain Jacobs showed me a revolver, and said that he had threatened them with it. I remonstrated with him for doing so, when he replied that I couldn’t suppose that he was really going to use it; that he only did it to frighten them; he had taken care there were no charges in it. I said to him, “Do you suppose that you would have got off that beach alive if you had used it?” and he said he never intended to use it.

Captain Warren told me that on the fishermen coming to haul in the seine that Captain Dago hailed them to say that they would take the seine in themselves if they waited, and that he (Warren) said to Dago, “It is too late now; you ought to have done it when they told you first; that they are too excited now.”

I then communicated with the natives of the place, who related the circumstances, and gave their reasons that the Americans were fishing illegally, and would have secured the whole of the fish, which they considered part of their property, and that they would have been distressed for the winter. They told me that they had at first told them to take up their seines, and they refused; that Captain Jacobs had threatened them with a revolver, but, notwithstanding this, they had taken up one and destroyed it.

I saw Captain Jacobs several times afterwards, and in the course of conversation with him I said: “If I had been there you would not have been allowed to shoot your seine.” “What!” he said, “could you prevent me?” I said “Yes; I should have seen the law carried out and taken your seine and boat, which you forfeited for breaking the law,” and I told him I would take the tine as well of $200, at which he said: “Do you think I care about paying the fine? I could pay the fine,” by which I understood him to mean that the fine was not worth considering, as the quantity of fish would have more than paid for it.

Q. Was there any one in Long Harbour on the Sunday referred to who could have enforced the law and protected the interests of the fishermen?—A. No.

Q. Is it not illegal shooting seines at all at that time of the year?—A. There is an act to that effect, but it has never been carried out in Fortune Bay, nor are the natives aware of its illegality at that time of the year, nor would they have molested the Americans had it not been Sunday, and which they knew it to be not only the law, but the infallible custom, to desist from fishing on that day.

Q. Has there ever been to your knowledge before quarrelsome disputes or ill-feeling between the Americans and native fishermen?—A. No, never; always on the best terms.

Q. How long did you remain in Long Harbour?—A. I remained till the 12th January.

Q. Did you observe during your stay in Long Harbour whether the three American captains remained and continued to fish or not?—A. I did, and I know that they continued to fish; they were not molested as far as I know.

Q. Was there anything to cause them to leave the harbor, or to cease fishing?—A. No, and they had not left it when I left. There were no further disputes to my knowledge afterwards.

GEO. THOS. SNELLGROVE,
Sub-Collector of Her Majesty’s Customs.

Sworn before me at St. Jacques, Fortune Bay, the 17th day of June, A. D. 1878.

GEO. L. SULIVAN,
Captain and Senior Officer on the Coast of Newfoundland.

(9.)

Deposition of Silas Fudge.

The examination of Silas Fudge, of Bellaram, Fortune Bay, taken upon oath, and who saith:

I am mate of my father’s schooner. I witnessed the disturbance at Long Harbour on Sunday, the 6th January last. I am certain that it was on the 6th January it happened.

I saw the seines in the water—two of them American and one English. We told them to take them up.

John Hickey, the Englishman, took his up. McAulay, the American, who owned the other, refused to take his up. There was another seine, which I did not see, in the water, belonging to Captain Jacobs. He had his in the boat at the time. He had shot once and discharged his seine into Thomas Farrell’s, who was working for him, and was going to shoot his seine out again. I saw it in the boat ready for shooting when the crowd came over. They first spoke to McDonald, and asked him if he would take his seine up, and he said, “Yes, if I am forced”; and they then went to Hickey and told him to take his up, and he took it up; then they went to McAulay and asked him to take his up, and he said he would not. They then told him that if he didn’t they would take it up for him. They then went to Jacobs, and told him they would let go the herring out of the seine of Tom Farrel, who was an Englishman. Jacobs then drew a revolver, and threatened to shoot any man who touched his property. The crowd were very excited. I saw them haul McAulay’s seine in and tear it up. That was the end of the row that day. Farrel had, during the previous week, secured herring in the American seine, and then had placed his own round them, and taken up the American’s. This was done before Sunday. It was in this seine of Farrel’s that Jacobs emptied his own seine.

Q. You knew that the American fish were in the Englishman’s seine; why was Farrel’s seine allowed to remain?—A. Because he had not shot it on the Sunday, but on the week day.

Q. Are you aware that it was illegal to use seines to catch herring that time of the year?—A. No; I don’t know.

Q. Did you believe it to be lawful to use seines for herring that time of the year?—A. Yes, I thought so, as far as I could understand. I supposed the Americans thought, with reference to the destruction of the seine, that we did it in envy of them, but it wasn’t; hut it was from regard to the Sabbath, on which day we never fish.

Q. How far from the beach were the American seines shot?—A. Close to the beach; the hauling lines were on the beach.

The Americans remained in the bay after the occurrence for several days; they were never molested or interfered with afterwards; they continued to fish until they left the harbour; they were not compelled to leave the harbour, but I believe they were unsuccessful on account of the bad weather and for want of frost.

SILAS FUDGE.

Sworn before me at St. Jacques, Fortune Bay, the 17th day of June, A. D. 1878.

GEO. L. SULIVAN,
Captain and Senior Officer on the Coast of Newfoundland.

(10.)

Deposition of John Cluett.

The examination of John Cluett, of Balloram, Fortune Bay, taken upon oath, and who saith:

I was in Long Harbour one Sunday in January last.

Q. Did you see anything of the quarrel between the Americans and other fishermen?—A. I did.

Q. Tell me what you know of it.—A. They commenced hauling herring on Sunday, about midday. The first American seine shot was Captain Jacobs’. There were two more American seines shot. There was an Englishman working for the Americans who had a seine moored there for several days, but it was not shot or attempted to be hauled on the Sunday.

The first seine we came to was Captain McDonald’s. They asked him if he was going to take his seine up. He said, “If we are forced to take it up we will”; and we told him if he didn’t take it up we would take it up for him.

The next we came to was a man belonging to Fortune Bay, called John Hickey, an Englishman, and we told him to take up the seine, and he said he would take it up, and he did. The next we came to was Peter McAulay, and we told him the same as the others, and he refused to take it up. Then we went on to Captain Jacobs, and when we got to him he was in his skiff, a little off the shore. He had just hauled herring and shot them into Farrel’s seine, who was working for him. They remonstrated about breaking the law and fishing on Sunday. There was an altercation between us. He said he would defend his seine if they touched it in a threatening way. I don’t know what he said. There was a great crowd, and he was in an awful rage, and I heard that he drew a revolver, but I didn’t see it. He then took his seine on board. Then all the seines were taken up but Farrel’s and McAulay’s. Farrel’s seine was not touched, because it was not laid on that day, and they therefore let it alone, although Jacobs’ fish were in it; but McAulay’s seine was taken up and destroyed, and that is all I know.

Q. Did the American captains remain in the harbour after?—A. Yes; I think about a fortnight, but perhaps more. They continued to fish and haul herring on week-days, but not on Sunday again.

Q. Were they ever molested or interfered with in any way subsequently or not?—A. Not to my knowledge; they remained there as long as they chose, and there was never any more dispute. I don’t know that it is illegal to haul seines that time of the year. I have heard of the law, but I have never seen it carried out; it had nothing to do with this dispute. The only cause of it was on account of its being Sabbath. I never saw herring hauled on a Sunday before, either by Americans or Englishmen.

The Americans, by hauling herring that day when the Englishmen could not, were robbing them of their lawful and just chance of securing their share in them, and, further, had they secured all they had barred they could have, I believe, filled every vessel of theirs in the bay. They would have probably frightened the rest away, and it would have been useless for the English to stay, for the little left for them to take they could not have sold.

The Americans would have a better chance than the English any day on account of the size of their nets, but the English would have had their fair chance the next day, and they thought they were justified, in the absence of any proper authority or power to enforce the law, to defend their rights themselves. There is no power or authority to enforce the law on all parts of the coast, and none nearer to Long Harbour than about 30 or 40 miles.

If there was not a good feeling and mutual understanding between all fishermen, whether foreigners or Englishmen, there would be no law carried, out or upheld at all, but there was always prior to this a very good feeling and a mutual understanding between the Americans and ourselves, and I don’t know anything to prevent the same in future. After the destruction of McAulay’s seine some of the American schooners, one of which was Peter Smith’s, drifted about the harbour among the fishermen’s nets when blowing hard, with their anchors hanging to their bows, and destroyed several nets. I don’t know if this was done out of revenge or not. I don’t think it was done purposely.

JOHN CLUETT.

Sworn before me at St. Jacques, Fortune Bay, this 17th day of June, A. D., 1878.

GEO. L. SULIVAN,
Captain and Senior Officer on the Coast of Newfoundland.

(11.)

Deposition of Charles Dagle.

Gloucester, February 19, 1878.

I, Charles Dagle, master of the American schooner Lizzie and Namari, of Rockport, do on oath depose and say:

That I sailed from Gloucester on the 6th December, 1877, for Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, for a load of herring. The last year (1877) I had sold a seine and boat to parties in Newfoundland, and they were to supply me with herring in payment for the seine and boat. I arrived at Fortune Bay about the 19th December. I was at Long Harbour, Newfoundland, with my vessel on the 6th January. Saw the seines of the American schooners New England and Ontario destroyed by the fishermen of Newfoundland. There is a decided objection to using netted or gill-net herring for freezing purposes, as these herring die in a short time after being taken in gill-nets. When they are seined they can be kept alive on the radius of the seine and taken out alive when the weather is suitable for freezing, while the netted herring, being dead, must be salted or spoil; consequently the seined herring are the best for our purposes, and are what the American vessels want for our market. Knowing this fact, the Newfoundland fishermen had endeavored to obstruct in every way the taking of herring with seines, as they use principally gill-nets; they placed their nets, which are set permanently, so as to hinder the using of seines. On the 6th January, 1878, the herring had come inshore, so that they were inside the gill-nets, thus giving our people an opportunity to seine them without interfering with the gill-nets. On the Americans attempting to put their seines in the water the Newfoundland fishermen threatened to destroy them, and when our fishermen had taken their seines full of herring, the Newfoundlanders came down to the number of 200, seized and destroyed the seines, letting out the fish, and afterwards stole and carried off the remnants of the seines. On account of this violence and the obstructions placed in the way of my men operating the seine, I was unable to procure a cargo, and have returned without a herring. If I had been allowed the privilege guaranteed by the Washington treaty, I could have loaded my vessel and all the American vessels could have loaded. The Newfoundland people are determined that the American fishermen shall not take herring on their shores. The American seines being very large and superior in every respect to the nets of the Newfoundlanders, they cannot compete with them. These seines are the mackerel seines which are used in summer for mackerel and are setting for herring. When they are plentiful we can take from 2,000 to 5,000 barrels. The seines and boats we use cost 1,200 dollars when new, and are too expensive for the generality of Newfoundland fishermen, and they would have no use for seines only during the herring season, while we can use them both summer and winter, and thus make them pay for their great cost.

My loss by these acts of violence, and being deprived of my rights under the Washington treaty, is fully 5,000 dollars, which I claim as indemnity. The netted herring are strangled while caught by the head in the net, and the eyes turn red from suffocation. They will not keep so long as seined herring, which are free to swim inside the seine, and are dipped out alive. The netted herring will not sell in the New York market, while the seined herring preserve their bright appearance and sell readily.

CHARLES DAGLE,
Master of schooner Lizzie and Namari.

Essex, ss:

Gloucester, February 19, 1878.

Personally appeared Charles Dagle, master of schooner Lizzie and Namari, who subscribed and made oath to the foregoing statement.

Before me.

ADDISON CENTER,
Justice of the Peace.

(12.)

Deposition of William H. McDonald.

Gloucester, February 19, 1878.

I, William H. McDonald, master of the American schooner William E. McDonald, of Gloucester, do on oath depose and say:

That I have just returned from Newfoundland, where I have been for a load of herring. I was at Long Harbour, Newfoundland, when the seines of the schooners New England and Ontario were destroyed. I had gone on shore and was on the beach at the time. The Newfoundlanders were much excited because of our use of the large seines, which for the first time were used last winter there. The Newfoundland fishermen had sunk large rocks off the beach in order to catch the seines and tear them, and had put their gill-nets where they would obstruct the use of the seines. These means failing, as the herring were close inshore, they took to personal violence, and destroyed one seine completely, and made the others take them up and release the fish: I had a seine, but was not allowed to use it. The nets they placed in the way and kept there only for the purpose of obstructing our operations with seines, as they took no herring there, but let the nets remain till they rotted. I can fully indorse the statement of Captain Dagle in all particulars. My vessel is a first-class Vessel, and with the time and expense, and with the loss of herring, I have sustained a loss of fully 5,000 dollars to myself and owners, and I claim that under the treaty of Washington, I have a right to the herring fisheries and claim indemnity for this severe loss.

WILLIAM H. McDONALD.

Essex, ss:

Personally appeared William H. McDonald and subscribed and made oath to the above statement.

Before me.

AARON PARSONS,
Justice of the Peace.

(13.)

Deposition of James McDonald.

Gloucester, February 19, 1878.

I, James McDonald, master of the American schooner F. A. Smith, of Gloucester, do on oath depose and say:

That the said schooner was chartered by George W. Plumer and others, of Gloucester, for a voyage to Newfoundland for herring. I sailed from Gloucester on the 29th November, 1877, and arrived at Long Harbour, Newfoundland, on or about the 15th December, 1877. I carried a large purse seine, such as is used to take mackerel. The seine will take 4,000 barrels of fish. I employed Newfoundland fishermen to operate the seine. I set my seine twice, but without catching anything, as my seine was torn by rocks that had been left off the beach. On the 6th January the herring made their appearance in great numbers, and the opportunity to take a large haul was improved by my men, and we took at least 1,000 barrels, enough to load my vessel and one other. The Newfoundland fishermen came off in their boats and told me to take my seine up, or they would take it up for me, and that they would cut it up. There were about 200 men engaged in this violence, and my own crew consisting of six men I could not resist, but was obliged to take up my seine. I saw the seines of the schooners New England and Ontario destroyed, and knew that mine also would be destroyed if I did not take it up. My seine was not attached to the shore when they came off, and the attack on me was made in boats. After destroying the other seines they all made for me, and my only safety was to gather up my seine. I lost all my fish, and the Newfoundland fishermen put all the obstructions they could in the way to prevent the use of our seines after that. From my knowledge of the facts I do say that the Newfoundland fishermen are determined to prevent American fishermen from using the shore fisheries. I consider that the loss to the vessel and the charter party at not less than 5,000 dollars, and under the Treaty of Washington I have been deprived of my rights as an American citizen, and full indemnity should be allowed for the outrage. I have read the statement of Captain Dagle, and know it to be true in all its particulars. The effect of this treatment will be to destroy the American fishing for herring at Newfoundland. There are annually about 100 voyages by American vessels made for herring to Newfoundland. The Newfoundland fishermen were taking herring on the same day the outrages before stated occurred.

JAMES McDONALD.

Essex, ss:

Gloucester, February 20, 1878.

Personally appeared the above-named James McDonald, master of the schooner F. A. Smith, who subscribed and made oath that the foregoing statement is true.

Before me.

ADDISON CENTER,
Justice of the Peace.

(14.)

Deposition of Charles H. Nute.

Gloucester, February 19, 1878.

I, Charles H. Nute, master of the American schooner Edward E. Webster, of Gloucester, do on oath depose and say:

That I have just returned from Newfoundland, where I have been for a load of herring. I went for the purpose of co-operating with other American vessels in the use of their seines in taking herring. I was at Long Harbour and saw the destruction of the seines of the American schooners New England and Ontario. I have seen the statement of Captain Dagle, of the American schooner Lizzie and Namari, and substantiate all he has stated. I have returned without a herring for the same reasons. My actual loss in time of vessel and crew, with herring I should have bought had I not been prevented by the inhabitants of Newfoundland, is fully 5,000 dollars; and, owing to being deprived of my rights under the Washington treaty, I hereby claim that amount as indemnity for the wrong done me and the owners of the vessel.

CHARLES H, NUTE,
Master Schooner Edward B. Webster.

Essex, ss:

Gloucester, February 20, 1878.

Personally appeared Charles H. Nute, master of schooner Edward E. Webster, who subscribed and made oath that the foregoing statement is true.

Before me.

ADDISON CENTER,
Justice of the Peace.

(15.)

Deposition of David Malanson.

Gloucester, February 20, 1878.

I, David Malanson, master of the American schooner Crest of the Wave, of Gloucester, Massachusetts, do on oath depose and say:

That I sailed from Gloucester on the 8th December, 1877 on a voyage to Newfoundland for herring. I arrived at Long Harbour, Newfoundland, on the 23d December, 1877. I was interested in a seine carried by the schooners New England and Ontario. I was at Long Harbour on the 6th January, 1878, and was on the beach when the Newfoundland fishermen destroyed the seine belonging to these vessels. The herring did not strike inshore until that day, and as it is very uncertain how long they will remain, it is imperative, for successful prosecution of the business, to take them when they are inshore. By means of our large purse seines we can inclose the herring and keep them alive a month, if necessary, as we need to have freezing weather when we take them out to freeze them, to keep them fresh until we get them to market. On this occasion the herring were entirely inshore of the Newfoundland gill-nets, and, as the sequel proved, if we did not take them then and there we should lose the season catch. The seines were set in no way interfering or injuring the gill-net fishing, and inclosed and held certainly 2,000 barrels of herring, enough to load four vessels. Over 200 men came down to the beach, seized the seine, let out the fish, pulled the seine on shore, tearing and cutting it to pieces with knives. The crews operating the seines were powerless against so many; and after they had destroyed this seine they went for the other American seines, shouting and gesticulating, saying: “Tear up the damned American seines.” All of the vessels would have been loaded with herring if the Americans could have used their seines.

My loss by this outrage is not less than 5,000 dollars, which has been taken from me despite the provisions of the Washington treaty, and which I claim as indemnity.

The Newfoundland fishermen have for years been in the habit of selling all the herring to American vessels. I have been there eight years, and I have always bought my herring, or engaged the Newfoundlanders to take them for me, paying them in cash. This has been the universal practice of American vessels. This year we carried the large mackerel seines, which we use in summer for taking mackerel. These seines will take from 2,000 to 5,000 barrels at a haul, and the herring are better taken in this way. As most of the Newfoundlanders fish with gill-nets, our manner of seining would take away from them the monopoly of the herring trade, and hence the feeling which produced the outrage on our vessels. It is apparent that they will obstruct any American fishery on their shores, and are not men who would know much about rights or privileges under a treaty. I should say that there are at least 100 cargoes of herring taken from Newfoundland yearly by American vessels, and as things are now it would be useless for American vessels to go there for herring unless they bought the herring from the inhabitants at whatever price they may see fit to ask. This American trade has been a great benefit to Newfoundland, and the change in the manner of taking herring will greatly reduce the amount of money paid them for herring. Only three vessels of eighteen that were there got any herring whatever. Captain Jacobs, of the Moses Adams, held his seine with revolvers, and, being a native of Newfoundland, was allowed to take in the herring he had taken. The feeling was very intense and bitter against the Americans. The Newfoundland fishermen were catching and taking herring with their nets and boats on the same day.

DAVID MALANSON,
Master Schooner Crest of the Wave.

Essex, ss:

Personally appeared before me David Malanson, and subscribed and made oath to the above statement.

AARON PARSONS,
Justice of the Peace.

(16.)

Deposition of Edward Stapleton.

Gloucester, February 21, 1878.

I, Edward Stapleton, master of the American schooner Hereward, of Gloucester, do, on oath, depose and say:

That I have just arrived from Newfoundland, where I have been for a load of herring. I was at Long Harbor, Newfoundland, when the Newfoundland fishermen destroyed the seines of the American schooners New England and Ontario, and saw the whole transaction. I carried a seine with me, and employed Newfoundland fishermen to operate it for me. The first time they set it for me they put it out in a strong tideway, and utterly destroyed it, and after that I had to depend on the other American seines. This was the understanding among the American captains, that we were to work together and load all our vessels. The setting of the seines on the 6th January did not interfere in any way with their nets or fishing. I think there is a local regulation that does not allow the Newfoundland fishermen to fish on Sundays; but the first seine (a small one) set on that day was one owned and operated by the natives, and they were picking their nets and boating their herring ashore all day. On the arrival of the American fleet the Newfoundlanders put their nets where they would obstruct our seining, but on this day the herring were away inside of their nets, giving us the first chance and only opportunity we had to seine or get herring. Enough were taken, and could have been taken, that day to have loaded the fleet. After that day there was no opportunity to take any. Newfoundland nets were placed where they never took a fish, and placed only for the purpose of preventing our seining. My loss to vessel and owners is not less than 5,000 dollars, and I claim indemnity to that amount. This loss is owing entirely to the hostile acts of the Newfoundland fishermen.

E. STAPLETON.

(17.)

Deposition of Charles Dagle.

(See appendix to instruction No. 347 to Mr. Welsh, ante, p. 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 361].)

(18.)

Deposition of Willard G Poole.

(See appendix as above, ante, p. 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 361].)

(19.)

Deposition of Michael B. Murray.

(See appendix as above, ante, p. 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 361].)

(20.)

Deposition of Michael B. Murray.

(See appendix as above, ante, p. 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 361].)

(21.)

Deposition of Peter Smith.

(See appendix as above, ante, p. 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 361].)

(22.)

Official statement of Newfoundland herring fishery.

(See appendix as above, ante, pp. 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 361] and 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 361].)

APPENDIX B.

(1.)

Anno Vicesimo-Quinto Victoriӕ Reginӕ.

Cap. II.—An act for the protection of the herring and salmon fisheries on the coast of this island, and for other purposes. [Passed March 27, 1862.]

Preamble. Whereas the breed and fry of herrings frequenting the coast of this island and the Labrador are often found to be greatly injured and destroyed by the using of seines and nets of too small size or mesh, and by other unwarrantable practices; and whereas complaints have been preferred to the local government of alleged depredations committed by the fishermen frequenting these coasts upon each other: for remedy whereof,

Be it therefore enacted, by the governor, legislative council, and assembly, in session convened: I. That no person shall haul, catch, or take herrings in any seine, on or near any part of the coast of this island, or of its dependencies on the coast of Labrador, or in any of the bays, harbors, or any other places therein, at any time between the 20th day of October and the 12th day of April in any year; and no person shall, on or near the coast of this island or of its dependencies aforesaid on the coast of Labrador, or in any of the bays, harbors, or other places therein, at any time, use a seine or other contrivance for the catching and taking of herrings, except by way of shooting, and forthwith tucking and hauling the same: Provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent the taking of herrings by nets set in the usual and customary manner, and not used for in-barring or inclosing or herrings in any cove, inlet, or other place. Herring not to be taken in seines from 20th October until 12th April. Proviso as ta the use of nets.

II. No person shall, at any time between the 20th day of December and the 1st day of April in any year, haul, catch, or take any herring on or near the coast of this island or of its dependencies aforesaid on the Labrador, or in any of the bays, harbours, or any other places therein, in any net having the meshes, mokes, or scales of less than two inches and three-eighths of an inch, at least, from knot to knot, or having any false or double bottom of any description; nor shall any person put any net, though of legal size of mesh, upon or behind any other net not of such size of mesh, for the purpose of catching or taking the fry of such herring passing through any single net of two inches and three-eighths of an inch mesh or scale. Nets of 2 3-8 inch scale to be used from the 20th December until the 1st April. Regulation as to nets with double bottom, &c.

III. No person shall wilfully remove, destroy, or injure any lawful net or seine, the property of another, set or floating on or near the coasts of this island or of its dependencies aforesaid on the Labrador, or in any of the bays, harbours, or other places therein, nor remove, let loose, or take any fish from or out of any such lawful net or seine. No person shall interfere with the nets of others.

IV. No person shall, at any time between the 20th day of April and the 20th day of October, haul, catch, or take any herring or other bait for exportation within one mile of any settlement situate on that part of the coast between Cape Chapeau Rouge and Point Rosey. Herring not to be taken from the 20th April until the 20th October between Cape Chapeau Rouge and Point Rosey.

V. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this act shall for every offence forfeit a sum not exceeding ten pounds; and, in addition, all seines, nets, and other contrivances used or employed in, about, or preparatory to the catching, hauling, taking, or in-barring of any herrings, in violation of any of the provisions hereof, shall be liable to forfeiture, and the same may be seized at once by any justice, sub-collector of customs, preventive officer, or constable, on view or by virtue of a warrant issued by such justice, sub-collector, or preventive officer, on oath to be administered by any of them, and detained until the trial of the offender, when they may be declared forfeited and ordered to be sold at public auction. Penalty for violation of this act.

VI. And whereas an act was passed in the twenty-third year of the reign of Her present Majesty, entitled “An act for the protection of the salmon fishery, and for other purposes,” whereby certain nets and seines were forbidden to be used, and certain weirs and other erections and contrivances were prohibited from being erected at certain times and under certain circumstances, in the said act declared: Prohibition foi using salmon nets at certain times, iand against erect ing weirs, and penalty.

Be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for any justice, sub-collector, preventive officer, or constable aforesaid, on view, and for any constable or other person by virtue of a warrant to be issued as aforesaid, to seize any net or seine, and to destroy any weir or other erection or contrivance used or erected in contravention of the said recited act, and all such nets and seines shall be forfeited and disposed of in manner provided by the Vth section of this act.

VII. All forfeitures and penalties imposed by this or the said recited act shall be recovered with costs, in a summary manner, before any justice of the peace, for which purpose such justice shall have full power to summon or arrest the offender, and to compel all witnesses, either by summons or warrant, to appear before him on such trial; and upon con viction of such offender, such justice shall issue his warrant to cause such seines, nets, or other contrivances so illegally used, to be sold at public auction, or, where permitted under the preceding section of this act, destroyed; and in default of payment of such penalty as may be imposed, and costs, by the party convicted, such justice shall issue his warrant to any constable or other person to arrest and imprison such convicted offender for a neriod not exceedingtwentv davs. Maimer of recovering penalties, and in default term of imprisonment.

VIII. All penalties and forfeitures under this or the said recited act, and all proceeds thereof, when recovered, shall be paid to the party informing against and prosecuting such offender to conviction. Disposal of penalties and forfeitures.

IX. No conviction or proceeding by any justice or other officer under this act shall be quashed or set aside for want of form, so long as the same shall be substantially in accordance with the true intent and meaning of this act. Convictions not to be quashed foi want of form, &c.

X. Provided always, That nothing m this act contained snail m any way affect or interfere with the rights and privileges granted by treaty to the subjects or citizens of any state or power in amity with Her Majesty. This act not to interfere with rights protected by treaty.

XI. The ninth section of the said recited “act for the protection of the salmon fishery “is hereby repealed. Ninth section -of the Salmon Fishery Act repealed.

(2.)

Title XXVII.—Consolidated Statutes of Newfoundland, 1872.

Cap. CII—Of the Coast Fisheries.

Section.

1. Herring not to be caught between 20th October and 12th April. Seine, how to be used.

2. Time for use of and size of net.

3. Injuries to nets and seines.

4. Herring not to be hauled for bait between 20th April and 20th October.

5. Spearing or sweeping with nets and seines for salmon above tidal waters unlawful.

6. Stake, seine, or weir unlawful.

7. Mill-dams and other obstructions.

8. Mesh of salmon net.

9. Salmon bought or sold in close time forfeited.

10. Distance between salmon nets.

11. Time for taking salmon.

12. Penalties.

13. Weir, &c., erected contrary to law, may be destroyed.

14. Forfeitures and penalties, how recovered.

15. Appropriation of same.

16. Convictions not to be quashed for want of form.

17. Governor may appoint superintendent of fishery and fishery wardens.

18. Reservation of treaty rights.

1. No person shall haul, catch, or take herrings by, or in a seine or other such contrivance on or near any part of the coast of this colony or of its dependencies, or in any of the bays, harbours, or other places therein, at any time, between the 20th day of October and the 12th day of April an any year, or at any time use a seine or other contrivance for the catching and taking of herrings, except by way of shooting and forthwith hauling the same: Provided that nothing herein contained shall prevent the taking of herrings by nets set in the usual and customary manner, and not used for in-barring or inclosing herrings in a cove, inlet, or other place.

2. No person shall, at anytime between the 20th day of December and the 1st day of April in any year, use any net to haul, catch, or take herrings on or near the coasts of this colony or of its dependencies, or in any bays, harbours, or other places therein, having the mokes, meshes, or scales of such net less than two inches and three-eighths of an inch at least, or having any false or double bottom of any description; nor shall any person put any net, though of legal size mesh, upon or behind any other net not of such size mesh, for the purpose of catching or taking such herring or herring fry passing a single net of legal size mesh.

3. No person shall wilfully remove, destroy or injure any lawful net or seine, the property of another, set or floating on or near the coast of this colony or its dependencies, or any of the bays, harbours, or other places therein, or remove, let loose, or take any fish from such seine or net.

4. No person shall, between the 20th day of April and the 20th day of October in any year, haul, catch, or take herrings or other bait for exportation, within one mile, measured by the shore or across the water, of any settlement situate between Cape Chapeau Rouge and Point Enragée, near Cape Ray; and any person so hauling, catching, or taking, within the said limits, maybe examined on oath by a justice, otficerof customs, or person commissioned for the purpose, as to whether the herrings or other bait are intended for exportation or otherwise, and on refusal to answer or answering untruly, such person shall, on conviction, be subject to the provisions of the twelfth section of this chapter.

5. No person shall, by spearing or sweeping with nets or seines, take or attempt to take any salmon, grilse, par, or trout, in any bay, river, stream, cove, or watercourse, above where the tide usually rises and falls, or in any pond or lake.

6. No stake, seine, weir, or other contrivance for taking salmon, except nets set or placed across, shall be set or placed in any river, stream, cove, lake, or watercourse. No net shall extend more than one-third of the distance in a straight line across, and all nets shall be set only on one side of such river, stream, cove, lake, or watercourse.

7. No person shall construct any mill-dam, weir, rack, frame, train gate, or other erection or barrier in or across any river, stream, cove, lake, or watercourse, so as to obstruct the free passage of salmon, grilse, par, trout, or other fish resorting thereto for the purpose of spawning; and all mill-dams or other erections placed on, over, or across any watercourse, river, or stream, resorted to by fish for the purpose of spawning, shall have a waste-gate opening, or slope sufficient to constitute a proper and sufficient fish way, which shall be kept in repair by the owner. No person shall permit any sawdust or mill rubbish to be cast into any such river, stream, cove, lake, or watercourse.

8. No person shall use any net for taking salmon, the mokes, meshes, or scales of which are less than four inches and a half inch.

9. No person shall buy or sell or have in his possession salmon, knowing the same to have been taken contrary to the provisions of this chapter, and every salmon so taken, bought, or sold, shall be declared forfeited to the complainant by am justice.

10. No net shall be moored or set in any harbour, cove, creek, or estuary, or on or near any part of the coast of this colony, or its dependencies, for the purpose of i aking salmon, nearer to any other net moored or set for a like purpose than one hundred yards for a single net, and three hundred yards for a double net or fleet of nets.

11. No salmon shall be taken before the 1st day of May or after the 10th day of September in any year: Provided, that if the time limited in this section shall be found to operate injuriously in any part of this island, the governor in council may appoint any otht r time or times, and such time or times shall be as binding on all persons as if specially mentioned herein.

12. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding fifty dollars, and all seines, nets, and other contrivances used contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be forfeited, and may be seized and detained until the trial of the offender by any justice, sub-collector of customs, preventive officer, fishery warden, or constable, on view, or by virtue of a warrant issued by such justice, sub-collector, or preventive officer, upon complaint made on oath to be administered by either of them, and, upon conviction, the same maybe declared forfeited and ordered to be sold at public auction.

13. Any justice, sub-collector, preventive officer, fishery warden, or constable, may, on view, destroy any weir, rack, frame, train-gate, or other erection or barrier, used or erected contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or the same may be destroyed by virtue of a warrant issued by any justice, sub-collector, or preventive officer, upon complaint made on oath to be administered by either of them.

14. All forfeitures and penalties imposed by this chapter shall be recovered, with costs, in a summary manner before any justice, for which purpose such justice may summon or arrest the oifender, and compel witnesses, by summons or warrant, to appear before him; and upon conviction of the oifender, such justice shall cause all seines, nets, and other contrivances illegally used, to be sold by public auction, or, where permitted under the provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter, destroyed; and in default of the payment of any penalty imposed, and costs, such justice shall issue his warrant and cause such offender to be arrested and imprisoned for any period not exceeding twenty days.

15. All penalties and forfeitures imposed by this chapter, and the proceeds thereof, shall be paid to the party informing against and prosecuting the oifender to conviction.

16. No proceeding or conviction by any justice or other officer under this chapter shall be quashed or set aside for any informality, provided the same shall be substantially in accordance with the intent and meaning of this chapter.

17. The governor in council may appoint the collector of revenue for Labrador, or other person, to be superintendent of the fisheries on the coast of this island and its dependencies, and may also appoint fishery wardens, and prescribe their duties for the purposes of this chapter. The compensation for the services of such officers to be provided by the legislature.

18. Nothing in this chapter shall affect the rights and privileges granted by treaty to the subjects of any State or power in amity with Her Majesty.

[Inclosure 2 with No. 170.]

Mr. Hoppin to the Marquis of Salisbury.

Legation of the United States,
London, April 6, 1880.

My Lord: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your lordship’s letter of the 3d instant in reply to Mr. Welsh’s communications of the 13th of August last in relation to the claims of United States fishermen for losses occasioned by certain occurrences at Fortune Bay, Newfoundland, in January, 1878; and I have to acquaint your lordship that I shall send a copy of your letter to the honorable the Secretary of State at Washington by the earliest post.

I have, &c.,

W. J. HOPPIN.

No. 376. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. No. 376.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
London, October 28, 1880. (Received November 9.) No. 81.]

Sir: I have the honor to acquaint you that I received this morning from Lord Granville an important letter upon the subject of our claims for indemity growing out of the disturbance of our fishermen at Fortune Bay in January, 1878. I shall send by cable to-night an abstract of this letter, and I herewith transmit a copy of it.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Inclosure in No. 81.]

Earl Granville to Mr. Lowell.

Foreign Office, October 27, 1880.

Sir: Her Majesty’s Government have carefully considered the correspondence which has taken place between their predecessors and the Government of the United States respecting the disturbance which occurred at Fortune Bay, on the 6th of January, 1878, and they have approached this subject with the most earnest desire to arrive at an amicable solution of the differences which have unfortunately arisen between the two governments on the construction of the provisions of the treaties which regulate the rights of the United States fishermen on the coast of Newfoundland.

In the first place, I desire that there should be no possibility of Misconception as to the views entertained by Her Majesty’s Government respecting the conduct of the Newfoundland fishermen in violently interfering with the United States fishermen, and destroying or damaging some of their nets. Her Majesty’s Government have no hesitation in admitting that this proceeding was quite indefensible, and is much to be regretted. No sense of injury to their rights, however well founded, could, under the circumstances, justify the British fishermen in taking the law into their own hands and committing acts of violence, but I will revert by and by to this feature in the case, and will now proceed to the important question raised in this controversy, whether, under the treaty of Washington, the United States fishermen are bound to observe the fishery regulations of Newfoundland in common with British subjects.

Without entering into any lengthy discussion on this point, I feel bound to state that in the opinion of Her Majesty’s Government the clause in the treaty of Washington which provides that the citizens of the United States shall be entitled, “in common with British subjects,” to fish in Newfoundland waters within the limits of British sovereignty, means that the American and British fishermen shall fish in these waters upon terms of equality, and not that there shall be an exemption of American fishermen from any reasonable regulations to which British fishermen are subject.

Her Majesty’s Government entirely concur in Mr. Marcy’s circular of the 28th of March, 1856. The principle therein laid down appears to them perfectly sound, and as applicable to the fishery provisions of the treaty of Washington as those of the treaty which Mr. Marcy had in view. They cannot, therefore, admit the accuracy of the opinion expressed in Mr. Evarts’s letter to Mr. Welsh, of the 28th of September, 1878, “that the fishery rights of the United States conceded by the treaty of Washington are to be exercised wholly free from the restraints and regulations of the statutes of Newfoundland,” if by that opinion anything inconsistent with Mr. Marcys principle is really intended. Her Majesty’s Government, however, fully admit that if any such local statutes could be shown to be inconsistent with the express stipulations, or even with the spirit of the treaty, they would not be within the category of those reasonable regulations by which American (in common with British) fishermen ought to be bound, and they observe, on the other hand, with much satisfaction, that Mr. Evarts, at the close of his letter to Mr. Welsh, of the 1st of August, 1879, after expressing regret at “the conflict of interests which the exercise of the treaty privileges enjoyed by the United States appears to have developed,” expressed himself as follows:

“There is no intention on the part of this [the United States] government that these privileges should be abused, and no desire that their full and free enjoyment should harm the colonial fishermen.

“While the differing interests and methods of the shore fishery and the vessel fishery make it impossible that the regulation of the one should be entirely given to the other, yet if the mutual obligations of the treaty of 1871 are to be maintained, the United States Government would gladly co-operate with the Government of Her Britannic Majesty in any effort to make those regulations a matter of reciprocal convenience and right, a means of preserving the fisheries at their highest point of production, and of conciliating a community of interest by a just proportion of advantages and profits.”

Her Majesty’s Government do not interpret these expressions in any sense derogatory to the sovereign authority of Great Britain in the territorial waters of Newfoundland, by which only regulations having the force of law wdthin those waters can be made. So regarding the proposal, they are pleased not only to recognize in it an indication that the desire of Her Majesty’s Government to arrive at a friendly and speedy settlement of this question is fully reciprocated by the Government of the United States, but also to discern in it the basis of a practical settlement of the difficulty, and I have the honor to request that you will inform Mr. Evarts that Her Majesty’s Government, with a view to avoiding further discussion and future misunderstandings, are quite willing to confer with the Government of the United States respecting the establishment of regulations under which the subjects of both parties to the treaty of Washington shall have the full and equal enjoyment of any fishery which, under that treaty, is to be used in common. The duty of enacting and enforcing such regulations, when agreed upon, would of course rest with the power having the sovereignty of the shore and waters in each case.

As regards the claim of the United States fishermen to compensation for the injuries and losses which they are alleged to have sustained in consequence of the violent obstruction which they encountered from British fishermen at Fortune Bay on the occasion referred to, I have to state that Her Majesty’s Government are quite willing that they should be indemnified for any injuries and losses which, upon a joint inquiry, may be found to have been sustained by them, and in respect of which they are reasonably entitled to compensation; but on this point I have, to observe that a claim is put forward by them for the loss of fish which had been caught, or which, but for the interference of the British fishermen, might have been caught by means of strand fishing, a mode of fishing to which, under the treaty of Washington, they were not entitled to resort.

The prosecution by them of the strand fishery being clearly in excess of their treaty privileges, Her Majesty’s Government cannot doubt that, on further consideration, the United States Government will not be disposed to support a claim in respect of the loss of the fish which they had caught or might have caught by that process.

I have, &c.,

GRANVILLE.

HawaiiHawaii

[377] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, November 24, 1879. (Received December 10.)

[378] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, December 22, 1879. (Received January 23, 1880.)

[379] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, December 22, 1879. (Received January 23.)

[380] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, December 22, 1879. (Received January 23, 1880.)

[381] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, February 16, 1880. (Received March 3.)

[382] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly.

Department of State, Washington, March 5, 1880.

[383] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, March 15, 1880. (Received April 1.)

[384] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, March 15, 1880. (Received April 1.)

[385] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, April 8, 1880. (Received May 1.)

[386] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, June 8, 1880. (Received June 24.)

[387] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly.

Department of State, Washington, May 12, 1880.

[388] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Comly.

Department of State, Washington, June 30, 1880.

[389] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, July 30, 1880. (Received August 17.)

[390] . Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Honolulu, September 20, 1880. (Received October 14.)

No. 377. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 377.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, November 24, 1879. (Received December 10.) No. 85.]

Sir: I have the honor of transmitting the concluding correspondence with the Hawaiian foreign office upon the subject of tariff on cotton clothing, showing that the Hawaiian Government has accepted the interpretation of Treasury experts and the honorable Secretary of the Treasury, and has ordered that duties shall not hereafter be levied upon cotton clothing, the same being the growth, manufacture, and produce of the United States.

I am, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 85.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Kapena.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, November 11, 1879. No. 162.]

Sir: In a note dated May 2, 1879, I had the honor to call your excellency’s attention to the question whether the customs officers of His Majesty had properly construed a certain article in the reciprocity treaty, in collecting a tariff upon all cotton goods when manufactured into clothing, the same being the growth, manufacture, and produce of the United States.

In a reply dated June 9, your excellency having stated the grounds of the decision, with an Inclosure from the collector-general elaborating his views and reciting his instructions, you thereupon express a desire to have the opinion and interpretation of the Treasury experts at Washington, “His Majesty’s Government wishing to give the reciprocity treaty the most liberal interpretation.”

In compliance with the desire so expressed, I forwarded copies of all notes, dispatches, and inclosures of the correspondence to the honorable William M. Evarts, Secretary of State, under date of June 9, 1879.

I have the honor now to transmit to your excellency a letter from the Hon. John Sherman, Secretary of the Treasury, with Inclosure, giving it as the opinion of the Treasury Department, upon unanimous advice of its experts at the most important ports, that “ready-made clothing of cotton is entitled to admission free of duty into the Hawaiian Islands, under the treaty mentioned.”

I need not recite the facts and arguments which have led to this interpretation, further than to say that they are based mainly upon an expert interpretation of the terms used in the treaty. I simply desire to call your excellency’s attention to the fact that a judicial interpretation of the treaty, according to the rules and maxims of the courts, would be no less conclusive as to the meaning of the phrase “cotton and manufactures of cotton.” The collector-general in his communication, a copy of which was inclosed in your reply of June 9 before mentioned, argues that “although the words ‘other than when ready-made clothing’ were not expressed here, as in regard to wool and manufactures of wool or textile manufactures, still such was the understanding and intention,” &c., and his reasoning seems to he that because “other than when ready-made clothing” is expressed in the two clauses, it must be taken to be implied as to the other clause, he “can see no reason why cotton clothing should be admitted free and all others made dutiable.” Now, it seems to me that the reason (or one reason) why cotton clothing should be admitted free and the other made dutiable is that “the other” is expressly excepted from the free list, while cotton clothing is not. The rule of interpretation has been for ages, expressum facit cessare tacitum, exactly the reverse of that relied upon by the collector-general.

Cordially reciprocating your excellency’s aspirations for liberality and frankness in the mutual relations between the two nations we have the honor to represent, and renewing the assurances of my high consideration and respect,

I am, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 85.]

Mr. Kapena to Mr. Comly.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, November 19, 1879.

Sir: I now beg to reply to your dispatch of the 11th instant, acknowledged on the 13th, regarding the tariff levied at our custom-house upon cotton goods when manufactured into clothing, the same being the growth, manufacture or produce of the United States. Your excellency alludes to a dispatch from this department which was accompanied by an Inclosure from the collector-general of this country, giving his reasons for levying the duty. In that dispatch it was stated that His Majesty’s Government would be glad to have the opinion and interpretation of the Treasury experts at Washington on the question, and you are likewise assured that His Majesty’s Government desire to give the reciprocity treaty a most liberal interpretation.

Your dispatch of the 11th instant was accompanied by a copy of a dispatch from the honorable Secretary of the Treasury of the United States to the honorable Secretary of State, dated the 17th of September; and likewise a copy of a letter from the appraiser of the custom-house at Boston dated the 11th of September.

By these dispatches His Majesty’s Government is glad to learn that the views and reasons expressed by our collector-general have received a kindly and candid consideration, and inasmuch as, after deliberately weighing the subject in a spirit of fairness and candor, the honorable Secretary of the Treasury of the United States has reached the conclusion that “cotton goods when manufactured into clothing “should not be subjected to duty in this country under the provision of Article II of the reciprocity treaty, I hasten to assure your excellency that His Majesty’s Government accepts the interpretation thus placed on Article II, and that duties will hereafter not be levied upon “cotton goods when manufactured into clothing, the same being the growth, manufacture or produce of the United States.”

Renewing the assurances of my highest respect and consideration,

I have, &c.,

JNO. M. KAPENA.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 85.]

Official notice from the collector-general.

Collector-General’s Office,
November 19, 1879.

[From the official publications.]

By order of his excellency the minister of finance, from nd after this date all cotton goods, when manufactured into clothing, the same being the growth, manufacture or produce of the United States, will be admitted free under the provisions of the reciprocity treaty.

W. F. ALLEN,
Collector-General.

No. 378. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 378.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, December 22, 1879. (Received January 23, 1880.) No. 86.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that after correspondence between the Hawaiian foreign office and this legation, and no legal impediment being found to exist, the following American schooners have been registered under the Hawaiian flag: C. M. Ward, General Harney, Joseph Woolley.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

No. 379. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 379.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, December 22, 1879. (Received January 23.) No. 87.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the bark Kalakaua, late Mary Belle Roberts, has been again seized and libeled for smuggling opium, and the chief justice in chambers ordered her confiscation and sale. The Kalakaua is now under the Hawaiian flag, but is owned by J. C. Merrill, San Francisco. No conviction for smuggling—no charge even—has been made in court against any officer or person connected with the bark. The bark itself is convicted of smuggling and condemned, with no confederates of human kind. The case is one in which I have declined to interfere, as the bark is not under the American flag, though owned by an American citizen.

* * * * * * *

The case has been appealed from chambers to supreme court, in banco, .and after that there is no appeal, I believe, unless to the executive.

I inclose documents which have been circulated among merchants here—a copy of which was furnished me by the master of the Kalakaua. The notes and marks upon these were not made by me.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure in No. 87.]

[From the Pacific Commercial Advertiser, Saturday, December 13.]

Opinion of the court.

Supreme court. In admiralty.

——

In the matter of the bark Kalakaua.

The libel in this case, which is filed by the collector-general of customs, asks that the bark Kalakaua, her tackle, apparel, and furniture, together with 36 tins of opium, containing about 3½ pounds of opium each, be condemned as forfeited to the use of the Hawaiian Government, because that, on or about the 2d day of this present month of November, the said 36 tins of opium were smuggled into this country on board the said bark.

At the hearing, objection was raised that opium could not be smuggled into the country because that its importation was prohibited by law, except by the board of health. But this objection being overruled, as having been decidedin previous cases, and especially in the ease of The King vs. H. Bradly, the case proceeded.

J. S. Walker, of the firm of W. G. Irwin & Co., appeared as claimant for the bark, alleging that he was owner on her register, but that the real owner was J. C. Merrill, of the city of San Francisco, State of California; and thereupon Mr. Walker puts in an answer to the libel, admitting that the 36 tins of opium were brought to this port by the said bark on her last trip, but averring that the same was shipped on board the bark by one or more Chinamen at San Francisco, who had artfully concealed the same in pieces of firewood, and shipped it as firewood only, without the knowledge of the owners, officers, or agents of said bark, that such firewood contained opium.

George W. Jenks, master of the bark, likewise filed an answer, by which he admits that opium was brought into the kingdom, but says that it was concealed in firewood which was brought as freight, and that the firewood, to the amount of about 20 cords, was shipped on the bark at San Francisco, by one or more Chinamen, one of whom came as a passenger to Honolulu on the same trip, but the name of the Chinaman he has forgotten; and that the Chinaman paid freight on the firewood after its arrival in Honolulu, and further avers that antil the discovery of the opium by the officers of the custom-house at Honolulu, he (the captain) had no suspicion that opium was concealed in the firewood.

The mode of concealing the opium in the firewood, as was shown by sample in court, was by splitting the stick, and morticing a place in the stick large enough to contain the tin and then placing the tin in the mortice and fastening the pieces together by nails and glue.

Mr. W. A. Markham, port-surveyor and custom-house guard, testified that the bark arrived on Sunday, the 2d day of this present month; that he went on board, asked the captain if he had any Chinese passengers; he said “Yes.” Asked him if the Chinese had any freight; he said “No;” which, it is argued, does not correspond with his averment in his answer, that a Chinese passenger aboard the ship brought it as freight. But the freight list is produced by which it appears that one Tongkee shipped 20 cords of firewood at $5.50 per cord, and Mr. Eldrich, a clerk at W. G. Irwin & Co.’s, testifies that a Chinaman, whom he had never seen before, called at their office, paid $125 for freight and wharfage; said his name was Tongkee, and demanded an order for the firewood, which he gave him. He asked him for a bill of lading; he answered he had none and showed no receipt; that the firewood was marked on the freight list, “No mark—no bill of lading,” and that he took the Chinaman’s word that he owned the wood and gave him the order.

And it is a significant fact, as testified to by the collector-general, that in the list of passengers handed him by the captain there is but one Chinese passenger, as the captain, in his testimony, likewise says, and his name was Afong, and not Tongkee; and further, that a person came to enter the wood at the custom-house, who, being questioned, said that he did not own it, and that it was not consigned to him, but he knew who did, and thereupon was told to go and bring the consignee or owner, and no person ever after came to enter the wood at the custom-house.

The firewood in question was stowed partly on deck, partly in the main-hatch, and the 36 sticks which contained the opium, which will be the subject of comment by and by, were used as dunnage for the cargo. The 20 cords of firewood were not included in the manifest.

The captain, who was on the stand, was asked “why the firewood was not put on the manifest?” answered, “that he had no record of it, because there was no bill of lading of it,” and being shown that it was on the freight list, answered, “that he did not know whether the freight list was opened on the voyage down or not,” but upon reflection he added, “I looked at it on the voyage down to see the amount of my freight”; and being reminded that the firewood was on deck and within sight of all persons, replied that that was so; that he could not tell why he did not observe it, but simply that he had forgotten it. He further testified that the Chinaman to whom he understood the wood belonged was not entered as a passenger at the office at all, and for that reason his name was not on the passenger list from the office of the owners of the vessel, but he found him out coming down the bay of San Francisco, about twenty minutes after he left the wharf; that he told him that if he did not pay, he would have to go back on the tug-boat, and thereupon the Chinaman paid $20 and came along, and that he, the captain, had no knowledge that this Chinaman was the man that owned the wood until after his arrival at Honolulu, when he came from Messrs. Irwin & Co.’s office and brought his receipted bill.

A. L. Ritchie testified that he is master of the bark D. C. Murray, but was mate of the Kalakaua, and in that capacity superintended her loading at San Francisco for her last trip down here; that the wood in question was brought by two Chinamen for 20 cords, more or less. [N. B.—It measures but 16 cords here in Honolulu.] That he did not measure it, but took the fellows’ word for it; that it was not all hauled down in one day; that he judged by his eye it was about 20 cords; that on the first day they hauled 7 loads, the second day 3 loads, the third day 2 loads, and so on; that he took the first lot and used it as dunnage; that he did not know the Chinaman; that he did not sign any receipt; that he told him he would give him his receipt when he got all his wood down; that he never came for it, and therefore he did not give it to him; that he did riot put it in the cargo-book because he did not sign any receipt.

How this witness could judge of the quantity of wood by the appearance, when, as he says, he took it on board as he wanted to use it to stow cargo with, and commenced to load it before it was all down, I am unable to say. He says he used it as dunnage at the direction of the captain and Mr. Merrill, the owner, and, being questioned, admits that at the last trip of the same vessel 100 tins of opium were found under the wood which had been used as dunnage, the same master, the same mate, and the same second mate being aboard the ship. Now taking it into consideration that every stick of the wood which contained the opium was passed down to be used as dunnage by the mate himself, and there was not one stick of it left on deck; add to that the fact that on the very last trip with same master and officers 100 tins of opium were seized in the fore-peak of the ship, under the wood, where no passenger could have access; and further considering that this is Mr. Ritchie’s own testimony and that the wood was not on the ship’s inward manifest nor on the cargo book, and no receipt given to any one for the wood, and the conclusion is irresistible that the opium in question was placed on board the vessel by the connivance at least of the mate of the ship, and was sought to be imported into this country for the account and profit of the witness Ritchie, and whomsoever might be associated with him, and I cannot but think with the connivance of the master. The seizure of the opium on the last trip of the bark, the fact that firewood is an unusual article of freight from San Francisco, and if this kind of firewood is worth $9 in San Francisco, and pays $5.50 freight, and nearly a dollar for primage and wharfage, making in all $15.50 for pine wood on the wharf at Honolulu before expenses of handling it at Honolulu commenced to accrue, it would appear to be so unprofitable an adventure on the face of it as to arouse the suspicions of any merchant owner of a vessel, mtore especially in view of the past experience of this vessel.

There are many circumstances which lead me to the conviction that Tongkee is a mythical person.

First. It is hardly probable that any man would put on board of a vessel property so large in value as this opium is, and the wood combined, calling himself Tongkee at the office of the owners, and then go on board of the vessel surreptitiously, as a stowaway, and when discovered give his name to the captain as Afong. A person who should do so could hardly expect to get his property back when at Honolulu should he call himself Tongkee.

Secondly. No Chinaman or any other man, though engaged in an illicit transaction, would pay a bill for 20 cords of wood, and pay freight and charges for the same, when there were only 16, unless it paid.

Thirdly. Though the wood was begun to be put on the wharf on Monday, no person appeared with an order for the wood until Thursday, when the cargo was nearly out.

Fourthly. The man who came to the custom-house was not the Chinese passenger who is said to have called himself Afong on the passage, and to have called himself Tongkee at the office of the owner at San Francisco, and at the office of the agents at Honolulu, and brought with him only a mere blank “20 cords of wood,” with no value .carried out. Now any man that had the capital to embark in the adventure of over 100 pounds of opium, and the intelligence to conceal it in the manner in which this was concealed, would have been likely to have the intelligence to know that he would have to make his own entry at the custom-house, or send some one well known to the custom-house authorities, or, at least, some one who had knowledge enough to make the entry. I am, therefore, convinced that the Chinaman who called at Messrs. Irwin & Co.’s office, and paid the f 125 and got the order for the wood had the money given him for that purpose by the real owners of the opium.

It therefore appears to me certain that the opium in question was imported in the bark Kalakua, with the guilty knowledge of those in charge of the said vessel, and I do therefore adjudge that the said bark Kalakua, her tackle, apparel, and furniture, be condemned and the same is forfeited to the use of the Hawaiian Government as by the statute in such case made and provided; and. further, I do adjudge and decree that the 36 tins of opium found on board the said bark are likewise condemned and forfeited to the use of the Hawaiian Government.

Messrs. Castle and Hatch for libelant; S. B. Dole for claimants.

Honolulu, November 24, 1879.

No. 380. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 380.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, December 22, 1879. (Received January 23, 1880.) No. 88.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose sundry clippings from the Pacific Commercial Advertiser, which may be of interest, giving account of * * * immigration to these islands of cognate races from the Pacific.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 88.]

immigrants from micronesia.

The hark Hawaii, Capt. E. Wood, which sailed hence on the 30th of July last, on a voyage to the groups lying southwest of these islands, in search of immigrants, returned to port on Sunday last, 31 days from Jaluit, in the Marshall Group. She brings 288 people, 115 men, 99 women, and 74 children—all apparently in robust health, and in excellent spirits.

The bark was only 22 days from land to land, the remaining 9 days being consumed in beating up from Kauai.

The Storm Bird, under command of Captain Hatfield (Captain Jackson returned in the Hawaii), which left Jaluit on the 14th of November, arrived on Thursday, bringing 110 immigrants, all well.

The brig Nicolaus, which had been chartered by the agent of the board of immigration, would sail for the Gilbert Group on the 16th of November, the agent going on her. She may be expected here about the 1st of February, with 200 immigrants.

We understand that the Hawaii will be refitted at once for another voyage, and will probably be commanded by Capt. Benjamin Whitney.

It appears that the result of the first thoroughly organized expedition by the board of immigration will be the addition of 600 men, women, and children to our population, with a prospect of as many more as we may have the means of sending for.

We heartily congratulate the board on the success which has so far attended their efforts to introduce a cognate race with the original inhabitants of Hawaii nei; and we congratulate the country on the fact that the supply of this class of immigrants is so ample, whereby the immigration of Chinese males—which threatened to overflow the country and overshadow the native race—will be materially discouraged.

We are well aware that as laborers or plantation hands the South Sea Islanders are not the physical equals of the Chinese, and it cannot be expected that they would be, under the circumstances. The Islanders are mere children in character, and have not been trained to systematic labor. But they are extremely tractable, and ready to do, with cheerfulness, whatever they are taught to do, and we may not anticipate their combining to attack an overseer with hatchets and cane-knives through some misunderstanding about rations or wages. But at the same time we beg to suggest that a system of treatment and management should be adopted by the employers of these Islanders somewhat different from that pursued with Chinese or native Hawaiian laborers. For some time, or until they become familiar with their new conditions and surroundings, they will require to be specially looked after in the matters of food, clothing, and medical attendance, for it must be remembered that they are liable to all the effects of change of climate and habits of life. Children as they are, of a larger growth, and with very inadequate ideas of the value of money, they will be likely to squander their wages with unscrupulous Chinese shop-keepers. In regard to health precautions, a few simple remedies are usually kept on hand on every plantation. It would, however, be a sound precaution to have all the new-comers vaccinated on their arrival in the country. Vaccination was made compulsory in the Fijis after they became a British colony, and it saved the race on the arrival of coolies from India with the small-pox.

A noticeable and pleasant feature is the large number of children among the immigrants from the South Seas. These will, of course, be sent to the government schools, and in a year or two become, to all intents and purposes, Hawaiians.

It has been commonly said—and we hear it here at the Islands as well as from abroad—that with the Hawaiian people a few years more will finish the work of extinction. This is a mistake. During the past few years the rate of decrease has been gradually lessening.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 88.]

the strangers.

The 398 men, women, and children, natives of the Micronesian Groups, who have arrived here during the week, under the auspices of the hoard of immigration, have been objects of curiosity to the Hawaiians, and on the other hand our own people and everything about us are equally objects of curiosity to the new-comers. They roam promiscuously about the city, entering yards and houses, where they make themselves perfectly at home, helping themselves to eatables, &c., with guileless simplicity. Their ideas of meum et tuum are apparently a little crude as yet, but were in one instance somewhat brightened by a Chinese shop-keeper strenuously objecting to their carrying off some of his dry-goods; but they are only children now—happy children. Experience of civilization, with its labors and responsibilities, is before them.

Our reporter has visited the quarantine grounds, and describes the Gilbert Islanders now quartered there as contented and happy. Their fancy is that Kalakaua has sent for them to come and work for him. They are only too glad to leave homes made undesirable by frequent wars, and consequent scarcity of food, for a land of peace and plenty. They are not very prepossessing in personal appearance, though some of them have good features and intelligent faces. They are in many respects obviously inferior to the Hawaiian race. But our people take kindly to them, and are ready to treat them with generous hospitality as they walk about our streets and suburbs, which they are freely allowed to do. There is even some complaint of the persistency with which the Hawaiians try to persuade those who have children to give away their little ones.

A careful inspection of the vessels will show how amply the board has provided for their wants. They have improved evidently in personal appearance and behavior in the few weeks they have been on board ship. Some of them are church-members, and have brought their books and slates and certificates of baptism and marriage. On the way up three companies of them had regular daily worship.

But the Gilbert Islanders are as ready for a fight as the Irishman proverbially is. Two or three times on the voyage it was necessary to insist that whatever they might choose to do on their own territory, there could be no fighting on shipboard. They tell of constant fighting on the islands. The war on Tarawa has ended because the young chief who was the head of the weaker party has come to Honolulu with all his family. The King of Apaiang is still fighting the people of Mariki. On Tapiteuea there has been a fight between the people of the north side, mostly heathen, and those of the south side, where Kapu and Nalimu, Hawaiian missionaries, have been preaching and teaching. It would seem, from the stories told, that Nalimu’s zeal against idolatry may have given occasion for the fighting. But the result has been disastrous for the heathen cause. Though they were furnished with guns, they were defeated and 13 killed. They look upon this as a Divine rebuke. Kapu has kept faithfully at work, exhorting the people to take Jesus Christ as their Lord and Savior. One hundred and ninety were received into the church last year, and 200 more are reported as inquirers. The people are building a new house of worship 90 by 48 feet, and wish to procure a bell.

No. 381. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 381.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, February 16, 1880. (Received March 3.) No 91.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit correspondence and inclosnres with the United States consular agent at Hilo, and with the Hawaiian Government, with reference to the case of Patrick Quinn, an American citizen illegally taxed by the Hawaiian authorities at Hilo. Standing upon his right, and refusing to pay the tax, he was arraigned before the police court of Hilo, and notwithstanding proof that he was not subject to the tax, the court condemned him to pay the tax and $3 additional costs of suit, or work out the whole amount on the public highway at 25 cents a day until paid.

After paying the tax and cost under protest, he appealed to the United States consular agent at Hilo, and the agent brought the case to my notice. The Hawaiian cabinet admitted that the judgment of the court was erroneous, and that Quinn was not liable to the tax, and ordered the money refunded, but held that the assessor and the court having acted bona fide could not be blamed in the premises, and that Quinn had sufficient remedy in an appeal from the decision through all the courts up to that of last resort. I respectfully refer the Secretary of State to the papers attached, particularly the last, No. 8, and ask that my action may be specifically approved or disapproved, in order that I may stand instructed as to cases of like sort hereafter.

There are vexatious regulations here requiring every person who enters the port, except in transitu, to pay $2 hospital tax, and every person leaving the kingdom after 30 days residence to buy a passport from the Hawaiian authorities. The hospital tax levied on foreigners supports a large hospital, with a handsomely increasing surplus after paying all the expenses of native beneficiaries, while foreign residents must ipay $1.50 a day, and are not received at all without a guaranty or a deposit of one month’s pay in advance.

There is no public provision whatever for any destitute foreign resident, while the native poor are substantially supported by this tax on foreigners entering the kingdom. These are laws within the scope of the law making power, and subject to criticism only on the score of policy. I mention this as a specimen of the thrift with which foreign residents here are milked for the benefit of the national treasury, and it is for this reason that I have endeavored to make the case of Patrick Quinn a basis for correct treatment of all cases where taxes have been or may be collected from persons not liable, even under Hawaiian laws.

I have, &c.

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 91.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Kapena.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, December 30, 1879. No. 168.]

Sir: In accordance with the agreement at the close of an oral discussion of the matter of Patrick Quinn, I have the honor to present to your excellency a brief of the points of the case.

As I understand it the following facts are agreed upon:

That Patrick Quinn is a native American citizen; that he left Port Gamble, in the United States, on the bark Jennie Pitts, on the 14th day of July last; that he arrived at Honolulu on the 9th day of August thereafter; that he has been in the lawful pursuit of his own business since, at Kau and Hilo; that he was notified on Friday, the 12th of December, 1879, by a constable, to pay taxes which are assessed under the law of this kingdom on the last day of June, each year; that Quinn called the attention of the constable to the fact that he was an American citizen, residing in the United States at the time the alleged tax was assessed, and consequently he was in no sort subject to said tax; that he, notwithstanding, agreed to go before the sheriff and state the case; that he did so state the case, and on demand produced proof of the correctness of the statement to the sheriff; that the sheriff, after having demanded proof, disregarded it and demanded that Quinn pay him ($5) five dollars tax or go before the police court; that Quinn, still standing by his right, and refusing to pay a tax levied before he had left his own country, was at once arraigned before the police court, and condemned to pay the sum of five dollars for taxes and three dollars costs of court, and was notified that, “unless paid immediately, he should be imprisoned and have to work out the amount at hard labor, at the rate of twenty-five cents per day, until paid; and at once, then and there, said sheriff gave orders to his officer to set said Quinn at work”; that Quinn thereupon paid the alleged tax and the cost of court, under protest, and laid the matter before the United States consular agent at Hilo, who has brought the case to my notice. So far, I believe, the facts are agreed upon. I now proceed with my own statement, which I cannot hut think your excellency will find as fully sustained, by reason and evidence, as the above agreed facts.

The consular agent, Captain Spencer, addressed a courteous note to Sheriff Severance, under date of December 16, once more calling his attention to the fact that Patrick Quüm was not liable to the tax assessed upon him, and therefore not subject to arrest or imprisonment for not paying the same. To this the sheriff replies in a style of military brevity and imperativeness, stating that he had arrested Quinn “as a delinquent tax-payer under the authority of a warrant from the Hilo police court,” “that Quinn was brought before the Hilo police court and by the judge sentenced to pay,” &c.

This warrant was, of course, issued at the instance and upon the demand of Sheriff Severance, upon his allegation, in the face of proof to the contrary that Quinn was a delinquent tax-payer. Your excellency will permit me to say that the sheriff’s somewhat peremptory letter furnishes no information which was not already in the possession of Captain Spencer, consular agent. The captain was already aware that Sheriff Severance had arrested Quinn and dragged him before the police court; the information Captain Spencer desired to hear, and asked to hear, was, why was this citizen of the United States charged by the sheriff under a law to which he was not subject, and to which he proved he was not subject?

This is not a dispute as to taxes, it is not a question as to whether the tax is too high or too low, to be decided by an appeal to the board in such cases provided. This is a question why Patrick Quinn, a citizen of the United States, living in the United States when this tax was levied or assessed, is outraged of his personal liberty by an officer who has proof produced before him that Quinn is not subject to the claim illegally made upon him. I submit that Quinn has no occasion to go before a tax board of appeal; he has nothing to do with the tax and is not subject to the board. He has shown a desire, it seems to me, if it please your excellency, to become a peaceable, law-abiding and industrious resident of His Majesty’s dominions, and, I have no doubt, will promptly pay any tax or other obligation due from him as such.

But I submit that he has a right to refuse to pay a tax assessed upon him before he came into the country, and that his arrest and imprisonment are totally indefensible upon any legal or equitable ground whatever. He seems to have been put to great inconvenience and expense, and has had his personal liberty put in peril in a matter where he has no more obligation or liability than any citizen of the United States now residing there, and never out of his own country.

Renewing the assurances of my highest consideration and respect,

I am, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 91.]

Mr. Kapena to Mr. Comly.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, February 14, 1880.

Sir: On return to the office yesterday morring I found that the secretary of the department had sent to your excellency a copy of the attorney-general’s dispatch to this office touching the arrest of one Patrick Quinn at Hilo, Hawaii.

It is certain that the police magistrate of Hilo misapplied the law, and he should have given judgment discharging Quinn. But the case stands in this way. The tax assessor found Patrick Quinn in his district, because he was employed on one of the plantations in that district, and in obedience to the form of assessment universally used for many years in this country the manager returned his name as one of the employés on the plantation liable to taxes. I inclose a blank form in use in such cases, with the questions to which I refer, marked A.

Thus your excellency Avill see that the assessor was not to blame for having placed his name on the roll.

The next step in the process of tax collecting in this country is for the assessor to deliver his roll to the governor of the island, who sends it to the department of finance, and the department in due course of business to the collector, wüose duty it is to collect according to that roll.

Thus it will be seen that up to this point no executive officer of this government had any reason to suspect that Quinn was not properly on the assessment-roll. Now, if the collector is unable to collect on parties simply, he takes out a summons from the district court, for instance, like any other creditor, and the sheriff must serve that summons. He has no option in the matter, and all representations made to him are quite valueless. The sheriff is the mere officer performing the order of the court.

In this instance, Quinn was so summoned before the police court of Hilo, and defended himself, as I am advised, and the police magistrate misinterpreted the law and wrongly adjudged that Quinn’s remedy was before the board of appeal, whereas he should have discharged Quinn. But Quinn had the right to appeal from that wrong judgment to the local circuit judge of Hawaii who lives at Hilo. This appeal he did not take, and so on he might have appealed to every court up to the supreme court itself, and I beg to remind your excellency of the universal rule, that every man must exhaust his legal remedy before he has occasion to resort to his country’s representative for redress, or, in other words, one cannot complain that justice is denied him, until he has sought for it from all those who are appointed to do him justice.

It may be said that Quinn is ignorant of our mode of procedure. But Captain Spencer is not, for he has resided and done business in this country for twenty-eight years, Your excellency’s note to me, dated December 30, alludes to a conversation had with me some two or three clays previously.

The facts, as I now learn them, are, that the next day after the judgment in the police court of Hilo against Quinn, Captain Spencer called at the office of Mr. Sheriff Severance, on the 13th of December, and Mr. Severance said to him that if he (Mr. Spencer) would write to the minister of finance, he (Mr. Severance) had ho doubt that the minister would remit the amount; and Mr. Severance further says that he supposed, from his remarks, that Captain Spencer would take that course.

Mr. Severance further wrote a letter on the subject, which was received here on the 17th of December last, and replies were sent to Mr. Severance on the 23d following, directing him to call on the tax collector, requiring him to pay the money back to Quinn; and as the steamer started on the same day from Hilo to Honolulu, Mr. Severance, of course, could not find Quinn that day; he (Mr. Severance) would arrange the matter as soon as he could find Quinn.

And so it was supposed here that the matter had ended and was amicably arranged until your excellency’s note of February 4 was received at this office. Immediately on receipt of that note another letter was sent to Mr. Severance directing him, if the amount had not already been paid Mr. Quinn, to pay it at once; and if Quinn were not in Hilo to pay it to Captain Spencer; and if Captain Spencer would not receive it to notify him (Captain Spencer) that he (Mr. Severance) held the amount subject to Spencer’s or Quinn’s order.

Thus I trust that your excellency will perceive that there was no fault to be attributed to the executive officers in the inception of this matter; and that after the mistake made by the Hilo magistrate, all the authorities have promptly endeavored to correct the error, even before your excellency communicated with me; and I trust you will further see that if Captain Spencer had acted in that calm and friendly manner which might have been expected of him from his conversation on the 13th of December with Mr. Severance, your excellency would never have been troubled with this matter.

Renewing the assurances of the highest respect and most distinguished consideration, I have the honor to be vour excellency’s most humble, obedient servant,

JNO. M. KAPENA.

His Excellency James M. Comly,
United States Minister Resident, &c.

[Exhibit with Inclosure No. 7, marked A.]

1879.

Statement of taxes of —— ——, district of ——, Island of ——.

(Assessments to be made of full cash value, as of July 1, 1879.)

House-lots and houses $

Acres of sugar-land

Acres of rice-land

Acres of kalo-land

Acres of pasture and forest land

Acres of growing cane

Acres of growing rice

Acres of growing kalo

Machinery of all descriptions

Head of cattle

Head of milking cattle

Head of sheep

Head of goats

Merchandise of all descriptions

Cash, bonds, and evidences of debt

Furniture

Property in hand belonging to others

Value of property not enumerated above

Number of horses

Number of carriages for pleasure

Number of vehicles for the carriage of merchandise

Number of dogs

Can you read and write?

Are you a Hawaiian subject?

Names of persons in your employ subject to taxation.

I do solemnly swear that the list of persons residing with me, and of animals and other property in my possession, or owned by me, liable to taxation, which I have given above, is true; so help me God.

—— ——.

Subscribed and sworn to before me this — day of—, 1879.

—— ——,
Assessor.

[Inclosure 8 in No. 91.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Kapena.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, February 16, 1880. No. 171.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of the 14th instant, in which you state in detail the efforts that have been made to rectify the injustice done to Patrick Quinn, by an erroneous assessment of taxes not due from him, and by trouble and expense and fine and threatened imprisonment, through erroneous judgment of a Hawaiian court.

I desire to express frankly my sense of the readiness with which redress was offered, so far as redress could be made by refunding money wrongfully taken (we may admit) through an honest error of judgment. While not desiring to proceed further in this case without instructions from the Secretary of State, I cannot leave it without saying that your excellency must see from this very case, on reflection, that redress from the courts must be, to say the least, very inadequate as a remedy for this particular sort of injustice. I cannot admit that an American citizen may be forced to fight for his liberty and property through all the Hawaiian courts up to that of last resort, because an official of this government has committed an error which might have been avoided by simply asking information of the man himself. In the case of this workingman such a course would amount to a substantial denial of justice. He has neither the learning nor the money to enable him to prosecute such a contest. I respectfully suggest to your excellency that the tax assessor is bound to know, before he places the name on the list, whether the person assessed is liable. If he places a man on the list who is not subject to the tax, it is he and not the person erroneously taxed who should pay the penalty of the error.

The amount in controversy in this case is nothing. It has not uncommonly happened that great principles have been tested upon cases where the pecuniary interest was inconsiderable. I am well aware of the principle quoted by your excellency, leaving citizens to the decision of the foreign courts where they are rightfully before such courts; but I submit that in this case the courts have no right to the person or property of Patrick Quinn, under the circumstances which we are all agreed have existed.

With the highest respect and most distinguished consideration, I am, your excellency’s very obedient servant;

JAMES M. COMLY.

His Excellency John M. Kapena,
H. H. M. Minister of Foreign Affairs.

Note.—The remaining inclosures are omitted herefrom.

No. 382. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly. No. 382.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly.

Department of State,
Washington, March 5, 1880. No. 55.]

Sir: Your dispatch. No. 91, of the 16th ultimo, in which you report your action, together with that of Mr. Consular-Agent Spencer, in the matter of the illegal arrest and taxation of one Patrick Quinn, a citizen of the United States, has been received, as well as the several inclosures, being the correspondence had in relation thereto, and read with interest and close attention, and it gives me pleasure to say that your course and that of Mr. Spencer, in the premises, meets with entire approval.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 383. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 383.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, March 15, 1880. (Received April 1.) No. 95.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit further correspondence, since last mail day, in relation to the case of Patrick Quinn and other similar cases since brought to my notice. These inclosures complete the exhibits properly belonging to my dispatch No. 91, sent by last mail.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 95.]

Mr. Kapena to Mr. Comly.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, February 17, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of yesterday, in which you say that you are not desirous of proceeding further in the case of P. Quinn “without further instructions from the Secretary of State.” Of course I am not desirous of continuing the correspondence any more than your excellency is; hut there is one sentence in your excellency’s letter which I think it worth while to speak of; it is this: You say, “An official of this government has committed an error which might have been avoided by simply asking information from the man himself.” And again, “the tax assessor is bound to know, before he places a name on the list, whether the person assessed is liable. If he place a man on the list who is not subject to a tax, it is he and not the person erroneously taxed who should pay the penalty of the error.” I think it worth while to again remark that Quinn was living on a plantation in Hilo, and that the assessor did ask the manager who of his employe’s was liable to taxation, and left the printed form containing the question to be answered at his leisure, so that the manager had an entire month to inquire of “the hands.” The manager returned in writing the name of Quinn as liable to taxation. Under these circumstances your excellency will see that the manager had every opportunity to ask of Quinn the necessary question as to his liability, and it was the manager, therefore (the employer of Quinn), who is to blame for putting his name on the list, rather than the assessor.

I make these remarks without any desire of prolonging the correspondence, but only because I am always anxious to clear up any misunderstanding and place the matter in a clear light.

I have, &c.,

JNO. M. KAPENA.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 95.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Kapena.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, March 8, 1880. No. 172.]

Sir: I have delayed my reply to your excellency’s note of February 17, in the hope that yesterday’s steamer from Hawaii would give me final information of the receipt by Patrick Quinn of his money and of his satisfaction. So far, however, I have only a notification that the money, $8, has been placed in the hands of Consular-Agent Spencer, subject to call of Patrick Quinn.

I regret to say that in the mean time two other protests have reached me through United States Consul Morton of cases similar in all respects to that of Quinn, except that in these new cases the tax collector himself took the names of the men, they protesting at the time against his illegal action.

Your excellency having taken the pains to repeat to me in your last note the statement that Quinn’s name was given to the assessor by the manager of the plantation where he was employed, and that it was the manager, therefore, and not the assessor, who is to blame, it seems necessary for me also to repeat that the assessor is the only lawful agent of His Majesty’s Government in this business, and if he delegates any part of his duties to a private person having no official relation to the duty and unknown to the law in that connection, the assessor becomes liable for the acts of his agent as fully as if they were his own acts. The person wronged could have no remedy against the manager of the plantation, because he is wholly unknown to the law as an assessor of taxes. Your excellency holds that the assessor is not to blame if he ignorantly accepts the list of which the manager has wronged the person illegally assessed. It would result, therefore, that the assessor has only to employ some agent unknown to the law to place the names of American citizens on the tax-list, and they may be illegally taxed without remedy and nobody to blame. The courtesy of his excellency the minister of finance would in that case be the only recourse to prevent His Majesty’s Government from doing a great wrong to an American citizen.

I cannot help thinking that your excellency will see on reflection that the only safe rule, not only for the protection of the citizens but for the protection of the government itself, is to hold the assessor responsible for the performance of the duty with which the law charges him. The government, it seems to me, should hold the assessor alone responsible for protecting its good name from the charge of injustice in wrongfully taxing persons not liable.

I have no desire, however, to prolong the discussion. I hope all future cases may be settled by an application direct to his excellency the minister of finance, who has so courteously and promptly ordered the money to be refunded in the case of Patrick Quinn.

It remains only for me to give the names of the two cases brought to my notice by Mr. Morton.

John Grace writes to Mr. Morton, inclosing tax-receipts for 1879, signed by J. Mills, Luna Auhau, acknowledging the receipt of $5 each from John Grace and T. Hayes, both employed at Honokaa, Hawaii. Grace states that he arrived in Honolulu, per steamer Australia, September 9, 1879, and did not go to Hawaii for a month later. Hayes arrived at Honolulu from San Francisco, November 4, 1879.

You will observe that both of these men arrived in the country after the date of making up the tax-rolls even, as stated in your excellency’s note. Grace states that there are no less than eight American citizens on this one plantation, Honokaa, that have been forced to pay this tax in the same way, illegally, under threats of imprisonment.

I hope all these cases may be promptly set right without further correspondence, and that such instructions may be issued as will relieve the minister of finance from all further trouble from errors of this sort on the part of assessors.

Renewing the assurances of my highest respect and consideration,

I am, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

Note.—The remaining Inclosures are omitted herefrom.

No. 384. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 384.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, March 15, 1880. (Received April 1.) No. 100.]

Sir: I have the honor of transmitting copies of Hawaiian customhouse statistics, covering the year 1879.

* * * * * * *

It will be observed that this year the imports of rice into the Hawaiian Islands do not appear separately, but are covered under some general heading. It is probable that they are smaller than last year.

The imports of “machinery” are reported as follows: 1. Value of goods paying duty $342,979 98

2. Value of goods free by treaty 199,477 18

I have confidentially verified a conjecture which struck me in examining these statistics, that “machinery paying duty” consists almost entirely of sugar “plants” and parts of plants from Great Britain; and that that “free by treaty” consists chiefly of steam-tpowers, sewing-machines, and other patented articles which cannot be bought elsewhere than in the United States. I learn from the same source that there is not one sugar plant from the United States during the entire year, and very little sugar machinery of any kind.

During the year there were seven full plants and two nearly full plants, besides other machinery, from Great Britain.

Again, the values, as stated, are misleading. The British sugar plants are invoiced by the manufacturer at Glasgow at net cost in the manufactory. They are sold here, after going through the custom-house, with all profits, costs, expenses, commissions, freights, tariffs, &c., added to the manufacturer’s invoice.

The value, as reported, is therefore not more than 50 per centum of the real value of British machinery imported to these islands.

For example, four or five of the sugar plants from Glasgow, Scotland, are invoiced at a uniform figure, a fraction over $32,000. One only is put at about $50,000.

* * * * * * *

Now, I am told that the planters have paid for these plants all the way along from $42,000 to $80,000. A glance at the table giving valuations of cargoes of merchant vessels will be suggestive, as nearly the whole cargo of all vessels from Glasgow would show sugar machinery.

The Secretary of State will see that these facts arid statistics confirm all I have said in former dispatches as to the bulk of the trade in sugar machinery having been absorbed by British manufacturers. The planters are not wholly or only to blame. An enterprising Scotch manufacturer has been here taking orders for his machinery and exploiting its merits. All the sugar plants received this year have been from his manufactory. Our manufacturers have neglected to work up a trade in sugar machinery until the best of it is already gone for years. The manufacturers on the Pacific Coast have lucrative business in mining machinery, and Eastern manufacturers seem to have ignored the business altogether.

As to most other items, there is a very gratifying showing for the United States. Our trade here is increasing considerably, and about 70 per cent. of the tonnage covers American bottoms.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure in No. 100.]

Value of goods paying duty imported at Honolulu from—

United States, Pacific ports $361,919 49

United States, Atlantic ports 33,670 59

Great Britain 798,261 17

Germany 185,867 69

China 86,443 43

Australia and New Zealand 65,922 73

France 26,256 94

British Columbia 11,102 20

Micronesia, Guano Islands, &c 2,993 43

Society Islands 869 56

Sea, by whalers 508 87

Total Honolulu 1,573,816 10

At Kahului, from United States Pacific ports 7,377 84

At Hilo, from United States Pacific ports 4,639 73

Total at all ports 1,585,833 67

[Inclosure in No. 100.]

Value of goods and spirits bonded.

From——

United States, Pacific ports $69,851 50

United States, Atlantic ports 8,320 52

Great Britain 43,683 98

China 39,459 97

Australia and New Zealand 11,428 31

France 7,597 11

Germany 4,876 06

Sea, by whalers 1,122 04

Micronesia, Guano Islands, &c. 775 83

Total Honolulu 187,115 32

At Kahului 34 66

Total at all ports 187,149 98

Value of goods from the United States free by treaty.

United States, Pacific ports $1,317,824 62

United States, Atlantic ports 298,727 77

At Kahului 110,252 54

At Hilo 93,407 52

At Kealakekua 142 88

Total 1,820,355 33

Résumé.—Imports, Hawaiian Islands.

Value goods free by treaty $1,820,355 33

Value goods paying duty 1,585,833 67

Value goods and spirits bonded 187,149 98

Value goods and spirits free 149,639 41

Total 3,742,978 39

No. 385. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 385.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, April 8, 1880. (Received May 1.) No. 101.]

Sir: Referring to my last dispatch (No. 100, dated March 15, 1880), inclosing Hawaiian custom-house statistics for 1879, I have the honor to make these supplementary remarks.

* * * * * * *

The detailed statement confirms all the conjectures and figures of my No. 100.

The importation of rice fell off considerably, the amount for 1879 being only 761,481 pounds, with 265,532 pounds in bond. This rice all pays duty to the Hawaiian Government, and releases that much Hawaiian rice to be sent free of duty into the United States. The export of rice is increasing rapidly. The collector-general reports, for first quarter of 1880, 1,232,200 pounds exported (to United States), an increase of 421,500 pounds over the same quarter of 1879. There is also an increase of 5,807,537 pounds in sugar, the amount for first quarter of 1880 being 15,967,857 pounds.

The figures of the detailed statement (p. 17) verify my figures as to sugar machinery: seven complete and two incomplete plants from Great Britain; none from the United States.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

No. 386. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 386.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, June 8, 1880. (Received June 24.) No. 111.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 58, received last night, I have the honor to report that, after further verbal discussion and some importunity, I have a promise that all future cases analogous to that of Patrick Quinn shall be disposed of in the same way with that, upon simple application direct to the Hawaiian minister of finance. Accordingly I have called his attention to twelve cases in which American citizens have been illegally compelled to pay taxes for which thev were not liable.

JAMES M. COMLY.

No. 387. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly. No. 387.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comly.

Department of State,
Washington, May 12, 1880. No. 58.]

Sir: I am in receipt of your No. 95, of the 15th of March last, in relation to the case of Patrick Quinn, an American citizen, arrested for nonpayment of taxes illegally imposed.

In your No. 91, of February 16 last, you gave a résumé of this case, detailing your action thereunder, which action was approved in an instruction of March 5, 1880. As it now appears, from Mr. Consular-Agent Spencer’s dispatch to you, a copy of which dispatch forms Inclosure No. 2 in your No. 95, that the tax money (and costs) has been returned to Mr. Quinn, it is not thought necessary to take any further steps in this particular case.

You furthermore state, however, that two other cases of a similar nature to that of Mr. Quinn have since been brought to your notice, and that you have entered your protest against the exaction of this repeated illegal taxation through the Hawaiian foreign office, but that the reply of the minister of finance thereto has not yet been received.

When you have communicated the substance of this reply to the Department, the expediency of taking further action in the premises, and the nature of such action, will be considered.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 388. Mr. Hay to Mr. Comly. No. 388.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Comly.

Department of State,
Washington, June 30, 1880. No. 64.]

Sir: Adverting to the Department’s No. 58, upon the subject of illegal exactions of taxes by the Hawaiian Government upon American citizens, I have now to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 111, of the 8th instant, stating that that government has promised that in future all cases of illegal taxation of our citizens analogous to that of Patrick Quinn shall be disposed of upon simple application direct to the Hawaiian minister of finance, and that you have accordingly called the attention of that officer to twelve cases in which American citizens have been illegally required to pay taxes for which they were not liable.

In view, therefore, of the disposition of that government to settle these cases in the way indicated, and your action in regard thereto, you are instructed to inform the Department of the result of each individual case, when determined, and to make direct communication thereof to the parties in interest, when this can be done.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 389. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 389.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, July 30, 1880. (Received August 17.) No. 120.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 61, inclosing a letter from Secretary Sherman, making inquiries as to the large importations of foreign rice in the Hawaiian Islands, and whether all proper precautions are taken to prevent the export of such rice to the United States from here as the product of the Hawaiian Islands, I have the honor to report:

I have given my attention to this business from the first (vide dispatch No. 75* ) as one of great importance to American interests, whether such rice was brought here for export or not; for, in effect, it acts simply as a release for the same quantity of Hawaiian rice, to be exported to the United States free. Whether the foreign rice is taken there, or it releases that much Hawaiian rice to be taken there, would seem to be about “six of one and half a dozen of the other.” The increase in the import of rice for the first quarter of 1880 was made the subject of urgent representations to different members of the cabinet, in conversations which I had with them, and also with Mr. Henry A. P. Carter, late minister for foreign affairs, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to England, Germany, &c., and others not necessary to name. The still greater increase for the second quarter emphasized my representations, the total imports for six months being over a million pounds.

I may as well say at the outset that there is no reason to suspect that any of this foreign rice is or will be exported as Hawaiian rice. It is all fed to the laborers on the plantations, who prefer it to the better and more costly Hawaiian rice. The Hawaiian rice is a different species. It is much larger, finer, better, and different in shape and appearance. I have no hesitation in affirming that I, myself, being no expert, can pick out the Hawaiian grains from a quantity of mixed rice, as fast as I could pick out grains of wheat from mixed grains of wheat, rye, and oats.

The points I have insisted upon in my representations, therefore, have been chiefly these: That these large importations must necessarily be looked upon by United States officials and public as a constant menace of such frauds, whether reasonably or without reason; and that, as above set forth, it made very little practical difference whether this very same rice, grain for grain, were sent to us, or only released Hawaiian rice to go in its place, free of the duty the foreign rice would have paid into the United States Treasury. I claimed that we were not only practically defrauded out of the revenue on this foreign rice, but that we were made use of to add that much more to the Hawaiian revenues, the Hawaiian Government, as matter of fact, receiving 1½ cents on every pound of this foreign rice, and sending us pound for pound in Hawaiian rice free of duty. The result of the interview, in almost every case, is the expression of regret that rice was put in the treaty at all.

I am told that there is neither Hawaiian nor any other capital or labor but Chinese invested in rice here. It is totally in the hands of the Chinese.

The sugar planters would all prefer to have Hawaiian rice pay duty in the United States, and have their own purchases of Chinese, Japanese, or East Indian rice freed from the Hawaiian duties. This would bring down the cost of their own supplies, and would make even Hawaiian rice cheaper in the home market, for the price of the home product depends upon San Francisco, at present.

As the result of various informal interviews and conferences, not only with officials but merchants, planters, and the like, a bill was finally drawn up (by Mr. Carter, I believe), which provides for a tariff of 2½ cents per pound upon all rice imported into this kingdom, an amount supposed to be prohibitory, in fact, though by the British claimed to be so only as to East Indian rice.

At the same time I sent, by suggestion, the letter, Inclosure No. 1, herewith, and received the reply Inclosure No. 2. I also fully informed Vice-Consul Hastings of the subject of this report, and asked certain details of him. His report, Inclosure No. 3, is so full and clear, that it seems unnecessary to go over the ground again. I desire to incorporate it as part of my dispatch, fully approving it as if written so.

The rice bill passed to a second reading without objection, and the ministry hoped to get it through at once, but on second reading Mr. Castle, a noble, and a merchant interested in the importation of rice (see letter of Castle and Cooke, appended to Mr. Hastings’ report), who had not been “posted”, arose and asked questions, and finally moved and carried a select committee of reference, where the bill still lies.

* * * * * * *

The English vice-consul, Mr. Davies, also came to see me, a merchant, largely interested. It was his ship that brought in over 100,000 pounds of East Indian rice, on July 4.* * * I told Mr. Davies that taxation is an incident of sovereignty, and if the British could dictate how much tariff the Hawaiian Government should put upon rice, or any other article not specified in some treaty already made, then Great Britain was the real sovereign of these islands, and the Hawaiian Kingdom was not an independent sovereignty.

He wanted to know whether the United States would not be satisfied with a strict system of Hawaiian excise, like the barley malt excise of Great Britain, which would insure that none of the foreign rice should be exported to the United States.

* * * * * * *

I have no means of forming any conjecture as to what may be accomplished to prevent so large an importation of foreign rice; but I am convinced beyond doubt that none of it ever can or will be exported to the United States as Hawaiian rice.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 120.]

Mr. Comly to Mr. Kapena.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, July 17, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to inform your excellency that I am in receipt of further instructions from the State Department, under date of May 25, in regard to suspected evasions of customs duties on rice, fraudulently shipped as the growth and produce of the Hawaiian Islands.

The large importations of foreign rice for the use of the Hawaiian Islands, while your own rice is still more largely exported free of duty to the United States, is looked upon by the Treasury officials as a constant menace to the faithful observance of the treaty stipulations.

I make no suggestions in the premises, trusting that His Majesty’s Government will constantly aid in preventing frauds on the United States revenue, and, if possible, take measures to remove even causes for first apprehension, so far as may be.

Renewing the assurances of my high consideration and respect,

I am, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 120.]

Mr. Kapena to Mr. Comly.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, July 19, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 175, dated 17th instant, informing therein “that you are in receipt of further instructions from the State Department, under date of May 25, in regard to suspected evasions of customs duties on rice, fraudulently shipped as the growth and produce of the Hawaiian Islands.”

At the earliest opportunity I will lay your said dispatch before my colleagues, with the view of taking such measures in the premises “to remove even causes of apprehension,” as alluded to in your (now acknowledged) communication. An early reply will be sent to you.

Renewing the assurances of my highest respect and distinguished consideration,

I have, &c.,

JNO. M. KAPENA.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 120.]

Mr. Hastings to Mr. Comly.

United States Consulate,
Honolulu, July 21, 1880.

Sir: With reference to the subject of dispatch No. 61, and inclosure, addressed to you by the honorable Secretary of State, referred to me on the 17th instant, in compliance with the request made at the time, I have the honor, most respectfully, to submit the following in regard to the importation of foreign rice into the ports of this kingdom, and of the practicability of its exportation hence as the product of these islands, thereby defrauding, the United States revenue.

This subject has been almost constantly before this office during the past three years. Attention was first called to it by Special Agent J. F. Evans, of the Treasury Department, under date of September 1, 1877. Mr. Evans then submitted a series of interrogatories in regard to the importation and exportation of sugar and rice at this port, for the use of a commission appointed by the President to investigate the customs service at the port of San Francisco, which commission, he reported, was also charged to make inquiries relative to the operation of the treaty of reciprocity between the United States and Hawaiian Islands.

The questions were replied to by Dr. Scott, then consul, aud as a number of them relate to the subject of the letter of the honorable Secretary of the Treasury (accompanying your No. 61), I append extracts herewith and copies of accompanying letters, marked Appendix A.

The subject was again brought to the attention of this office by a communication from your excellency dated May 28, 1879, which was replied to on the 30th of the same month, to which reply I would most respectfully beg to refer.*

The practice of issuiug invoice certificates at this office is the same as described by Consul Scott in the reply to query IX in the accompanying appendix (A).

It is true that “there seems to be room for fraud in the importation of rice from other countries (to the United States) via the Hawaiian Islands, and entered as the growth, &c., of those islands,” but the reasons that may be given why, in the opinion of this office, it is not done or that no attempts have been known to have been made in that direction may be stated as follows: 1st. The well-known difference existing between Hawaiian and other rice in size, shape, &c., make detection almost certain at any port of entry in the United States.

2d. Those interested here in the cultivation, cleaning, and shipping of rice, knowing that the commission of such frauds under the treaty might be a strong argument in favor of its abrogation, and, consequently, the i emission of duties of Hawaiian rice at the ports of the United States would cease, are continually on the alert to observe that such a scheme is not attempted.

3d. It will not pay. Chinese and other rice can be bought in San Francisco or any other United States port cheaper than they can be brought here, landed, and re-exported thence. Presuming that a scheme could be carried into effect whereby such rices as are imported here could be re exported as No. 1, Hawaiian (the only kind exported), buyers in San Francisco or elsewhere would hardly be supposed to pay 6 or 6½ cents a pound for a rice they know can be purchased there for 3½ cents. To make such a scheme profitable it would not only be necessary to make the United States officials at this port and the port of entry believe the article to be Hawaiian product, but also the purchaser. Considering the difference existing between the foreign and the island product, this would be no easy matter.

On several occasions when large quantities of rice have been landed here, I have been well informed as to its whereabouts and intended destination, not only by personal observation, but through the Hawaiian customs officials here.

The importation of rice here since the treaty went into operation (September, 1876) has largely increased, as the following table will show: Years. Duty paid. Value. Bonded. Value.

Pounds. Pounds.

1875 400 $8 00

1876 21,713 494 00 20,000 $480 00

1877 928,806 24,874 00

1878 541,075 15,823 11

1879 761,481 22,394 57 265,532 4,806 00

Totals 2,253,475 63,593 68 285,532 5,286 00

The imports of rice for the first six months of the present year are as follows: Whence imported. Pounds. Value.

duty paid.

Japanese 69,147 $1,566 76

British colonies 4,210 127 70

Chinese 640,239 16,840 02

Siam 20,000 500 00

bonded

Chinese 203,262 5,562 29

Total 936,858 24,596 77

The arrival of the British ship City of Madrid on the 4th instant, with 100,000 pounds of rice from British Burmah, Aia Liverpool, swells the numher of pounds of foreign rice imported thus far during the present year to 1,086,85b pounds. Judging from these figures the importations of foreign rice for the year 1880 will he more than double those of any preceding year since 1875. It will, therefore, he seen that the merchants here have been, and are still, importing yearly large quantities of foreign rice, not for re-exportation as island product, however, as has heen suspected, for it is far more profitahle to import it for consumption and export the home product. The former could hardly he done without detection either here or at the port of entry in the United States, while the latter is a safe business. Chinese, Japanese, and East India rice can he imported here direct, or via San Francisco, and sold at a profit to the planters and other consumers for 4½ cents per pound, while the Hawaiian, No. 1, sells for 5 to 6 cents per pound here.

The total yearly production of rice on these islands is not given, as it is difficult to calculate on the amount consumed yearly.

The exportation of this staple for the year 1879 amounted to 4,792,813 pounds, nearly all of which was sent to San Francisco. Of paddy, only 38,815 pounds were exported, all of which went to the same port.

The consumption of rice on the islands is variously estimated. From the numher of Chinese among the population it would seem that 8,000,000 pounds for 1879 would he a fair estimate. This would he 3, 168,372 pounds in excess of the total amount of rice and paddy exported.

The importation for 1879, duty paid and bonded, amounted to 1,027,013 pounds. According to these figures the total production of rice on the islands for 1879 may be estimated at 11,804,615 pounds, such amount being obtained as follows: Pounds.

Estimated amount of home consumption 8,000,000

Deduct importation of foreign rice 1,027,013

6,972,987

Amount of rice and paddy exported 4,831,628

Estimated total product 11,804,615

It was estimated that the acreage of rice lands under cultivation in 1879 would yield a crop for that year of about 5,900 tons (11,800,000 pounds). It would therefore appear that the foregoing estimate is not far from correct.

The crop for 1880 will not show a marked increase over this amount, but for 1881, judging from leases lately made of rice lands on this island (Oahu) and Kanai, the product for that year may reach 6,500 tons. It is quite probable, however, that the exportation of rice from these islands will increase in proportion to the amount of foreign rice imported, as it has been shown that the latter takes the place of the home product as an article for consumption.

I have, &c.,

FRANK P. HASTINGS,
United States Vice-Consul.

[Inclosure in Mr. Hastings’ dispatch to Mr Comly.]

APPENDIX A.

Extracts from answers to interrogatories, propounded by J. T. Evans, special agent Treasury Department, to Jas. Scott, United States consul, Honolulu.

[Vide Consul Scott’s letter of September 25, 1877.]

Query II. Is it possible under the existing usages of trade for rice and sugar imported from this country to the islands to be re-exported hither as the products of the islands?

Answer. I think it highly improbable under the existing usages of trade that rice or sugar could be imported from the United States or other countries to these islands, and be re-exported to the United States as the productof the islands, without detection.

As I am advised not only by the presentation of landing certificates for all goods landed from the United States in bond, but by the publications in our papers of the manifests of cargoes landed here from all countries, I am satisfied that sugars and rice could not be imported under the usages of trade here without my cognizance. All importations to these islands, except occasionally a cargo of lumber and coal at Lahaa-na and Hilo, are entered at this port. I have been careful since the ratification of the treaty to watch the importation and disposition of goods included in the schedule of Article II of the treaty.

I have every reason to believe that the China, Japan, and India rice, named in my answer to interrogatory No. 1, has been or is being consumed on the islands.

The Japan, India, and China rice imported here differs in size, shape, and color from the Hawaiian rice, and can easily be distinguished by a partially practiced eye. Should it ever be exported to the United States in Hawaiian packages, it could hardly fail detection at the port of entry.

As there is but a fraction of a cent difference between the cost of the Japan and India rice per pound when landed here, and second class Hawaiian rice, which is better than the imported, it would not more than pay to reship it to the United States, leaving out of the question the great risk of detection.

I addressed notes, when I received your interrogatories, to Messrs. C. Brewer & Co., Castle & Cooke, and H. Hackfeld & Co., all highly respectable merchants of this city, and the principal importers of the rice named. I inclose herewith copies of the notes and answers marked Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4.

Query IX. What is your practice in issuing export certificates to the United States, and upon what information are they granted?

Answer. My practice of issuing export or invoice certificates of goods exported to the United States is as follows:

I require the shipper, producer, manufacturer, or owner, or their agents, to produce their invoices at this office in person, and make declaration over their signatures to their correctness. If I have any doubt about the correctness of the declaration I put them on their oath, or satisfy myself by inquiry or investigation as to their correctness, then adding my certificate.

This is my practice in case of invoices not covering goods included in the reciprocity treaty. I require the shipper, producer, manufacturer, or owner, or their agents, in addition to the foregoing, to take and subscribe, in triplicate, the oath herewith inclosed, marked No. 5, which are attached to the triplicate invoices. Of course if I suspect fraud in any case I notify the Treasury Department and collector of customs of the port at which the goods are intended to be entered.

[Inclosure 1 accompanying Appendix A.]

Circular letter of Mr. Consul Scott to several Hawaiian mercantile houses.

Consulate of the United States,
Honolulu, Hawaiian Islands, September 29, 1877.

Gentlemen: Your house has been importing a considerable amount of foreign rice.

Will it be asking you too much to state to me why foreign rice is imported into this kingdom, while a large quantity of rice is raised in and exported from the kingdom.

I am, gentlemen, &c.,

J. SCOTT,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 2 accompanying Appendix A.]

Messrs. Brewer & Co. to Mr. Scott

Honolulu, September 29, 1877.

Dear Sir: We have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of this date inquiring of us “why foreign rice is imported into this kingdom, while a large quantity of rice is raised in and exported from this kingdom.”

In reply to the same, we would state that the reason is simply because we can import and sell here, so as to leave a margin, by selling at the same rate as the same quality of Hawaiian rice is sold for, and is preferred by Chinamen on the plantations who consume it.

As it may be of interest to you, we give below the cost of 50 tons Japan rice (equal to second-quality Hawaiian grown) lately imported by us:

Cost of 100,000 pounds Japan rice bought in bond in San Francisco, including charges.

Carting and commissions for purchasing $3,317 41

Freight at $5 per ton & priming $262.50; wharfage, $12.50 275 00

Carting to store, $25; debenture certificate, $5 30 00

Import duties 10 per cent., $331.74; custom-house stamp, $2.50 334 24

Total cost laid down 3,956 65

By this you will observe the cost of the rice is to us about 4 cents per pound, which is less than we can purchase second-quality Hawaiian rice for, that being sold here , for 4⅛ cents to 4½ cents.

This rice we sell here to our sugar plantations at 4¼ cents per pound, thus making a fair profit besides making freight for our vessels, and if we sell at 4 cents we should be satisfied with earning our freight.

We are of the opinion that the Hawaiian rice-growers prefer to polish their rice for table use, as it pays better and it is not liked as well by the Chinamen, who consume most of the imported rice.

We remain, &c.,

C. BREWER & CO.

[Inclosure 3 accompanying Appendix A.]

Messrs. Castle & Cooke to Mr. Scott.

Honolulu, Hawaiian Islands,
October 1, 1877.

Dear Sir: Your favor of the 29th ultimo, asking for information in regard to our importation of foreign rice, is at hand and noticed in full. In reply we would say, our attention was called last November to the low price of Japan rice in bond in San Francisco by commercial papers of that city, and having a vessel up for this port from there, directed a shipment of 200 mats, if to be had, at the quotation 3 cents per pound. This rice was shipped at the time and landed at Honolulu at a cost of 3¾ cents per pound, duty paid. Hawaiian rice was selling then at 4½ cents per pound. We were thus able to sell at a less price than we could buy Hawaiian, besides securing freight for our vessel from San Francisco.

We have imported of this Japan rice thus far 1,400 mats (35 tons), the bulk of which has been sold for consumption on the various plantations of these islands, and the balance in small quantities (say one to ten mats) for consumption in Honolulu by servants and families.

If considered necessary we can show schooner receipts of delivery of the above rice to the various plantations sold to.

You will observe, therefore, that we import Japan rice because we can sell it here to the plantations cheaper than Hawaiian, making thereby not only a profit to ourselves, but also secure so much additional freight for our vessel from San Francisco. Should Japan rice advance ½ cent per pound in San Francisco, or Hawaiian rice fall here ½ cent per pound, we should not import the rice.

Trusting that the above will meet your requirements,

We remain, &c.,

CASTLE & COOKE.

[Inclosure 4, accompanying Appendix A.]

Messrs. H. Hackfeld & Co. to Mr. Scott.

Honolulu, October 2, 1877.

Sir: We have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of this date, stating that onr “house has been importing a considerable amount of foreign rice,” and asking us to state to you “why foreign rice is imported into this kingdom while a large quantity of rice is raised in and exported from the kingdom.”

In reply we beg to say that the reason why foreign rice is imported here, is that it can be laid down cheaper here for home consumption than the Hawaiian product, owing partly to the inferior quality of the foreign rice thus imported, and partly, and we may say principally, to the fact that Hawaiian rice is admitted duty free to the United States under the treaty of commercial reciprocity, and hence commands an increased value in this market.

H. HACKFELD & CO.

* See Foreign Relations, 1879, p. 529, et seq.

* See inclosure No. 8 with my dispatch No. 75, for copy of Mr. Hastings’ reply.—J. M. C.

No. 390. Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts. No. 390.
Mr. Comly to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Honolulu, September 20, 1880. (Received October 14.) No. 124.]

Sir: In my No. 120, of July 30, 1880, I had the honor to report, in reply to your No. 61, inclosing letter of Secretary Sherman, requesting information as to the large importations of foreign rice to the Hawaiian Islands, and whether sufficient precautions are taken to prevent such rice from being reshipped to the United States as Hawaiian rice free by treaty. In that dispatch I inclosed copies of correspondence with the United States consul and with the Hawaiian office so far as received.

In my No. 122, dated August 16, 1880, giving course of political events and Hawaiian legislation affecting American interests, I had the honor to inform the Department that an act had been passed and approved fixing a tariff of 2½ cents a pound upon all foreign rice imported into this kingdom.

Since the date of No. 122 I have a note from the Hawaiian foreign office giving official notice of the passage and approval of this act, and inclosing a copy of the same. In order to complete the record of my No. 120, I transmit copy of the minister’s note and the original inclosure.

I have, &c.,

JAMES M. COMLY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 124.]

Mr. Bush to Mr. Comly.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Honolulu, August 31, 1880.

Sir: In reply to your communication of July 17, 1880, relative to “the suspected evasion of customs duties on rice fraudulently shipped as the growth and produce of the Hawaiian Islands,” I have the honor to reply that the legislative session of 1880, which has just closed, made provision to prevent any suspicion of fraud by passing an act entitled “An act to impose specific duties upon rice, paddy, and raw sugars imported into this kingdom,” approved August 14, 1880. A copy of the act is inclosed for your consideration.

It is the great object of His Majesty’s Government to observe faithfully all treaty stipulations with the Government of the United States of America, and to prevent any cause of apprehension.

Renewing the assurances of my highest respect and distinguished consideration,

I have, &c.,

JNO. E. BUSH,
Minister for Foreign Affairs ad interim.

[Inclosure in note of Mr. Bush.]

AN ACT to impose specific duties upon rice, paddy, and raw sugars imported into this kingdom.

Be it enacted by the King and the legislative assembly of the Hawaiian Islands in the legislature of the kingdom assembled: Section 1. There shall he levied, collected, and paid a duty of two and a half cents per pound upon all rice imported into this kingdom, and if the same he in the husk, or what is commonly known as paddy, a duty of one and a half cents per pound, and a duty of two and a half cents per pound upon all raw sugars imported into this kingdom.

Sec. 2. All laws and parts of laws inconsistent with the provisions of this act are hereby repealed.

Approved on the 14th day of August, A. D. 1880.
KALAKAUA, R.

HaytiHayti

[391] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, October 30, 1879. (Received Nov. 22.)

[392] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, November 6, 1879. (Received Nov. 22.)

[393] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States. Port-au-Prince, December 20, 1879. (Received Jan. 3, 1880.)

[394] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, December 20, 1879. (Received Jan. 3.)

[395] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, December 20, 1879. (Rec’d Jan. 3, 1880.

[396] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, January 9, 1880. (Received Jan. 23.)

[397] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, April 9, 1880. (Received April 22.)

[398] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, April 21, 1880. (Received May 6.)

[399] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, May 20, 1880. (Received June 2.)

[400] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, May 20, 1880. (Received June 2.)

[401] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts:

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, June 18, 1880. (Received July 1.)

[402] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port au-Prince, June 18, 1880. (Received July 1.)

[403] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston.

Department of State, Washington, June 22, 1880.

[404] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, July 2, 1880. (Received July 14.)

[405] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, July 2, 1880. (Received July 14.)

[406] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, July 3, 1880. (Received July 14.)

[407] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston.

Department of State, Washington, July 6, 1880.

[408] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston.

Department of State, Washington, July 17, 1880.

[409] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, July 24, 1880. (Received August 14.)

[410] . Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Port-au-Prince, August 9, 1880. (Received August 27.)

No. 391. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 391.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, October 30, 1879. (Received Nov. 22.) No. 197.]

Sir: I have heretofore, in my dispatch No. 196, advised you of the election of General Salomon to the Presidency of this republic. I have now the honor to announce his inauguration on the 26th instant, accord-to the decree, with translation, which is herewith inclosed, in conformity with the order of exercises presented in the programme, which, with translation, is also herewith inclosed.

The exercises throughout were deeply interesting. Especially was this true of the address of the president of the national assembly, the reply of the President-elect, and the taking of the oath of office, all which, of course, took place at the Maison Nationale.

The address of M. Montasse, the president of the national assembly, with translation, as published in the Moniteur of the 30th instant, is herewith inclosed. The reply of the President-elect, which was delivered in a graceful, earnest manner, and which, with translation, is also herewith inclosed, was his pledge, forcibly presented, to bring to the country peace, security, and liberty, with appeal to his fellow-citizens to give him their firm and patriotic support, when, in attestation of his sincerity, and as required by law, he read and accepted the oath of office as presented in the decree.

Immediately after his proclamation, an address to the people and the army, herewith inclosed with translation, was published.

In it the President refers to the fact that it has been twenty years since he left the country, exiled as a public enemy; that he returns now, called by the votes of the people, to perform the most exalted and difficult mission that patriotism can impose, that of repairing the evils of the past disasters, of lifting the country out of the abyss into which long and bloody dissensions have plunged it; that it is not without doubt and hesitation that he accepts such responsibility; that if he bows in obedience to the national will, it is in the belief that he will find in his own conscience the echo of the conscience of all; and that the sentiments which he brings to the executive, as he hopes and believes, will be approved by all members of society of whatever rank or party. He alludes to his individual experience as gained from passions of which he has been a victim, alleging that Haytian society is in an analogous condition, and advises that it retire within itself to determine the motives, the errors, causes of its ruin, and, forgetful of common failings, to gather without reservation about him to whom it has intrusted the perilous honor of healing its wounds.

He states that he brings to the performance of his duty the most entire good-will, the most serious desire for the welfare of all and by all without exception of person. He hopes, he says, to find on the part of society the most complete reciprocity of ideas and sentiments. Law and justice, equal for all, will only make themselves felt by their benefits, and not by their rigors, wilieh would not fail to provoke dangerous obstinacy in the ways already watered by so many tears and so much blood.

He claims that the aspect of the country is enough to appease every passion, to teach concord, especially the ruins, the bloody traces of dissensions. The country, he says, is without army, without finance, without credit, without industry; and its agriculture, the chief support of national wealth, not yet advanced beyond its youth, is already languishing. Good sense and patriotism indicate the path of duty. It is, as he affirms, to strengthen the national credit abroad, sustain labor at home, to seek fortune in the efforts of individual activity and not in doubtful transactions; to divert the youth, disquieted for the want of employment, from the search after public places to agriculture and industry, and for this purpose to create with order and security the means of credit and circulation; and for political revolutions, which assail and destroy the general resources, substitute an economic revolution, with encouragement and facilities brought to the doors of all. Such he declares to be his programme, and this he hopes all will approve.

These views he admits, are not new; others have advanced them before, but when once in power they have been forgotten. He asserts, however, his purpose to give them effect, and thus give example to others of what he requires of them. Loyalty and honesty in the conduct of the public affairs, and diligence in the performance of his duty, are promised. Concluding, he says: My only ambition to-day is to justify, by my efforts and by real services, the esteem which my fellow-citizens have entertained for me for so long time, and of which they have just given me the most brilliant testimony in my elevation to the chief magistracy of the state.

The moderation which distinguishes the first official utterance; the clear and positive enunciation of a policy generally deemed wise, as well as his earnest assertion with regard to its maintenance, accord well with the high character of the President.

The duration of the Presidential term has not as yet been determined. It is declared in the first article of the decree that it shall be for the time which shall be determined by the constitution of 1867, as revised. Already the matter of revising the constitution has been submitted to a commission of eminent lawyers, members of the Haytian bar, and within a very short time their report, as is generally supposed, will be presented to the Corps Legislatif for its consideration.

With regard to the procession organized after the inauguration ceremonies had been completed at the Maison Rationale, moving thence to the cathedral 5 the exercises there, including the address of the archbishop (which was full of religious fervor, patriotic Christian utterances and sage counsels) and the celebration of the Te Deum; the escort of the President to his residence; his reception of distinguished visitors, including the diplomatic and consular body, whose dean presented its congratulations in an address, to which the President made a kindly reply, expressing the hope that the good understanding which now subsists between Hayti and foreign powers generally may be continued and declaring his purpose to do all in his power to that end; the public rejoicing throughout the day and general illumination in the evening—nothing less can be said than that they were conducted in accordance with the order announced, and characterized by promptness of performance, good order, and general satisfaction.

The President has not yet announced his cabinet; but, as under the provisional government, especially since the 3d instant, when Lamothe and Hérissé were removed, General Télémaque continues in charge of the portfolio of war and marine; General Sam, of the department of the interior and agriculture; General Rigaud, of the department of justice, public instruction, and worship; while M. Surpris, as a sort of assistant secretary, is in charge of the department of finance, commerce, and foreign relations, as he was under General Salomon before his election to the Presidency.

Speculations are rife as to who will compose his cabinet; but so far the President holds the matter within his own knowledge.

General Salomon is, in blood and complexion, a pure negro, with full head of white hair. He is a large man, of imposing presence, and of easy, self-possessed, and dignified bearing. His age is sixty-five years. His wife is a French woman, purely white, and is said to be a person of various and solid accomplishments. They are without children.

Not merely by reason of his position as president, but as a man, a scholar, a statesman, in name and achievement, General Salomon occupies the chief place among his countrymen; and the election of no man to the Presidency of Hayti has been characterized, perhaps, with such fairness, unanimity, and popular approval as his own.

With sentiments of the highest consideration, I have, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure in No. 197.—Translation.]

Liberty! Equality! Fraternity!

Republic of Hayti.

Decree electing citizen Salomon to the office of President of Hayti.

The National Assembly, in conformity with the decree of the provisional government, dated October 3, of the present year, in view of its almost unanimous vote, has called citizen Louis Etienne Félicité Lysius Salomon, general of division, to the Presidency of Hayti.

Decreed: Article I. Citizen Lysius Salomon, general of division, has been elected president of the Republic for the period that shall be determined by the constitution of 1867 revised.

Art. II. He shall take, in presence of the National Assembly, the following oath: “I swear, in the presence of God and that of the nation, to faithfully fulfill the office of President of Hayti; to cause to be respected the national independence and the integrity of the territory; to observe and cause to be observed the laws of the republic.”

Art. III. In view of the situation, President Salomon shall immediately enter upon the discharge of his functions.

Art. IV. The present decree shall be printed, and published throughout the entire republic.

Given at the palais of the National Assembly, the 23d of October, 1879, in the seventy-sixth year of the independence.
The president of the National Assembly:
M. MONTASSE.
The vice-president:
T. SUIRE.
The secretaries:
L. T. Lafontant, H. Piquant, P. Lubin François.

No. 392. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 392.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, November 6, 1879. (Received Nov. 22.) No. 198.]

Sir: Revolutions in Hayti are not only frequent, bat they often work unforeseen and unexpected results, in bringing to defeat and apparently utter ruin their originators and chief actors, and to power others whose promotion is as offensive to the revolutionists as the authority against which they direct their blows.

Bazelais moved against Canal. He sought his own advancement; and for several days and weeks it was doubtful as to what would finally be the result of his movement. It is a fact that Canal, after considerable hesitation arid delay, advanced with vigor and success against this movement, as it discovered itself in Port-au-Prince, and routed Bazelais; and his adherents sought refuge in various legations and consulates situated hereabout. But the movement of th- North assumed daily larger proportions and more commanding importance. From the Cape to St. Marc, to the very gates of the capital, under the command of Hérissé Télémaque, Simon Sam, and others, the people were found rising and the soldiers moving against the constituted authorities.

In the midst of this condition of things Canal resigned; for lie understood full well that this movement was against him. But was it favorable to Bazelais, and will it sustain his pretensions? Within a very few days after Canal had embarked for St. Thomas, and while Bazelais was in refuge upon the English man-of-war Boxer, lying in this harbor, the revolutionary army of the North took possession of the capitol. Bazelais then proposed to leave his refuge with his chief followers, Paul and Alexis, not to mention others—for I understand there were some six or seveu such persons n the man-of-war—and coming ashore, through the aid of this army, which was the natural fruit of the movement which he inaugurated, be placed, at no very distant day, in the chair of state made vacant by the resignation of Canal.

Certainly to his disappointment and chagrin, he found the revolutionary forces not only opposed to Canal, but equally and as positively opposed to him. He was not permitted to land from the Boxer at Port-au Prince. Subsequently, on the 1st day of August last, embarking upon the German steamer Vandalia, he sailed for Gonaives, and landed there on the 2d of the month. This city he immediately took and held till the 17th of the month, when he was driven out by the forces of the provisional government, and making his escape thence by the Rouillonne, a steamer belonging to the Haytian Steamship Company, then in the hands of certain insurgents of Jérémie, he took refuge in the French consulate of the last-named place, whence he left on one of the steamships of the Atlas line on the 23d of August for Kingston, Jamaica, where he is said to be at this time. His colleague in the House of Deputies for ten years past, his chief adviser and supporter in the late insurrectionary movements, Edmond Paul, is at present, as he has been for some time, since the Boxer left, August 9 last, in refuge at the British legation here, while his followers generally are scattered, some concealed in the country and others exiled abroad.

It is true that Canal has lost his power; but it is equally true that Bazelais is not his successor therein.

The man of all others in the country whom Bazelais and the entire liberal party would have opposed is in power. His name was associated in such manner with the Tanis movement of March, 1878, by the persons referred to, while they professed to be honestly and patriotically interested in sustaining CanaFs administration against the attack which seemed then about to be made, that Salomon was then compelled to seek refuge in the consulate of Peru in this city and go thence to Kingston, where he remained in exile till Canal had fallen; Bazelais had been utterly routed; and his countrymen had called him home to aid, in the use of his great powers, in re-establishing law and order, and thus conserve the common welfare. And upon a vote of the National Assembly, unprecedented in its unanimity, he has just been made the Chief Magistrate’ of the Republic.

Exile, calumny, unjust accusation, have not prevented the advancement of Salomon; and his advancement has been hastened, if not assured, by the very movements which were intended to promote the aspirations and success of a man who certainly would not have attempted his insurrectionary enterprise if he had foreseen such result. But so it is; and Bazelais is in exile, and Salomon is the President of Hayti. And he is the President, not by force organized by himself or his friends; not by opposition made to depose his predecessor; not by uniting with Tanis, Benjamin, and others in conspiracy; but on the free vote, in accordance with popular demand of the national assembly. Tanis and Benjamin, who, like Bazelais, opposed him and joined Lamothe and Hérissé in their recent machinations against him, are suppliants for his mercy.

The destruction of life and property, as connected with the revolution commencing on the 30th day of last June, must certainly constitute a sad chapter in the history of this country. If it be true that the amount of property destroyed belonging to foreigners was comparatively small; that the scenes of real contest were Port-au-Prince and Gonaïves only; it is nevertheless a fact that the whole amount of property destroyed belonging to the government, including the war vessel “1804,” blown up in this harbor by a treacherous commander, and that belonging to private citizens, by fire and otherwise, must aggregate at least a million dollars. The lives lost are counted by hundreds, while the interruption of general business—commercial and other—must be sorely felt for a long time.

It is very justly regarded as an auspicious omen that the great body of the people—the masses—did not take special interest in this revolution until the question of electing a successor to Canal was presented. Up to that time the whole matter seemed more particularly confined, on the one part, to the army and the immediate friends of the administration, and on the other, to Mr. Bazelais and his co-conspirators. Thereafter, however, when the revolutionary army had taken control of affairs, and the matter of organizing a new administration began to be discussed and to assume its natural importance, the masses of the people discovered earnest and profound interest in the reconstruction about to take place. The army became animated with new zeal and purpose; so that when the soldiers were given permission, by regulation of the provincial government, to cast their vote here at the capital for Deputies to fill vacancies caused by the treachery of several members who had gone into the insurrection, they voted with decision and promptness, as if they felt that their votes must have important bearing upon the Presidential election; and when it was discovered that Lamothe and Hérissé were using their official influence, as was alleged, to prevent the election of Deputies who would vote for Salomon to be President; and when it was discovered that they were planning the arrest and removal of Salomon, in order to render his election impossible, the soldiers vied with the people in earnest protest against such conduct, and demanded that such persons be immediately relieved of their positions, arrested, and imprisoned for trial.

It was in view of these circumstances that General Duperval, left by Canal in charge of the military forces of the capital, at present in charge of the department of general police of the government, issued an address, published in the “Moniteur” of the 4th ultimo; and General Salomon was called to the position of secretary of state, of finance, commerce, and foreign relations, made vacant by the deposition of Lamothe. And it was immediately thereafter that the army signified its readiness to General Salomon to declare him President at once; when he showed his good sense and patriotism by declining such favor, saying that if he ever became President of his country it must be in the manner prescribed by the constitution.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 393. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 393.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States.
Port-au-Prince, December 20, 1879. (Received Jan. 3, 1880.) No. 204.]

Sir: The citizens of this Republic as to complexion are divided into two very distinct classes.

No reference is made here to the fact that, according to the constitution of the country, only Haytians, Africans, and Indians and their descendants are or can become citizens; but allusion is made to the fact that as to those who compose the population and who constitute the body-politic, while all enjoy fully and equally civil and political rights and powers, there is a very decided line of difference discoverable between the black, and the mulatto and mixed classes.

This condition of things had its origin in that peculiar status of the latter class as compared with the former, when slavery existed in French colonial times and the French father recognized and educated his colored son born of his black slave woman; and thus, although this white father could not confer upon such son the rights and dignities of citizenship, he did give him social place above the ordinary black, slave or free.

As this class multiplied in numbers and influence, it constituted a sort of aristocracy as compared with the one below it, and was regarded and treated accordingly. Besides, whe,n the very first movements were had with reference to the bestowal of civil rights upon the Haytians, under French authority, Ogé made his demand in the name of the colored class which he personally represented, circumscribing and limiting his demand by lines of color and condition. Subsequently, it is true, the movement which he inaugurated resulted, after many bloody struggles, great waste of human life, and destruction of property, in the common freedom of all the black and colored classes of the isiand, and even in the independence of the people.

But the color line, established and impressed as indicated, has even to this day continued to exist and to disclose itself in the feelings, the prejudices, and the predilections of the people—with marked distinctness in the society and the politics of the country.

In the two political parties of the country, one will find colored and black men; but when the liberal party is in power, it is understood that the colored portion of the community is in control of affairs; and when the national party is in power, as at present, it is understood that the black portion of the community is in control. When Canal was in authority, it was particularly noticeable how many of the colored class occupied conspicuous and influential positions in connection with his administration. Indeed, at no time during the last two years of his administration did he have in his cabinet more than one black man of the four composing that body; and the number of the colored class filling other subordinate places was noticeably large. The black class is already largely represented in official place under the present administration; and that class, as it shows itself, in the corps legislatif, the national assembly, the cabinet, and the army, demonstrates its consciousness that it is in power.

In no case, however, is either class wholly or entirely excluded by the party in power. For, as has already been intimated, there are colored men in the national party and black ones in the liberal; and it would therefore seem impracticable, in either case, to make an entire exclusion. Moreover, the feeling existing between these classes does not seem to be one of positive hatred or ill-will. It seems, where it exists so as to be definable, in society especially, to be rather a suspicion or mistrust, slight on the part of the black, towards the colored man; and on the part of the latter towards the former, a manifest sense of mental and social superiority.

However, no special damage either to general society or the government will ever occur as the result of this condition of feeling; for there is no moral power in it on either hand which can ever produce the coherence essential to make the one or the other class continue to wield its power and influence against the other. In fact, the philosopher and statesman, when they come to investigate and consider this feeling as existing on the one or the other part of the Haytian people, will treat it as harmless, practically, and surely, though gradually, passing away, as intelligence and virtue are more generally established among the people.

In this connection it is to be remembered that a very large portion of the people of the Haytian Republic are black—that the number of the mulatto and colored class is comparatively small. And, while it is true that the latter class has, from the beginning, exerted a broad and general influence in the country, the other class has never organized or countenanced any common movement against it or exhibited toward it any general or persistent feeling of malice or ill-will.

All classes of the people are quick to apprehend threatened or probable danger to the republic, and they unite earnestly and courageously, in the promptest manner possible, against a common enemy or a policy which menaces their national independence. This statement finds the fullest confirmation in that part of Haytian history which records the struggles—the united and desperate struggles—of the entire population against the French, the English, and the Spanish, made to secure popular freedom in the first place, and, finally, national independence and self-government. It is sustained, also, by the fact that the opposition to the annexation of Santo Domingo to our own country, as proposed some years since was, as far as the Haytian people were concerned, solid and firm, animating and influencing every class and condition of the community. Annexation was regarded by all as the first step toward the annihilation of Haytian independence.

Besides all classes seem proud of their common African or negro origin, or extraction, and appreciate the common destiny which awaits them and their posterity. Hence, were no account made of considerations of justice, right, and law, in their influence upon either the black, or mulatto and colored classes, in their conduct towards each other, the two circumstances just named, of themselves, will always serve to keep them in close social, political, and friendly relations.

The fear, therefore, which is sometimes expressed that these classes in this country, may, at some future day, reach a misunderstanding which will result in permanent social and political separation—separation, even bloody and desperate—is wholly without foundation.

I have, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 394. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 394.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, December 20, 1879. (Received Jan. 3.) No. 205.]

Sir: Perhaps no utterance made by General Salomon since his inauguration as president of this Republic, has produced such general and profound satisfaction among his admirers and partisans as the one herewith inclosed, with translation as published in Le Moniteur of the 6th instant.

This speech was delivered on the 30th day of last month, and under peculiarly favorable circumstances, when the president could give play to his remarkably fine facility of elocution and when the imagination and sensibility of his audience were unusually lively and impressible.

The president was giving a large, brilliant, official reception to the leading members of the administration, especially those who have the management and control of public instruction. The attendance was great, and as the president entered the spacious reception room of the National Palace, filled to its utmost capacity, supported by the ministers of state, cordial demonstrations of applause discovered at once, that the chief of state was among admiring and enthusiastic friends who were prepared, to indorse and accept any utterance which he chose to make. Under such circumstances, on a beautiful Sabbath morning, in the flush of political victory, conscious of a generous popular support for the time being certainly, he made this speech.

Those portions of the speech which were received with special delight, and which are approved and applauded with the greatest emphasis by the journals of his party, are the ones which concern administrative reforms and the reorganization of the personnel of the various departments of the government. Such feelings may be regarded as being altogether natural; for the declarations made on these topics give promise of place and employment, with remunerative salaries, to those who have not enjoyed such benefits for a long time, and who may very much need and who do very much desire them. Besides it is not to be denied that many really patriotic persons, intelligent and sagacious, believe that such reforms and such changes should be made at once in the interest of the country.

The language of the President with regard to the reforms proposed is emphatic and plain. He says: I promise you that they shall he complete and radical. I do not wish, after the example of President Boisrond Canal, to appoint to the offices of the state the enemies of my government. I do not wish that the functionaries, that those who live upon the public pence and whose commissions I would have to sign, should come hereafter to take up arms against the state. I intend that my government shall be served by my friends and not by my enemies. I know that the offices of the present administration are in good part occupied by these last. This shall not be always so.

The policy indicated in these words is being thoroughly applied by the administration; and the friction, the disturbance, which its inauguration would naturally produce is witnessed already, especially in the northern part of the republic, where the secretary of war and marine has now gone to supervise, according to report, the installation of certain newly-appointed officers. It is but a few days ago that the same officers made a visit to Mirabalais upon a similar errand.

The authorities appear to understand and appreciate the condition of the public mind produced by this cause, and their movements with regard thereto seem to be made with reasonable wisdom and sagacity.

With reference, in all probability, to this state of feeling more than any other present and immediate source of disturbance, the government has deemed it wise to reorganize the army, particularly the national guard.

Connected with this subject, there has been some anxiety, though no trouble, found in the fact that the call of the government, made some two weeks ago, for recruits to this branch of the service, was quite unheeded, and the government found itself forced to adopt the system of general and indiscriminate impressment, as provided by law, under such circumstances. For, among other things which the President has promised, is the maintenance of the public peace and the assurance of the public order.

How difficult his task in this regard will prove to be, and how well he will keep his promise in that behalf, the future alone can demonstrate. He seems to recognize the gravity of his responsibility as well as the difficulty of his task. But his confidence and purpose would seem adequate to his duty.

The revision of the constitution, upon which the President lays special stress, has been fully accomplished, and his prerogatives are distinctly and clearly defined. A copy of this document, as revised, will, hereafter, be transmitted to you. Any obstructions found here, then, are supposed to be removed, and he may go forward in the way of reorganization “rapidly and without weakness.”

Referring to exile, the President pronounces it, after the manner of a distinguished author, to whom he refers, “impious.” And he declares that he does not wish it for any one of his compatriots. Nevertheless, on the 12th instant, several of the first men of the country left it, according to the usage under which the President himself took his departure at the fall of Soulouque. The men to whom reference is made are Darius Denis, Dr. Louis Andain, Jean Louis, Duverman, and Claude. There remain several others, refugees in different legations and consulates here, such as Tanis, Benjamin, and Paul, who must soon go. It were well could such men find employment at home, laboring for the good of their country, rather than spending their time in an exile which must be hateful to every one of manly impulse.

The closing words of the President, in which he pledges himself to the people to maintain peace, are as strictly eloquent as they are patriotic, while they certainly challenge the admiration of his fellow-citizens. He says: I shall employ all my energy, all my will, and all my strength, which the sufferings of life and the trials of exile have not taken from me, to give and maintain peace in order that you may be able to labor without disquietude, enjoy tranquilly the fruit of your labors, and leave to your children, after your death, a patrimony.

I have, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure in No. 205.—Translation.]

address of president solomon.

Gentlemen: I have the satisfaction to announce to you that the country is at peace and that tranquillity reigns everywhere. Yet, for several days it has been reported that the city of Gonaives had taken up arms. This news came from Je’re’mie, but correspondence which I have received lately from the last-named place contradicts these reports.

The peace has not been disturbed for a single instant at Gonaïves. The country is quiet and tranquillity has not ceased for a single instant to prevail at all points of the republic. Here is the proof that all these reports are simply false. Those who propagate this false news entertain but one object, to bring disquietude and desolation to the families, to interrupt the march of business, to create division and discord, to facilitate the accomplishment of their base designs. Such ought, especially, to comprehend that these maneuvers are to-day out of season. In presence of the unanimity of the suffrages which has brought me to the Presidency, before the imposing manifestations of all the people who have applauded me, the malcontents should understand that the attitude which best becomes them is that of repentance, silence, and submission to the will of the nation. Some have been designated to me. I have notified them, as I have notified everybody, I would believe that they are not blameworthy, as they themselves have declared to me, but every one is duly warned; I do not wish to take any iy surprise; I do not desire to find myself under the necessity of exercising severity, but I will be severe, if necessary unpitying, and I promise you that considerations of no kind will prevent me from causing the chastisement, impartially and as they merit it, of all those who shall be taken. The chastisement shall be severe in order that the example may be profitable to others and deter them always from their wicked projects.

Gentlemen, I have suffered much in exile. I do not desire this for any of my compatriots, and I do not wish ever to return there; besides I am not now of the age to do it. Hence, I am disposed to repress, energetically and without weakness, all seditious acts which would work in the end the overthrow of society and the subversion of the legal government of the country.

I have been chosen with unanimity; I have never employed intrigue or any indirect means to reach the executive; I have reached there loyally, legally, constitutionally, and in that I have had a rare good fortune, which my predecessors have not had.

Presidential elections, up to mine, have always been under the influence of united and preconcerted means. Only the Emperor Soulouque was elevated to power without his own effort; hut his election was a scheme (calcul). They wished to make of him an instrument, a plaything. He did not lend himself to this; he marred all such calculations; you know this as well as I.

I do not think, gentlemen, that any would have desired thus to make a plaything of me. My character, my opinions, my sentiments, my past are too well known for any to fall into error with regard to me. The vote which called me to power was free and sincere; scheming was altogether a stranger therein.

In placing in me its confidence, in giving to me the direction of its affairs, the country has imposed upon me a great task and a heavy responsibility.

In spite of the difficulties which I will have to surmount; in spite of the ruin of the country and the state, exceptionally grave, in which it is found, I have accepted this charge and this responsibility, with the sincere faith of a man who loves his country and who ardently desires to accomplish for it the largest possible good.

I do not know, gentlemen, whether time will permit me to realize all the points of my programme.

I have promised to maintain peace and tranquillity; to maintain respect for all; to assure order, under the shelter of which every citizen shall be able to maintain peaceably his life by honest labor. As to this part of my programme, I promise you to accomplish it entirely.

You can count upon me for that, and I repeat it: woe be to those who shall attempt to disturb order.

Gentlemen, the epoch of revolution ought to be forever past in our country Revolutions, after having destroyed the vitals of the nation, have led the country into a condition of debasement in which it finds itself to-day. Its credit is ruined, and has been diminished to a point where it will disappear at the least breath.

Revolutions have made of every Haytian a general, and often when I would distribute employments to those who merit them and place each in a position which befits him, I am very much embarrassed, because the applicants occupy in the army high grades incompatible with modest employment.

I am reproached that I do not go sufficiently fast in the way of administrative reforms and of the reorganization of the personnel. A deputation of the Chamber of Deputies came even recently to express to me an opinion on this subject; but those who reproach me only consider Port-au-Prince. I am in continual relations with the different points of the republic. I receive each moment deputations from the communes.

I do not wish to perform a disjointed and interrupted work. These reforms will only be useful and serious upon condition of their being accomplished according to a general plan, a system maturely considered, and a profound study of the question. All this is not the affair of a moment.

Above all, gentlemen, it is necessary that the constitution be adopted. The new constitution ought to give to the chief of state prerogatives which my predecessors have not enjoyed. With these new powers, the President of the republic can, according to the desire of all, advance rapidly and without weakness in the way of reorganization.

Political reasons, which I cannot mention to you, and certain considerations of deference for absent members of the cabinet, as yet restrain me. There is also the embarrassment of the choice. Sometimes there are seventeen candidates equally meritorious for the same employment. How can one make choice of one of the seventeen without making malcontents of the other sixteen?

Reforms are necessary; the whole country demands them with impatience. I promise you that they shall be complete and radical. I do not wish, alter the example of President Boisrond Canal, to appoint to the offices of the state the enemies of my government. I do not wish that the functionaries, that those Avho live upon the public pence and whose commissions I would have to sign, should come hereafter to take up arms against the state. I intend that my government shall be served by my friends and not by my enemies. I know that the offices of the present administration are in good part occupied by these last. This shall not be always so.

I have invited the ministers to commence to-morrow the reorganization of the personnel of their respective departments.

I give you, Messrs. Ministers, full latitude, full power, for that. Be unmerciful to those insubordinate, undisciplined, arrogant, and insolent employes who regard themselves as superior to their chiefs. I commend to you for their places, Messrs. Ministers, those brave young men who offered their breasts, exposed their lives in the days from the 30th of June to the 4th of July, and contributed to the establishment of the present order of affairs. If there are any such in the audience, I advise them to present themselves to-morrow to the ministers and make valid their title; they shall be examined and employed according to their capacity.

My government shall not be a government of despotism. I have suffered too much from despotism. I have not forgotten the sufferings which I endured during the twenty years which I spent in exile. Many others in my place would have succumbed, but, thanks to my convictions, to which I have always remained faithful, thanks to my hopes and to my sincere faith in the future, I have not succumbed; I have remained the same.

The finances of the republic have become dilapidated, wasted by those same persons who were charged to watch their employment.

I am finally resolved to cause these abuses to cease. I wish that the resources of the country may be employed with economy; that honesty and good faith may enter every branch of the administration. I shall commence by setting the example.

I have held high offices in my country, either as director of the registry, as administrator of the finances, or minister of state charged with the portfolio of finances, and I can say, without boasting, that I have filled these positions with honor and dignity. I administered during eleven years the finances of the republic; I retired poor; I retired, I say, poorer than when I came to the ministry. The pittance which was left of my fortune I have spent in exile, little by little to the last cent. After this I suffered; and I remained steadfast, because I had profound faith in the future.

I have, however, passed through cruel trials; I found myself in Paris in the greatest embarrassment. It was to a noble friend, inspired no doubt by God, that I owe it not to have yielded. I make to him a public testimony of my gratitude; I will never forget him. I did not yield, because God had not willed it. In his inscrutable designs he had preserved me, perhaps to a later period, that I might play a prominent part in the destinies of this country.

Gentlemen, “exile is impious,” has said a great writer; if I knew a word more energetic, I would use it to you; I do not desire it for any one of my compatriots. I have promised you peace, and I shall be faithful to my promise. I shall employ all my energy, all my will, and all my strength which the surf erings of life and the trials of exile have not taken from me, to give peace and to maintain it in order that you may work without disquietude, enjoy tranquilly the fruit of your labors, and leave after your death a patrimony for your children.

No. 395. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 395.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, December 20, 1879. (Rec’d Jan. 3, 1880. No. 207.]

Sir: Whatever concerns the relations of Hayti to other, and especially neighboring countries, must, more or less, interest our own government; and hence, a watchful care with reference to the relations of this country to Cuba, or Santo Domingo, and a judicious report with respect thereto, cannot prove to be inopportune or unimportant.

From time to time, for the past two months especially, Spanish war vessels have visited this port, remaining generally for several days, behaving as if seeking to discover, if possible, any movement that might be made from these shores by any parties, Cuban or other, against Spanish authority and Spanish interests.

A vessel of such nationality now lies anchored in the outer harbor of Port-au-Prince, commanded by Sr. García San Miguel. This particular vessel, a small one, the Guadalquivir, of old model and construction, carrying some eighty five men, has made, including the present, three visits to this port within the last thirty days.

It is said, perhaps on good authority, that there is one General Macéo, of Cuba, in this city, who seeks recruits for service in connection with Cuban insurrectionary movements. So far, however, no discovery of any movement of any kind or sort on the part of Cuban residents of this city, or other persons, seems to have been made.

As to Santo Domingo, there seems just now, as between that country and this, to be no movement of special interest or importance. The matters of dispute hitherto existing between them are for the time being apparently left to rest, while both countries, either engaged in active revolutionary movements or seeking, for the moment, recovery and imperative reorganization, made necessary by such movements, have their thoughts and efforts fully occupied with pressing domestic concerns.

In the mean time the traffic kept up by Dominican citizens living along and near the frontiers of their country, with the Haytian people, in spite of any regulations to the contrary, is prosecuted with considerable vigor and no little profit.

No better evidence of the truth of this statement can be found than that furnished in the fact that numerous fine beef-cattle coming from Santo Domingo are now offered for sale constantly in this market.

I have, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 396. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 396.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, January 9, 1880. (Received Jan. 23.) No. 220.]

Sir: The anniversary of Haytian independence was observed this year, commencing on the 31st ultimo and closing on the 1st instant, by all classes of the people, in and about the capital especially, with marked spirit and earnestness.

The reception held by the President at the National Palace on the afternoon of the 31st, attended chiefly by the representatives of foreign powers, resident of this city, and the high dignitaries and officers, civil and military, was large and brilliant.

The diplomatic and consular body, composed of the various ministers, chargés d’affaires, and consuls-general and consuls, accredited to the government, was fully represented on this occasion, and through its dean, Comte Millon de la Verteville, minister of France, paid its respects and congratulations to his excellency the President in handsome and befitting, phrase.

The opening of the first day of the new year, 1880, was announced with such firing of cannon as to make to echo and re-echo the mountains which surround the city, and far across the beautiful harbor which lies ever so peaceful and tranquil in its face—those sounds which so strikingly remind the Haytian of the peculiar circumstances in the midst of which the independence of his country was begotten.

It was on the 1st day of January, 1804, that Hayti’s great but bloody leader, Dessalines, sustained by his officers and men, as well as the people, declared the independence of his countrymen, who had but just asserted and maintained in blood their right to freedom, and who were then to enter upon a national existence, honorable, it was to be hoped, to themselves and mankind.

Whatever may have been the conflicts, the experiences, the revoke tions, which have interrupted the progress and general advancement of the country, the people of Hayti may with just pride celebrate the fact that, for seventy-six years, they have maintained and to day enjoy, with the hope of transmitting to their posterity, if they are wise and loyal, national independence and self-government.

Among the ceremonies of the 1st instant, especially appropriate and interesting, should be mentioned first of all in the order of importance the meeting at La Place Pétion. Here were assembled the President, the secretaries of state, and more distinguished personages, the members of the corps legislatif and foreign representatives, occupying the altar of the country (l’autel de la patrie), officers of the government of every rank and grade, and citizens prominent in social and political life, as well as an immense crowd of the more common people, gathered in honor of the occasion to listen, upon this classic ground, near the grave of the statesman whose name it bears, to the address of the chief of state, delivered here after a custom followed by all his predecessors. A copy, with translation, of the discourse delivered by the President, and published in the Moniteur of the 3d instant, is herewith inclosed. Though brief, it is well worded, and appropriate in sentiment and style, characterized by earnest patriotism, and genuine devotion, seemingly, to the country and government.

In the next place, the military display on this occasion deserves special mention, for it was unusually imposing. The army discovered, in its several branches, the good effects of the reorganization which it has been undergoing since the advent of the present administration, and its uniform, equipment, behavior, and numbers showed it more than ever a means of defense, support, and honor to the country. Without being able to state the exact figures, it is safe to estimate the number of the regular army, the guard of the President, and the national guard parading on the 1st instant, at three thousand, residents in the main of Port-au-Prince.

With regard to the Te Deum celebrated at the cathedral, the general rejoicings throughout the day, and the illuminations in the evening, no less can be said than that the former was performed with the interest usual to such exercises of the church, while the latter were cordial and well ordered.

The fête of this occasion, like the close of the President’s address and the conclusion of the exercises at the church, was signalized, at 5 o’clock p.m., with a salvo of seventeen guns. And thus the seventy-sixth anniversary of Haytian independence, celebrated with éclat, passed in good order and with beneficial effect, no doubt, to all concerned.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERGER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure in No. 220.—Translation.]

Salomon, President of Hayti, to the people and to the army.

Fellow-Citizens: In establishing our independence our fathers were not contented with bequeathing to us a native country; they wished that a solemn fête might each year remind their descendants upon what condition this nationality could be conserved. To establish as a national fête this anniversary of the proclamation of our independence and of the oath which they had taken on this occasion, was to make us remember constantly the close union by means of which they had created this country. Was not this, in fact, the secret which conducted to victory the heroic soldiers of an entire people, of a whole race—which made one nation of an agglomeration of slaves?

Fellow-citizens, have we profited by the lesson which our fathers have given us, of that which in their wisdom they had wished each year to remind us by the fête? The response is only too easy; a fatal spirit has taken possession of our people; parties whose names have very often changed, while the tendencies and the object might be the same—parties exasperated—have from the beginning compromised the work of 1804. Without doubt, our national independence remains intact. But was this all we had to do to satisfy ourselves to conserve it? Did we not owe it to our fathers, to our race, to ourselves, to prove to the world that this independence was not the mere result of courage and of fortune? That on the side of the virtues upon which nations are founded we have the qualities which conserve and develop them? And yet, neither intelligence nor courage has failed us, hut we have only understood how to misuse them; we have turned them against ourselves. We have forgotten that sentiment of solidarity, that firm union which enabled our fathers to escape difficulties even greater than ours. This fête vainly recurs each year; it is no longer appreciated; this voice of the past is only an echo without value, a common remembrance, a custom, which has been ruined by habit.

Very well, to-day, in presence of the ruins which surround us, I have desired to impress you with the hearty and profound meaning of this feVfce I have wished to call up in your presence this simple idea, and yet so forgotten, of the union which had gathered our fathers in a single bundle, which had enabled them to conquer. I am held so much more to do this as I am, I do not ignore it, before the eyes of so many people, the symbol of the discord and of the division. I have merited the perilous honor that around me, during my lifetime, has grown up a sort of tradition. But be very well convinced, fellow citizens, that if I merit another after my death, it shall be that of having been to my country the firmest support of the peace which I desire to establish, at any price, of the sincere and loyal union of all the members of the Haytian family. I hope to lead them through a community of interests and the forgetfulness of the past to this grand sentiment of conciliation and solidarity which it is altogether our duty to adopt, which this fête imposes upon us in such high sense. This is, fellow citizens, the task which I have traced for myself, this is, God helping, that which, by your assistance, General Salomon will accomplish.

Vive l’Union de la Famille Haïtienne!

Vive la Constitution!

Vive la Paix!

National Palace, Port-au-Prince, January 1, 1880, 77th year of Independence.
SALOMON.

No. 397. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 397.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, April 9, 1880. (Received April 22.) No. 247.]

Sir: For several years the statesmen of this republic have felt, according to their declarations, that the introduction of foreign capital is essential to the development of the agricultural and other resources of the country, in a larger and more remunerative m anner. It will be recollected that under the former administration this position was taken, and the present one has accepted and urged the correctness of this opinion in the several official papers and addresses, which it has already published. Besides, it has generally been felt that the treasury was not wisely constituted nor efficiently and advantageously managed. Upon this last point President Salomon, in presenting his views latterly to the Corps Legislatif, in favor of the establishment of a national bank, uses these words: “But the government would not deceive you. The principal object it has in view is to establish upon solid basis the working of the service of our treasury.”

To gain, then, the introduction of foreign capital, and to secure, if possible, a better service in the national treasury, the proposition to establish a national bank, which shall take the place of the treasury, and which shall be founded upon foreign capital, was received with general favor.

Such proposition was formally submitted by the government to the Corps Legislatif on the 4th day of last month, and, after due consideration by a special committee, and subsequently, upon their report with regard thereto, by the national assembly, it was voted by that body on the 1st instant. The ordinance passed by the national assembly, as proposed by the government, a copy of which, with translation, as published in “Le Moniteur,” official section, April 3, 1880, contains two articles, with nine sections of the first article.

The first article authorizes the government to negotiate, after due publicity and competition, the establishment of a national bank, with an institution of first class credit, upon the following basis, as described in the several sections of this article: First. The bank shall be constituted as a foreign corporate association, with a capital of ten millions of francs; this amount to be increased aathe operation of the bank may require.

Second. The duration of the concession shall be for fifty years, during which period the government agrees not to issue any paper money.

Third. The bank shall have the exclusive privilege of issuing bills, which shall be redeemable at sight and in coin, these bills to be represented always, either by metallic reserve or by values affording entire security.

Fourth. The bank shall perform the service of the treasury; it shall be in account with the government, with which it shall open a permanent credit of 1,500,000 francs, at 6 per cent. per annum, without prejudice to other credits or advances which the government may wish to obtain upon special contract, ratified.by the Corps Legislatif.

Fifth. Besides performing the service of the treasury the bank shall conduct the ordinary operations of a bank of circulation, loan, and discount.

Sixth. There shall be appointed to the bank two commissioners of the government, who shall have control of all its operations; no bill shall be issued without having been countersigned by the commissioner residing at Port-au-Prince.

Seventh. The bank, if the grand public powers authorize it, shall have struck, at the mint at Paris, national coin of the same stamps and standard as the French coin.

Eighth. The bank, as a civil personality, shall enjoy the rights of a Haytian citizen, and shall be subject to the jurisdiction of Haytian tribunals, but any dispute arising between the government and the administration of the bank shall be referred to arbitrators.

Ninth. There shall be two councils of administration, one at Paris and the other at Port-au-Prince, where the principal seat of the bank shall be; special branches shall be established where the Avant thereof is felt.

Article 2 provides that the contract made by the government with the concessionary company shall be submitted for ratification to the national assembly and the bank shall be opened within the shortest delay possible, and in any case this delay shall not exceed six months from such ratification.

It is said seventeen bankers of Paris stand ready to accept the contract proposed in this ordinance; and it is reported that at a very early day the honorable secretary of state for finance, commerce and foreign relations will leave this city for Paris to make arrangements in that behalf How true either statement is, it is now quite impossible to state. And yet certain phraseology of the enactment, as that in which provision is made for striking coin at the mint in Paris, and that in which two councils are established, the one at Paris the other at Port-au-Prince, would seem to indicate that it was expected that the concession would be taken in France.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERGER LANGSTON.

No. 398. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 398.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, April 21, 1880. (Received May 6.) No. 258.]

Sir: I have the honor to advise yon that there appears in the official section of Le Moniteur, as published on the 8th instant, the following remarkable statement as translated: The government recollects that international law accords it the absolute right of expulsion from our territory of foreigners who seek to disturb the public order.

The government remembers equally that according to the law of all nations, consuls and consular agents are subjected to the local jurisdiction, especially when they are engaged in commerce, and that diplomatic immunities only reach public ministers and the personnel of their legations.

The announcement of these doctrines, in this manner at this time, would seem to indicate a purpose, on the part of the government of inaugurating some new policy with regard thereto in its national practice.

However, so far, it is only practicable to await, after transmitting this intelligence, the future action of the government with regard thereto.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 399. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 399.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, May 20, 1880. (Received June 2.) No. 266.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith inclosed a copy of a dispatch, with translation, received on the 29th ultimo from the Haytian Government, wherein was inclosed an “Annonce Hydrographique,” which, with translation, is also herewith inclosed and transmitted to the Department.

In his dispatch, under cover of which the inclosure mentioned is conveyed, Mr. Archin states that it is sent to be used as may be judged proper to advance the navigation between our country and Hayti.

Upon reading the announcement as to the lighting of the gulf and harbor of Port-au-Prince, it will be perceived that it is proposed to erect two light-houses, one upon the largest of the three small islands of the Arcadins; this presents a fixed white light, with apparatus of the fifth order, being situated according to chart No. 1588 of the depot of charts and plans of the marine of France, near latitude north 18° 46′ 50″, longitude, west 74° 58′ 20″. The height of the focus above the highest seas, 11m. Its compass, 9 miles.

The second is located at a point of the Lamantin 120 meters to the west of the old light-house now in ruins; this will present a red light with red flashes every thirty seconds; its apparatus is of the third order, situated according to chart No. 1197 of the depot of charts and plans of the marine of France, near latitude north 18° 33′ 21″, longitude west 74° 44′ 59″. The height of the focus above the ground is 28m.50. The height of the focus above the highest seas is 29m.50. The mean compass, 15 miles.

Both these lighthouse are to be illuminated and used regularly daring the night season after the 1st day of next July.

According to the contract made with Mr. Clément Haenuens, as approved by the law of the 14th of September, 1878, he shall collect from the day of the lighting of these light-houses as by a memorandum to be submitted to the previous examination of the custom-house of Port-au-Prince, duties as follows: 1st. Upon national vessels, sail or steam, engaging in foreign trade, upon their entry or departure, 3 cents per ton measurement, for each voyage.

2d. Upon foreign vessels, sail or steam, upon their entry or departure, 6 cents per ton measurement, for each voyage.

Here is a remarkable discrimination, worthy of special notice, but it is one in perfect accordance with Haytian legislation on this and kindred subjects involving the interests of foreign snipping.

Upon the exorbitance of these duties, it is not necessary to dwell, in order to show, that for the service rendered it is out of all proportion and unparalleled. Two light-houses are established, one upon a small island of the Arcadins about thirty-five miles distant to the west of this city, the other upon the Lamantin, a point of land about five miles to the southwest of Port-au-Prince, extending out somewhat northwest into the sea. One has a fixed, the other a revolving light, the first is visible at nine and the second at fifteen miles. Such arrangement and the service connected therewith will cost, as already stated, 6 cents to foreign and 3 cents to national vessels per ton.

The great steamers will find it difficult to consent to pay such charges, and the result may prove to be serious damage to the navigation of Port-au-Prince.

The vessels exempt from this duty are foreign and Haytian war vessels, national vessels, sail or steam, engaged in the coasting trade, and vessels entering the port by stress, provided they neither load nor unload.

The clearance of sailing vessels shall be delivered only upon the payment of such duty, while the agents of steamers shall be held responsible for its payment on their account.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure in No. 266.—Translation.]

Republic of Hayti.

Hydrographic announcement.

Atlantic Ocean.—Sea of the Antilles.—Lighting the gulf and harbor of Port-au-Prince.

light-house of the arcadins.

From the 1st of July next a new light-house shall be illuminated nightly on the summit of a round iron tower, painted white, recently constructed on the largest of the three small islands of the Arcadins.

This light-house will show a fixed white light.

Apparatus of the fifth order.

Its position, according to chart No. 1588 of the depot of charts and plans of the marine of France, is near latitude north 14° 46′ 50″, longitude west 74° 58′ 20″; height of focus above the ground, 9m.50; height of focus above the highest seas, 11m. Compass, 9 miles.

light-house of the lamantin.

From the 1st of July next a new light-house shall he illuminated nightly on the summit of a round iron tower, painted white, consolidated by four piers, in construction at the point of Lamantin, at 120m to the west of the site of the old fixed light to-day destroyed.

This light-house will show a red light, with red flashes, every thirty seconds.

Apparatus of the third order.

Its position, according to chart No. 1197 of the depot of charts and plans of the marine of France, is near latitude north 18° 33′ 21″, longitude west 74° 44′ 59″; height of focus above the ground, 28m.50; height of focus above the highest seas, 29m.50. Mean compass, 15 miles.

[Extract from the contract passed with Mr. Clément Haenuens and sanctioned by the law of September 14, 1878.]

Art. 6. From the day of the illumination of the light-houses, the grantee shall collect, according to a memorandum which shall be made and submitted to the previous visa of the custom-house of Port au Prince, the following light-house duty: 1. National vessels, either sail or steam, engaging in foreign trade, shall pay on their entering or leaving the port a duty of 3 cents, cash, per ton measurement for each trip.

2. Foreign vessels, either sail or steam, shall pay on their entering or leaving the port a duty of 6 cents, cash, per ton measurement for each trip.

There shall be exempted from payment of such duty— 1. Foreign or Haytian vessels of war.

2. National vessels, either sail or steam, engaged in the coasting trade.

3. Vessels entering the port in distress, so long as they do not engage in discharging or loading.

Art. 7. The clearance of sailing vessels shall only be delivered on the presentation of the receipt of payment of the light-house duty, and agents of steamers shall be held responsible for the payment of said duty.

Port-au-Prince, April 17, 1880.

The secretary of state of justice, charged par intérim with the portfolio of the interior:

C. ARCHIN.

No. 400. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 400.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, May 20, 1880. (Received June 2.) No. 270.]

Sir: I have the honor to advise you that there was published on the 13th instant, in the official section of Le Moniteur, the official journal of the Republic of Hayti, the statement that the president had just received a telegram from Mr. Laforestrie, secretary of state of finances and foreign relations, now absent upon a mission at Paris, to regulate the loan (Domingue), and the establishment of the National Bank of Hayti, to the effect that the efforts of the secretary in that behalf had proved entirely successful.

It is supposed, therefore, that the regulations contemplated in the recent legislation of the national assembly with regard to these subjects, of which you have been fully advised in my dispatches Nos. 246 and 247, will, at a reasonably early day, become accomplished facts.

Such belief is already producing its natural effect upon the community, which is by no means unfavorable to the present administration, increasing, as it would seem, popular confidence both in the wisdom and patriotism of the President.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 401. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts: No. 401.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts:

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, June 18, 1880. (Received July 1.) No. 277.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of circular dispatch, with translation, received from the Haytian Government on the 16th instant, together with a reply thereto dated as of the 17th instant, having reference to the habit of consuls and foreign agents in Hayti of lines of steamers connecting the republic, going on board of vessels which anchor in the port of destination before the usual formalities in such case can be fulfilled by order of the local authority.

It is claimed by the honorable secretary who writes on this subject that this practice is contrary to the law of nations and to the maritime regulations adopted in the republic to maintain order and the general security. He therefore asks that our consular officers be instructed accordingly. This request, under the circumstances, may be reasonable, and if not otherwise instructed by the Department, I shall direct our agents to observe such request. However, in acknowledging the receipt of this dispatch and dwelling briefly upon the subject, I state that the matter is under consideration, but that it is to be understood that no right or privilege belonging to our consular officers is either to be waived or disturbed.

I most respectfully await your instructions.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERGER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure in No. 277.—Translation.]

Mr. Archin to Mr. Langston. (Circular.)

Department of State of Foreign Affairs,
Port-au-Prince, June 14, 1880.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to inform you that it has come to the knowledge of the government that consuls and foreign agents in Hayti of the lines of steamers connecting the republic go upon vessels which take anchorage in the port of destination, and even before the usual formalities in like case can be fulfilled by order of the local authority.

This practice being contrary to the law of nations and to the maritime regulations adopted in the republic for the maintenance of order and the general security, I pray you to be good enough to transmit to agents under your control all the instructions which you deem necessary to prevent the commencement or the continuation of the irregularity indicated, which my government invites me to bring to your attention, in order to prevent it or to make remedy thereof as soon as possible.

Be pleased to accept, Mr. Minister, the assurances of my high consideration.

The secretary of state of foreign affairs, par intérim:

C. ARCHIN.

No. 402. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 402.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port au-Prince, June 18, 1880. (Received July 1.) No. 279.]

Sir: I beg to advise you that on the 15th instant it was reported that the government had made important discoveries in connection with a conspiracy in contemplation, which was to have been inaugurated within a very few days, and were making important arrests. Upon inquiry this was found to be substantially true; and during the 15th and 16th days of the month some fifteen or twenty persons were arrested in Port-au-Prince, said to be more or less inculpated in such proposed movement.

Among the arrested are several persons of prominent social position in this city, who, up to this time, have not been known as political leaders, or as having any prominent connection with politics. Mr. D. Lespinasse, an aged, rather learned, discreet, and industrious colored man, the relative of Boyer Bazelais, now in exile, is eminently a representative of the class mentioned.

Whether such persons have, in fact, any connection with such movement is to be determined; but the government evidently believes that they were engaged in organizing conspiracy.

The most prominent, however, among the persons already arrested is Richelieu Duperval, commandant of this arrondisseinent, who figured in such capacity upon the resignation of Boisrond Canal and during the interregnum to the election of General Salomon, and who not only maintained perfect order during the trying period named, but who has been constantly treated and regarded by the administration and the people, up to the time of his arrest, as the chief person who aided in the President’s election, and upon whom he might always implicitly rely. And now he and his friends deny that he has done or said or allowed any actual or proposed utterance or act against the government. It is claimed that his enemies have sought and secured his downfall by deceiving the President.

Hitherto General Duperval has been, in view of his manly and courageous conduct, a very popular and influential man; and the fact that his arrest was made not in his office, nor in the city, but in the country, where he had been sent upon some feigned errand of the government, according to report, shows that it was not deemed wise to attempt his capture where he was within reach of his arms or in the presence of the troops over whom he exercises very great control.

It is now considered, although it is reported that other arrests are to be made in other parts of the republic, and perhaps here, that this proposed movement is entirely anticipated and foiled.

So far, also, this city has remained perfectly tranquil, and the general peace of the country seems not to have been at all disturbed.

It has not as yet transpired what course will be taken as to the trial of the parties already arrested, or what disposition will be made of them. Investigation with regard to their cases may be postponed for some time.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 403. Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston. No. 403.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston.

Department of State,
Washington, June 22, 1880. No. 114.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 266, in which dispatch you reported the erection of two light-houses in the harbor of Port-au-Prince, and commented upon the unjust discrimination on the part of the Haytian Government, in the dues proposed to be levied upon vessels of that nation and those of foreign powers, I have now to inform you that I am in receipt of a note of the 17th instant from Sir Edward Thornton, Her Britannic Majesty’s representative at this capital, in which he states that he has received information from the British vice-consul at Port-au-Prince of the establishment of these two light-houses and the light dues proposed to be levied in connection therewith.

Sir Edward further states that in view of the apparent injustice of this taxation, Mr. Stuart, the British vice-consul, has been instructed to urge that British vessels should be put upon the same footing as Haytian in this respect, and to endeavor to secure the co-operation of his foreign colleagues in any representations which he may make to the Haytian Government on the subject.

The British minister adds, in conclusion, that Earl Granville has instructed him to bring the matter to the attention of this government, and to ask, if it is willing to take steps in support of the action which Her Majesty’s Government has taken with a view to securing the equal treatment of vessels of all flags, that it would address similar instructions to its representative at Port-au-Prince.

You will therefore put yourself in communication with your colleagues, and endeavor to secure for vessels of this nation an impartial administration of these laws.

You will also report your action under this instruction, and the result achieved by you, to the Department.

I am,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 404. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 404.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, July 2, 1880. (Received July 14.) No. 283.]

Sir: Referring to communication from the Department, “Separate,” dated April 30, 1880, having reference to the amount of gold and silver coin, bullion, and paper currency in Hayti, I have the honor to advise you, as follows:

1st. I am unable to secure so far reliable information with regard to the actual or even approximate amount of gold or silver coin in the general treasury of the government. So far as this treasury is concerned, the amounts received from day to day constantly fluctuate, not finding deposit there for any length of time, but are used immediately to meet daily demands. Some days a hundred thousand dollars; at others fifty, thirty, twenty, ten, five thousand dollars, in American, Mexican, and Haytian silver may be found therein, with a small amount, it may be, of American, English, French, or Spanish gold.

Bullion, gold or silver, is never found in the treasury.

At present, the amount of silver, Mexican silver dollars, in the Caisse d’Amortissement, is $120,000. This sum, however, is being used to pay the interest on certain obligations of the government, as created by legislation had in 1875–’76.

2d. There are no banks in this country, and there is now no paper currency. In 1872, when paper currency was retired, to be redeemed at the rate of one silver dollar for three hundred of paper, in American silver, there was certainly a fabulous estimated circulation of paper, amounting, as some estimate, to over $800,000,000; redemption was provided for $544,675,404 by $2, 154,266.04 in American silver.

3d. There are no gold and silver mines worked in Hayti, and there is no coinage of gold or silver in this republic.

4th. The amount of gold annually imported and exported, used as currency, or in connection with the arts and manufactures, is comparatively small 5 when found, it is more generally bought, at high rates of premium, to be hoarded.

5th. The amount of silver coin annually imported, and exported is considerable.

Here first, it is to be recollected, that in connection with the redemption of the paper currency, there were employed in 1872, as stated already, $2, 154,266.04 in American silver. And, for the past eight years, Hayti has depended almost entirely upon the United States for her circulating medium, and gold and silver standard of value.

In the next place, the estimated amount of gold and silver coin needed for the business transactions of the country annually, cannot vary far from $5,000,000, the principal part of this amount being silver coin of the United States; about $1,000,000 of Mexican silver dollars lately imported, and a small amount of Haytian fractional currency, variously estimated, lately monetized.

Late statistics of Port-au-Prince show that in 1879 there were imported in this city, in silver coin of the United States, $63,519; and in Mexican dollars, $719,888; the total being $783,407; while the exportation from the same city for the same period, in the silver coin of the United States aggregated $278,818.88.

It is through the imports and exports of gold and silver coin at and from the various open ports of the republic, that the amount named as required by the exigencies of business in this country is kept at about the figure given, $5,000,000.

It is not possible, at this time, to give the exact amount of the total of imports and exports of gold and silver coin for the entire republic for the year 1879. Hereafter, however, in the annual report which will be made from this consulate general to the Department for the year, if not the exact, a very close approximate estimate thereof, will be given, founded upon such statistics as may be secured from the several open ports of the republic.

There has been no law as yet passed by the Corps Legislatif of the republic fixing the coin standard and governing minting operations. As already stated this republic depends in the main for its circulating medium and its gold and silver standard of value upon our country.

It should be added that American gold and silver are held in special favor, the first selling generally for a considerable premium, and the latter, as against Mexican dollars, always being held preferable, and often selling, as against them, for a premium sometimes as high as 7 per cent.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 405. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 405.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, July 2, 1880. (Received July 14.) No. 284.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit to the Department herewith inclosed, with translations, certain extracts as published by the Haytian Government in the official section of Le Moniteur, on the 17th ultimo, which have reference to the absolute right, as claimed by the government, to expel from its territory foreigners who seek to disturb the public order, and the doctrine as held by the government, that, according to the law of nations, consuls and consular agents, especially those who engage in commerce, are subject to the local jurisdiction.

As bearing upon the first subject named, and as confirmatory of the view expressed with regard thereto, the government offers two notes, one written by Charles C. Roundell, secretary of royal commission, King’s House, Spanish Town, February 15, 1866, and the other by Spencer St. John, Her Britanic Majesty’s chargé d’affaires, Port-au-Prince, January 20, 1872, with respect to the arrest and expulsion of General Salomon, at present President of Hayti, from Jamaica.

Mr. St. John states the doctrine with regard to the right of expulsion in very broad terms. “Every government has the right to expel a foreigner from its territory if it suspects him of plotting against it or against a neighboring and friendly government.” And I understand that the present representative of Her Britannic Majesty near the government, is of the opinion that this statement needs qualification, and expects soon instructions from his government in that regard.

As presenting to the Department a full and trustworthy history of the case of General Salomon, arrested and expelled from Jamaica in 1865, I have the honor to transmit herewith inclosed three copies of a publication, entitled “Actualité,”* made by General Salomon himself, June 14, 1877, supposed to contain all the facts and circumstances of his arrest and expulsion.

As the subjects referred to seem to be assuming at this time, according to the publications of the government, unusual and special importance, it has been deemed wise to bring them to the attention of the Department in precisely the form and with the connections in which they are placed, so that the Department, should it deem it advisable, may instruct this legation accordingly.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 284.—Translation.]

[Extract from Le Moniteur, June 17, 1880.]

The government desires to announce that international law accords to it the absolute right to expel Irom our territory foreigners who seek to trouble public order.

The government announces also, that according to universal law of nations, consuls, and consular agents, are subject to local jurisdiction, especially when engaged in commerce, and that diplomatic immunities only affect public ministers and the personnel of their legations.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 284.—Translation.]

[Extract from Le Moniteur, April 8, 1880.]

“The following extracts, in support of acts had by one of the most advanced nations and the most rigidly attached to respect for its political rights, as well as regards its own citizens as those of foreigners to whom it has given shelter, leave no doubt as to the exteait of the powers of the state with regard to this matter.

“Royal Commission Jamaica,
“King’s House, Spanish Town, February 15, 1866.

“To Lieutenant-General Salomon,
“Ex-Senator and Secretary of State of the Republic of Hayti:

“Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt, &c.

* * * * * * *

“Permit me to say to your excellency that since His Excellency Governor Eyre has, in justification of the order of your arrest and your expulsion then from this island, given as reason, that you were a supposed accomplice of designs against the Government of Hayti, with which republic Her Majesty is in friendly relation, it is evident that your case is not within the limit of the inquiries with which the commission of Her Majesty finds itself charged.

“I have, &c.,

“CHARLES C. ROUNDELL,
“Secretary of the Royal Commission.”

“British Legation, Port-au-Prince, January 20, 1872.

“To Messrs. Cheesman, J. J. Riviere, F. Herman, and J. F. Martineau:

“Sirs: I have the honor, &c.* * * Every government has the right to expel a foreigner from its territory if it suspects him to conspire against it or against a neighboring or friendly government. It was for this reason that order was given to General Salomon to quit Jamaica.

“I have, &c.,

“SPENCER ST. JOHN,
“Her Britannic Majesty’s Chargé d’Ajfairs.”

* Omitted from the present publication, owing to its length.

No. 406. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 406.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, July 3, 1880. (Received July 14.) No. 290.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 279, June 18 last, I have the honor to state that, since the 16th ultimo, no further arrests have been made by the government, and nothing further as to rumors of conspiracy or revolution has been heard. However, the authorities seem to be upon the alert, and it would be doubtless extremely difficult to inaugurate even, at this time, a movement of any consequence against the government.

While General Salomon up to this time evidently holds the popular esteem and confidence, he is earnest in his purpose to guard and conserve the public peace, and to that end is exerting himself with unusual wisdom and vigor.

The national guard and the troops of the army are being constantly increased, consolidated, and disciplined. And the police force, which is composed of soldiers detailed to such duty, has not only been improved in appearance and numbers, but, apparently, in efficiency and general behavior. And it is seemingly true that the guard, the army, and the police, in the condition at present indicated, are intelligently devoted to their respective duties, and are worthy of the confidence of the administration.

So far there has been not only no disturbance of the general condition in connection with the late arrests, but the public confidence in the government appears even to have been increased and strengthened in view thereof.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 407. Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston. No. 407.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston.

Department of State,
Washington, July 6, 1880. No. 118.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 277, of the 18th ultimo, has been received. You therein state that the Haytian Government has made general diplomatic complaint in reference to the habit of the consuls in that country and the “foreign agents” of lines of steamers running to Haytian ports, who go on board of vessels which anchor in ports of destination before the usual formalities in such case can be filled by order of the local authority. The foreign secretary, Mr. Archin, claims that this practice is contrary to international law and maritime rules in force in Hayti, and he asks you to instruct the consuls of the United States accordingly.

So far as the practice of the local agents of the vessels is concerned, the Haytian complaint against their boarding the vessels before the necessary permission of the health and customs officers is given, is thought to be well founded. With consuls, however, the case may be different, and questions of internal order on the vessels may need their presence before the local authorities can take cognizance thereof. Our own consular agreements with Hayti are vaguely comprised in the most favored nation clause, and any privilege with regard to flying the national flag in port on the consular boat, and employing that boat in visiting national vessels, which may be conceded to auy foreign consuls should be asked and secured for our own.

It is, however, expected that the agents of the consular service of the United States will conform to the local laws and regulations, unless there shall have been some special exemption by treaty. It is, at the same time essential that all such foreign agents shall be on the same footing.

You will, therefore, avoid committing yourself on this point until you may have an opportunity to observe what special privilege, if an5, may be claimed for and granted to the consuls and agents of any other nation in Hayti.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY.
Acting Secretary.

No. 408. Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston. No. 408.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Langston.

Department of State,
Washington, July 17, 1880. No. 124.]

Sir: Your No. 284, of the 2d instant, throws additional light upon the action of the Haytian Government in support of its pretension to the absolute right of expelling from its territory foreigners who seek to disturb public order, and to the application of this asserted right to consuls and consular agents, especially those engaged in business, who, it is further claimed, are subject to local jurisdiction. The subjects presented are of interest and importance, and will be taken into consideration. Meanwhile it may be said that there is no law on the Federal statute-book of the United States authorizing the expulsion of a foreigner, whether he hold a consular or official post, or be a simple private individual. The revocation of the exequatur of an obnoxious consular officer is probably as far as executive action in such matters could or would be carried by this government.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 409. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 409.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, July 24, 1880. (Received August 14.) No. 297.]

Sir: Upon the receipt of your dispatch No. 114, dated June 22 iast as instructed therein, I put myself in communication with my colleague, the representative of the British Government, as regards the imposition of light dues, especially as discrimination is made, in that behalf, by the Haytian Government against foreign vessels.

After learning that the representative referred to, the Hon. Robert Stuart, had already presented the views of his government on this subject, asking the equal treatment of vessels of all flags, I addressed to the Haytian Government a note, a copy of which is herewith inclosed, as expressive of the views of my government with regard to the discrimination made as between national and foreign vessels, and the propriety of modifying the provisions of the law with respect thereto, so as to put both classes of vessels upon the same impartial footing.

This subject shall receive full attention from this legation, and the Department shall be fully advised as to the final result.

Already much opposition has been developed against the enforcement of the regulations concerning these light dues, especially as the contractors, the Messrs. Haenuens, who, according to the terms of the concession made them by the government, collect all charges in the premises, seek to enforce payment not according to registered, but gross tonnage of vessels, steam and sailing.

I am advised that the steamships of the Royal Mail Steamship Company touching here twice per month, carrying mail and passengers only, have been already placed upon the footing of Avar vessels, no charge being made against them. This is done, because otherwise they would pass the port entirely, and the mails carried by them from Europe would not be left here.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure in No. 297.]

Mr. Langston to Mr. Archin.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, Hayti, July 14, 1880. No. 107.]

Sir: After presenting to you the thanks of this legation for the copy of the “Annonce by drographique” which you did it the honor to transmit, under the cover of your uote of the 29th of April last, I have the honor to advise you that it is the judgment of my government that the discrimination which is made between your own and foreign, vessels as to the payment of light dues, the former being charged three and the latter six cents per ton for each voyage, does not accord with the wise considerations of commercial reciprocal obligation which ought always to be recognized and cultivated by the greatly friendly powers of the world.

In observance of the suggestions of such obligation, and in accordance with the principles of enlightened international reciprocity which secure to all nations adopting them permanent advantage, I have the honor now to ask that the provisions in the premises be so modified as to put all American vessels, as far as the administration of the dues referred to is concerned, upon the same footing with your own vessels, and that such service be administered in such regard with impartiality.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

No. 410. Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts. No. 410.
Mr. Langston to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Port-au-Prince, August 9, 1880. (Received August 27.) No. 301.]

Sir: I have the honor to advise you that on the 2d instant the President presented to the National Assembly his message, or the general exposé of the situation of the Republic of Hayti for 1880–’81.

I transmit herewith inclosed to the Department three copies of this document as published by the government.

I also transmit herewith inclosed a translation of all that part of the exposé which is entitled “Foreign Relations.” This portion of the message must prove interesting, as showing in a succinct yet very minute manner the relations of this government to the foreign powers whose representatives are found here, with allusions to the various subjects of diplomatic consideration at present in debate.

The several other portions of the paper not only show the general purpose of the present administration to advance as rapidly as possible the welfare of the country as regards its finances anScommerce; the reorganization of its army and navy; its agriculture; its public works and general internal improvement, police and other; its judicial system, public instruction and religion; but the present condition of the country as respects the subjects mentioned, as well as the projects of amelioration proposed for legislation by the administration.

I am, &c.,

JOHN MERCER LANGSTON.

[Inclosure inNo. 301.—Translation.]

Extract from the message of the President of Hayti, as published on the bth of August, 1880.

foreign relations.

I experience profound satisfaction in advising you that the events which have occurred in the country since the 30th of June of last year have not in their effects disturbed the international relations of the republic, as happens in the internal dissensions of a state, which, in damaging often the interests of foreigners, beget diplomatic difficulties, resulting sometimes in complications. Thanks to the persistent measures of order taken by my government, the public security is perfectly assured, and foreign interests are sheltered against every assault.

Our late events have occasioned reclamations of indemnity, addressed to my government by the representatives of certain powers, for losses which their citizens may have sustained. My government could not allow such reclamations, by reason of that principle that a State cannot be held responsible for losses or injuries sustained in analogous circumstances—a principle consecrated by practice in the political life of modern peoples.

Nevertheless, my government has, of itself, come to the aid, in a feeling of humanity, of a very small number of foreigners whose feeble interests have been injured by such occurrences. It has accorded them some pecuniary support, comporting with the precarious condition of the finances of the republic, and demanded by their personal position, not by the value and the legality recognized in the losses sustained.

In the month of December of last year, the hospitality, to which mankind is entitled from governments, came near creating a difficulty in the republic. Cubans, established in the capital, having for their leader General Macéo, publicly offended the consul and flag of Spain. The consul, attributing this regrettable disorder to the complicity of our police, demanded therefor reparation of my government.

There was done under the circumstances, as regards the representative of this power, which is friendly to the republic, that which national dignity, the honor of my government, and its ardent desire to see maintained the good relations of Hayti with Spain, required. The difficulty created has been thus completely appeased and settled.

Towards the end of January of the present year my government had also to make satisfaction to Germany and Denmark, in consequence of an unfortunate incident occurring at Jacmel, under the previous administration.

Wrongs had been done to Mr. Daguin, a German subject, consul of Denmark, in the execution of a judgment rendered against him by the justice of the peace of Jacmel, recognized as incompetent by the previous government to pass judgment in case of a consul.

Mr. Daguin was arrested at the German consulate of Jacmel, and placed in prison upon the demand of a third party.

The representatives of Germany and of Denmark at Port-au-Prince demanded, respectively, in the name of their governments, reparation of that which they considered as forgetfulness of the immunities attaching to Mr. Daguin in his quality of consul of Denmark, and of the considerations due to the German consul and to his consulate at Jacmel.

My government in its wisdom could not fail to give satisfaction to Germany and to Denmark, especially in reconciling national honor with the legality of the double . complaint presented.

This other difficulty has been, also, regulated to the satisfaction of the parties.

The questions pending between the government of the republic and that of Great Britain, and which date back to the previous administration, have not as yet been settled, but the government has in nowise neglected that which lies in its power to reach this end by the best means possible.

The unfortunate affair of “St. Michel,” which has occasioned, with the loss of a government vessel, the tragic and painful death of numerous Haytians, with families, for the most part, depending on them for support, occupies the most serious attention of my government.

Taking this affair at the point at which negotiations, commenced at the time between the department of foreign affairs and the British legation at Port-au-Prince, had left it, my government has charged our consul of Hayti at Kingston to occupy himself with the preliminaries of a process which, perhaps debated even in England, will result in throwing light upon this deplorable catastrophe and cause the right to triumph.

The reclamation of Madame (widow) Joseph Maunder, a résumé of which reclamation was presented to the former legislature, has not yet been settled.

My government considers that this reclamation, by reason of its great importance and its excessive pretensions, solicits its greater and more serious attention. Having regard to the point of view in which the Government of Her Britannic Majesty regards it, a point of view contrary to our manner of seeing it, the arbitration of the court of cassation of France, would be able to settle it, we think, with all the impartiality which characterizes that high tribunal.

This proposition my government has lately made to the minister resident of Her Britannic Majesty at Port-au-Prince—and in regard thereto we await a definite reply.

The relations of Hayti with France were re-established upon normal footing, m consequence of the arrival here of M. the Count de Rochechouart. There remains on our part an equitable solution of the payment of our loan of 1875, to regain entirely the sympathies of the French Government. It is to this solution that you have lent me your patriotic and intelligent support in voting the settlement of this loan upon a more equitable basis in the extraordinary session of this year.

I am happy to inform you that the bondholders of this loan have accepted the settlement, as I have just been advised by the secretary of state of finances and foreign relations, at this moment upon a mission at Paris.

My government found itself confronted by the following quarters of the double debt of 1825 not paid at their maturity:

June 30, 1879, namely, 249,937.50 francs; September 30, 249,337.50 francs; total, 499,875.00. In adding to this sum the quarter of December 31, namely, 249,937.50 francs, my government had then to pay an arrearage of 749,812.50 francs, as well as the interest unpaid at 5 per cent. upon this sum total of 13,762.00 francs. It has been able by means of fortunate combinations and of the order introduced into the service of the finances of the country to pay this sum of 763,574.50 francs, besides the quarter of the 3.1st of March of this year, namely, 249,937.50 francs; in total, 1,013,512 francs.

My government in paying this sum of 1,013,512 francs has settled the arrearage of our double debt and brought this service up to date. It will continue to pay thereon also and with all possible regularity, all the remaining quarters, amounting up to 1883 to a balance of 3,641,549.98 francs, conformably to the exposition of 1870, and with the reserve which is made there.

Thus by the settlement of the loan of 1875 and by the punctuality made in the payment of the double debt, my government believes that it has shown the high value which it attaches to the maintenance and the development of the credit of the republic.

Several questions raised by the minister resident of the United States of America with the former government are still in litigation.

Some have been transferred to Washington; among others the protest of the Government of the Union against our law of the 23d of August, 1877, upon consular visas, which is supported or participated in by the governments of Great Britain, of Germany, and of France, and its complaints against our law of patents.

But it is hoped that with regard to ail these old affairs as well as to the subject of others which have been brought since to the knowledge of my government by the representative of the United States, the considerations which the Haytian Government has presented in defense of its rights will be duly appreciated.

My government will never cease to consider it an imperative duty to entertain the, best relations with the Government of the Dominican Republic.

Although a definitive government has not been able yet to succeed in that country to the administration of General Cesario Guillermo, my government gives to the provisional government, actually established at Santo Domingo, public testimonies of the interest which it takes in the maintenance of peace in the Dominican Republic, especially in assuring it of its firm purpose to maintain the strictest neutrality in the events which may there occur.

Upon the communication which has been lately made to us of the tendency of certain Dominican citizens to trouble in our territory the established order of affairs in the, Dominican Republic, we have notified such to whom we have accorded hospitality in misfortune to remain tranquil in order not to expose themselves to lose it. Already we have caused other Dominicans to be sent back to the interior who were found upon the frontiers and whose menaces were denounced as hostile to the peace of their country.

There only remains for my government to await the nomination of a definitive government at Santo Domingo, in order to seek again with it, your intelligence aiding, the best means fco establish fraternal friendship and the best relations of two brotherly peoples inhabiting the same territory upon the most solid and durable basis which is alone capable of contributing to the development of their mutual prosperity.

I ought not to pass over in silence a custom which it has been attempted for a long time to introduce in the administration of the country, namely, the taking from their proper jurisdiction of the judicial affairs in which foreigners find themselves interested, to place them upon diplomatic ground.

My government will not permit such custom to be established, absolutely contrary to the right of nations, and of which there is no instance among civilized countries; the consequence of this abnormal practice can never be other than to destroy the cordial relations which exist between Hayti and the friendly countries which are represented here.

My government cherishes the hope that upon this point it will always obtain the beneficent and sympathetic support of the governments of such countries.

Finally, I am able to say tbat our international relations are satisfactory.

On the 17th of November of last year, I gave notice of my election to divers governments having agents accredited to this republic. Almost all have already responded to this notification. On this occasion I would emphasi ze as a happy augury for the continuance of our good relations with the Government of the Republic of France, the recognition which the President of such republic made, hardly three weeks after my election to the first magistracy of the state, and before even the notification of my promotion had reached him.

The list of foreign consuls appointed in Hayti and that of Haytian consuls named in foreign ports, still enlarging itself, permits the hope of increase in our national commerce.

I have had the honor to receive through the distinguished kindness and exalted friendship of the chiefs of the republics of Liberia and Venezuela, the orders of “African redemption” and the “Bust of Bolivia,” which exist in those two countries.

Especially in recording here a solemn and intelligent testimony of my profound recognition of Presidents Gardner and Guzman Blanco for the grand distinction of which I have been the object on their part and that of their country in whose name they have acted, I believe it my duty to add that I have only accepted such decorations as marks of esteem and good relations shown to the republic in my person.

Such, gentlemen, is a succinct exposition of the situation of our foreign relations.

The chief of each department will give you, if you judge it necessary, all the information and present to you all the documents which you deem useful to inform you completely as to the lesser details, to facilitate your legitimate control in the adoption of measures which you think ought to be taken in order to advance these branches of the public service.

For my part I give you the patriotic assurance that nothing shall be neglected to extend more and more the good relations of the republic with the civilized countries of the one and the other hemisphere; for I am convinced that from constant contact of our fellow-citizens with our grand leaders upon the route of progress and civilization will result surely the solutions of the difficult problem, but not insoluble, proposed since our political emancipation, in relation to the existence of Hayti as a free and independent people, bringing to the family of nations its part, feeble as it maybe, of all that which contributes to the glory and to the wants of mankind.

ItalyItaly

[411] . Mr. Wurts to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, October 4, 1879. (Received October 22.)

[412] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, January 26, 1880. (Received February 20.)

[413] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Borne, February 17, 1880. (Received March 8.)

[414] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, March 22, 1880. (Received April 8.)

[415] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, April 17, 1880. (Received May 6.)

[416] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, May 24, 1880. (Received June 10.)

[417] . Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Rome, July 20, 1880. (Received August 9.)

[418] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Marsh.

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1880.

No. 411. Mr. Wurts to Mr. Evarts. No. 411.
Mr. Wurts to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, October 4, 1879. (Received October 22.) No. 851.]

Sir: As a corollary to my dispatch No. 850, on the subject of Mormon emigration into the United States, I beg to inclose to you herewith a copy of a report relating thereto from Mr. Bayley, consul at Palermo, so far as regards his consular district. I have received communications on the same subject from most of our consuls in this country, but as they all merely disclaim any knowledge of the existence, now or in the past, of Mormonism, I deem it unnecessary to transmit copies of their reports to the Department of State.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE W. WURTS.

[Inclosure in No. 851.]

Mr. Bayley to Mr. Wurts.

United States Consulate,
Palermo, September 26, 1879.

Sir: In response to your esteemed favor of the 30th ultimo, and in accordance with the requirements of the Department of State communicated to me in a circular letter of the same date, I have the honor to submit this report on the subject of Mormon emigration from this consular district to the United States.

Inquiries at the several cities in my jurisdiction elicit but little information of a positive character regarding the present status of this spurious system of religion. The cities of Girgenti, Lecata, Marsala, and Trapani, if I can rely upon the information I have obtained from the most available sources, are and have been, at least for a number of years, absolutely free from all intlueuce tending to propagate this faith, and to encourage emigration to Mormon territory in the United States.

Within the last five years a few Mormons of Sicilian extraction have visited Palermo with the ostensible purpose of looking after their pecuniary interests, and although they seem to have displayed during their sojourn here great activity in representing the advantages that must neccessarily accrue to all those who espouse their creed and emigrate to Utah, it appears that their efforts to obtain converts were unavailing, and that they left Palermo alone for Salt Lake City, their adopted home.

However, there is no evidence to warrant the conclusion that these men were authorized agents, sent hither to inculcate the doctrines of their religion, to encourage emigration, or to develop the interests of Mormonism in any way whatever. Indeed, I am inclined to the belief that they were not vested with authority to encourage emigration from Sicily to Utah, because they refused absolutely to give pecuniary aid to all those who showed a disposition to accompany them.

The geographical position and barbarous dialect of Sicily, the lack of sympathies and affinity of its population with people of another creed, and the influence of the priesthood, would seem to interpose an almost insuperable barrier to this system of religion in Sicily.

On the other hand, it is by no means certain that Mormonism would be benefited by such recruits, inasmuch as any civil community, having a proper regard for its prosperity, rather than encourage would inaugurate measures to discourage the introduction of an element so ignorant, superstitious, and barren of those attributes of character generally found in well-to-do and law-abiding citizens.

I am, &c.,

S. P. BAYLEY,
United States Consul.

No. 412. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. No. 412.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, January 26, 1880. (Received February 20.) No. 865.]

Sir: The usual ceremonial receptions and festivities of the New Year at Rome have taken place without any noteworthy incident, except the absence of the Queen, who was spared the fatigues of the season by a prolonged stay at Bordighera on the Riviera, but returned to the capital early in January in, as is hoped, permanently improved health.

The two legislative chambers have resumed their parliamentary labors after a short vacation, the Senate having commenced its debates before the reassembling of the Deputies, and closed them with a vote whereby action on the ministerial project for the abolition of the grist-tax was postponed by a majority of forty-two. Upon the announcement of this ministerial defeat, Parliament was prorogued. It is now said that it will be dissolved and a new election ordered, and it is also reported that the ministry has advised His Majesty to nominate thirty or forty new senators, with the view of securing a majority for the ministry when Parliament is again convened.

The year 1879 was remarkable for the general failure of all the crops, for the appearance of the phylloxera in Italian vineyards, for destructive inundations and volcanic eruptions, and for an autumn and (thus far) winter of almost unexampled rigor, naturally attended with extreme destitution and suffering among the laboring classes throughout the kingdom. It was thought by many that this latter circumstance would have weight with the Senate in inducing it to assent to the abolition of the grist-tax, a measure which promised some, though inadequate, relief to the peasantry, but it does not appear to have had any influence on the vote of the upper house, although there is some reason to believe that if the Chamber of Deputies persists in pressing the abolition of the tax, the Senate will at last yield the point and concur with the deputies.

There has been, I am sorry to add, a great increase in the number of crimes of violence, which, however, is not to be ascribed to the physical misery and want of the people—for, as a general rule, it is not the suffering poor in Italy who plunder and assassinate—but in a great degree to a vicious system of criminal law, which is fast destroying the moral sense of the nation, by virtually making passion an excuse for every violence, even those committed after long premeditation, and has already gone far to extinguish in the people the feeling of righteous indignation against crime, however atrocious. The motive of homicide is generally revenge or jealousy; of robbery, not want, but to obtain the means of gratifying some criminal passion. The influence of the octroi and the government monopolies is highly demoralizing, but of the causes of the increase of crime special to the year the most pernicious I believe to be the general amnesty proclaimed by advice of the ministry on the accession of King Humbert, which extended not merely to political offenses, abuses of the press, and other transgressions of a less grave character, but which turned loose upon society a large number of the most depraved and dangerous inmates of the prisons. Some, indeed, of these criminals were rearrested for new offenses in the course of a few months, but very many of them are still at liberty, and not only swelling the number of criminals at large, but adding new recruits to the enemies of society by the corrupting influence of example. This deplorable state of things is especially noticeable in the provinces formerly belonging to the Bourbons and to the States of the Church.

* * * * * * *

In spite of these unfavorable circumstances it is not to be denied that the general condition of many branches of industry, of the public finances, and of public morals, has, on the whole, very considably improved in Italy since the dynasty of Savoy has occupied the throne. This improvement, however, I believe, is not to be mainly ascribed to the wisdom of the special legislation of Parliament, but is due to the general influence of the liberal character of the fundamental law, which, by permitting and encouraging the individual initiative of the citizen and protecting him against illegal oppression and exaction by favored classes, has conferred on Italy a fair measure of the advantages of a govern ment founded on the principles of freedom and equality.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

No. 413. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. No. 413.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Borne, February 17, 1880. (Received March 8.) No. 807.]

Sir: The Roman journals of this morning announced the nomination of twenty-six new senators by His Majesty, a number barely equal to that of the vacancies which have occurred in the Senate since the last Parliamerit, and insufficient, even supposing them all to vote with the administration, to overthrow the anti-ministerial majority at the close of the last session.

The session was opened this morning with a speech from the throne, several copies of which and a translation are herein inclosed. The King, it will be perceived, is outspoken in his support of the policy recommended by the ministry at the last session, and it is probable that the influence of the Crown and the firm attitude of the ministry and of the Chambers will secure the adoption of that policy, though perhaps in a somewhat modified form.

The ministers of war and of the marine as well as of the public works will ask large appropriations for new military and naval constructions, and for the extension of the railway system of this kingdom. How such expenses are to be met without the imposition of new burdens as intolerable as those which the ministry propose to remove from the already overtaxed capital and industry of the people, is not apparent, but the spirit of militarism, which the Napoleonic dynasty has left as its dying curse to the European continent, may induce Parliament to vote appropriations which the nation cannot meet.

Hitherto money has been voted without stint and almost without opposition to the army and the navy, and it is hardly an exaggeration to say that, practically, Italy has been treated as existing for its soldiery and its fleet, not they for their country. And yet that portion of the army which is occasionally employed as an aid to the police is found unable to protect a single square mile of the island of Sicily, which hardly measures in area as much as the single State of New Hampshire, from daily robberies, murders, and ransoms.

Italy has no enemies, present or prospective, unless provoked by her own imprudence, without her own border. But she proposes the creation of a fleet—one of which, the Duilio, is just completed at the cost of more than four million dollars, and three others of like colossal dimensions are in course of construction—of iron-clad ships of war more formidable in their means of both offense and defense than anything elsewhere attempted in naval architecture and equipment. Not to be behindhand with their nautical brethren, the land army has lately been strengthened, or incumbered, as the case may prove, with a gun weighing upwards of a hundred tons, which has been cast at the government works at Turin, and is, for the present, mounted on a sea-coast battery at La Spezia.

It is certainly a gratifying proof of national energy and skill that Italy should be able to execute, chiefly within her own territory and with her own means, such stupendous undertakings, but the misdirection of her powers implied in such achievements accompanied with such shortcomings is, nevertheless, greatly to be deplored.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

[Inclosure in No. 867.—Translation.]

The King’s speech on the opening of the Parliament, February 17, 1880.

Senators and Deputies: I may, to-day, after the arduous experience of these twe years, repeat the words which I addressed to you in a day of affliction, when in the unanimity of the national sentiment I found grounds of confidence and of hope.

In presence of the grave questions agitated in the last session, which touched so deeply so large a proportion of our citizens, they proved themselves able calmly to await the result of the parliamentary discussion and the blessings hoped from our institutions.

The two promises which the founder of the kingdom left as his final legacy to resuscitated Italy, the reform of the tributary system for the relief of the poorer”classes and the extension of the rioüt of suffrage, form a sacred obligation to his venerated memory and to the just expectations of our people.

If the wise resolution not to disturb the balance between revenue and expenditure has created difficulties and delays, a safe experience will avail, lam confident, to hasten the completion of a task initiated with the reduction of the burden most grievous to the classes smitten by fortune, but ennobled by labor.

To give efficient support to every civil reform and to strengthen its authority, it is needful to provide for the reorganization of the electoral body.

Persuaded that my rule is founded on the love of the people, I desire that its representation derive new strength from a greater concurrence of opinions and of interests.

Instruction, more widely diffused by virtue of laws voted by you, now allows you to call with confidence to the exercise of the highest right of the citizen all who present the necessary guarantees of legally established capacity.

My government, then, will propose to you two bills for the gradual suppression of the tax on grist and for electoral reform.

These are the most urgent and fundamental measures that I have to recommend to you. They will be supplemented and completed by certain other measures:

The revision, of the communal and provincial law in some important points indicated by a general agreement in public opinion;

A reconstruction of the administrative and judicial arrangements whose complicity has been so often a source of complaint;

To provide for the impartial and well-co-ordinated execution of the railway constructions ordained by a law which does honor to the past session, rules designed to facilitate the traffic, to stimulate the industry, and to fortify the harmony of local interests; and

To continue the already well-advanced revision of our penal legislation and to initiate the amendment of the code of commerce, which has become urgent from the novel and daily changes in economical condition.

Such are the labors to which my government will invite you, in full confidence that your discussions will proceed with diligence and efficiency.

In the past session Parliament gave a noble example of charity, which the inclemency of the seasons had rendered necessary, by availing itself of it in the form of an encouragement to industry. My government will now lay before you several bills providing for the execution of productive works, with the view of giving a vigorous impulse to the national enterprise.

Grave reasons compel us to include among these certain works indispensable to the salubrity and embellishment of Rome, which affected the unity and grandeur of the older Italy, and ought not to be the projer home of the new Italy, furnished with naught but the memories of her past fortunes.

I need not recommend to your patriotism the complete organization of the army and navy, the guardians of our national honor and our national safety. I have had proof in late years of your solicitude for this very important object. The friendly relations which we cultivate with all states and which are reciprocated by all, confirms us in the persuasion that the impartiality and loyalty of governments are the nearest means of maintaining concord among nations; the maintenance of peace is the earnest wish and the highest interest of Italy. The scrupulous observance of the Treaty of Berlin is her natural policy, and it is easy for her to fulfill the promise made to the world that, once restored to unity, she would prove an element of concord and of progress.

Senators and Deputies: If the late session was long and laborious, I hope that equal eliligence and even greater fruitfulness will mark that which I now inaugurate, reaffirming my faith in the destiny of the country, in the wisdom of Parliament, in the loyalty and affection of the people who, directed in the paths of liberty by my magnanimous grandfather and recalled by my great sire to the dignity of a nation, know that it will always find me devoted to the traditions of my family and in the soundness of our institutions.

No. 414. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. No. 414.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, March 22, 1880. (Received April 8.) No. 874.]

Sir: The last week was signalized by one of the ablest and most important debates which has ever taken place in the Italian Parliament. The subject under discussion was what may be called the diplomatio appropriation bill, and the debate embraced the conduct of the foreign relations of Italy during the whole period which has elapsed since the formation of the present kingdom. The debate closed with a resolution of confidence in the ministry, which, though not so strongly worded as the most earnest supporter of the administration would have wished, was nevertheless accepted by the ministry as satisfactory, and was carried in an unusually full house by the large majority of 127 votes.

* * * * * * *

The replies of the ministry to inquiries and charges respecting the present policy and future intentions of the government are of much greater moment, because they touch upon one of the burning questions of the day, the relations between Italy and Austria.

On this point both the president of the council and the ministry of foreign affairs gave the most explicit assurances of a firm purpose of maintaining the present friendly relations between the two states and of discouraging all discussion and repressing all movements tending to the disturbance of the existing harmony and friendship between the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Italian Kingdom. I have no doubt these assurances will be fulfilled, and we may therefore regard one of the menacing clouds in the political horizon of Europe as completely dispelled.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

No. 415. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. No. 415.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, April 17, 1880. (Received May 6.) No. 881.]

Sir: Although, as I stated in my dispatch No. 874, the clouds which obscured the political horizon of Europe and seemed specially to threaten a disturbance of the friendly relations between Italy and Austria have been, for the present at least, dispelled, there are, in the relations between the Mediterranean states and those of Central and Northern Europe, several circumstances, the bearing of which upon the international policy of these commonwealths does not seem to have been very generally appreciated, but which is now forcing itself on the attention of European statesmen in the shape of questions which, if not immediately, may at no distant day give rise to grave and hitherto unforeseen complications. The first of these is the overthrow of the Napoleonic dynasty.

* * * * * * *

The downfall of the empire has emancipated the Latin states, allowed them to recover their ancient independence, to reassume the direction of their own domestic and external affairs, and it may be hoped that time enough for the consolidation of that independence may elapse before the hegemony of the European world shall be assumed by another Caesar. Of course, the action of the Mediterranean states towards each other and towards the non-Christian people which border upon the same sea will no longer be subservient to imperial interests and imperial aim, but will be determined by the views of the different states as to the policy most likely to be conducive to the special interests of their own industry, commerce, and political position.

In close connection with this great fact is the vast importance which the African continent seems destined to assume as a field for European enterprise and colonization. The researches of recent travelers and scientific inquirers have greatly modified the opinions formerly entertained in Europe in regard to the hopeless sterility of Central and Northern Africa, and it has now been ascertained that even the Sahara is not the desolate sand-waste which geographers have depicted it, but is interspersed with inhabited and productive oases, once well wooded and watered, which formerly sustained a large population, but have been reduced in dimensions, deprived of their water courses, and involved by sand drifts in consequence of human improvidence. Both theory and experiment show that it is practicable in many cases to restore the ancient physical condition of the soil, not only by means of artesian wells, but often by simpler processes, and hence that, not to speak of remoter regions which have never lost their primitive luxuriance of vegetable production, even the dreaded desert may become a habitable and self-sustaining province. There is doubtless much that is chimerical in the boldest of these speculations; but these views have long been cherished by far-seeing statesmen in France, and they have now been diffused among the masses, and many popular treatises on scientific subjects speak of the Great Desert as capable of becoming to France what the Great West is to the United States. Of course the annexation of Tunis, Tripoli, and the Empire of Morocco, parts of which, though now scarcely cultivated, are of a fertility probably unexampled elsewhere, enters into all these schemes, and the jealousy of Italy has long been excited by movements of France looking towards a speedy annexation of the beylik of Tunis. I suppose England is more likely than France to aspire to the possession of Barca (Cyrene), which the ancients considered the richest spot on earth, but which is now virtually abandoned.

* * * * * * *

Although, therefore, Italy may be neither willing nor able to prevent the construction of a railway through the heart of the Sahara from Algeria to Timbuctoo, a route for which is now actually under survey by a strong party of French engineers with a sufficient military escort, yet it is certain that the Napoleonic scheme of making the Mediterranean a “French lake” will not be submitted to without resistance on the part of Italy and the other States bordering on that sea. * * * *

I have, &c.,

GEOEGE P. MAESH.

No. 416. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. No. 416.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, May 24, 1880. (Received June 10.) No. 890.]

Sir: The action of the Grown in refusing to accept the resignation of the ministry, and at the same time dissolving the Parliament in accordance with their advice, was not altogether satisfactory to the opposition, because, as was alleged, the continuance of the ministers in power during the canvass gave them too great an advantage in influencing the result. The first ballot was held on Sunday, May 16, but there were many colleges in which elections were not effected, and in these cases a second vote was taken yesterday, the 23d of May. The opposition journals of this morning insist that the general result is a condemnation by the people of the present ministry and its policy, but it must be remembered that a very large proportion of those who are poor enough to be sensibly affected by the determination or the great question of the abolition of the maccinato (grist) tax are not voters of the laws now in force, and of course their voice is not heard in the elections.

It is believed, however, that the opposition has gained largely, but what the relative strength of the parties will be in the Chamber cannot be known until a test vote shall have been taken, as it doubtless will be soon after the commencement of the new session, which opens on the 26th instant.

I have, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

No. 417. Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts. No. 417.
Mr. Marsh to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Rome, July 20, 1880. (Received August 9.) No. 897.]

Sir: The Chamber of Deputies of the Italian Parliament having postponed the question of electoral reform until the next session, and passed the financial bills proposed by the ministry, including that for the abolition of the grist tax, adjourned, or rather somewhat irregularly closed the session, for want of a quorum, on the 17th instant. The Senate continued to sit; and, at length, though reluctantly, adopted the principal House bills, and thus the great relief measure of the abolition of a tax felt to be specially oppressive to the laboring poor has been accomplished. The opposition party predicts that the reduction of the revenue by so considerable a sum as that yielded by the “maccinato” will seriously embarrass the national exchequer, and that none of the measures proposed by the ministry will aid materially to supply the deficit. I trust that these prophecies will be disappointed, and that this important step is but the first in a series of measures specially directed to the relief and elevation of the classes least favored by fortune, the amelioration of whose national as well as moral condition seems to me indispensable not only to sound national progress, but to the continued maintenance of social order in Italy.

I am, &c.,

GEORGE P. MARSH.

No. 418. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Marsh. No. 418.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Marsh.

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1880. No. 731.]

Sir: I have received a communication from the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution referring to a report that the Italian Government, with a view to monopolizing the curiosities obtained at Pompeii, designs to destroy such of its duplicate specimens as cannot be accommodated in its national museum. It has been suggested that in consideration of the fact that the United States National Museum is in another hemisphere, the Government of Italy, if properly approached on the subject, might conclude that it plan of practical monopoly of Pompeian antiquities would easily admit the presentation to the National Museum in Washington of any of its duplicates.

Professor Baird states that, as the Director of the United States National Museum, he is prepared to offer “a series of the specimens of pueblo pottery and other aboriginal objects,” which can be had from no other source than the museum at Washington, in exchange for a proper series of the Pompeian objects, and asks that you may be instructed to present the subject to the Italian Government for its consideration, with a view, if the proposition should appear acceptable, to negotiate further as to the time and character of the proposed exchange. He adds: It is of course desirable that the Italian authorities be made to understand that the museum, in the interest of which the proposition in question is made, is the sole national museum of the United States, and as such the depository of all the collections of antiquities and industries belonging to this government, and that it corresponds in its functions, its powers, and its relationships to the national museums of the old world.

You will perceive the great importance of obtaining the objects of antiquity referred to for the museum at Washington, and the possible necessity of an early negotiation for the same, in order to secure them. It would probably be desirable, in case an assent should be given to the proposition of exchange, to procure a list of the duplicates that would be supplied. I have no doubt that the series of American antiquities which it is proposed to send in exchange would be of the amplest character. I have to request that you will act in the premises according to your best judgment.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

JapanJapan

[419] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, October 22, 1879. (Received November 28.)

[420] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, October 22, 1879. (Received November 28.)

[421] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, October 22, 1879. (Received November 28.)

(Extract from the Japan Weekly Mail, October 18, 1879.)

[422] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, Japan, October 24, 1879. (Received November 28.)

[423] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Japan, Tokei, October 27, 1879. (Received November 26.)

[424] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Japan, Tokei, November 11, 1879. (Received December 16.)

[425] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Tokei, December 29, 1879. (Received Jan. 27, 1880.)

[426] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, December 29, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880.)

[427] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,, Tokei, December 30, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880.)

[428] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, January 16, 1880. (Received February 19.)

[429] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, January 16, 1880. (Received February 19.)

[430] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, January 21, 1880. (Received February 19.)

[431] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, February 6, 1880. (Received March. 15.)

[432] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, March 1, 1880. (Received April 2.)

[433] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, March 1, 1880. (Received April 2.)

[434] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, March 4, 1880. (Received April 2.)

[435] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, March 15, 1880. (Received April 26.)

[436] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, April 13, 1880. (Received May 11.)

[437] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Tokei, April 13, 1880. (Received May 11.)

[438] . Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Tokei, July 24, 1880. (Received August 27.)

No. 419. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 419.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, October 22, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 995.]

Sir: I regret to say that the most recent official reports of Asiatic cholera in this empire, as published, show that the total number of cases from the commencement of the epidemic in April last up to the 11th instant, was 153,486, of which 86,644 proved fatal.

I cannot resist the conviction that’ this roll of death would not have been nearly so great if the Government of Japan had been aided and not resisted, as she was by certain foreign powers, in the laudable endeavor to prevent the spread of the contagion by land and maritime regulations.

Now that the great army of victims has fallen, it is a gratification to me to know that our government seconded the efforts of this government to save its people from the pestilence which for months has wasted the lives of its people.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 420. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 420.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, October 22, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 996.]

Sir: I have the honor to acquaint you that His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government has established a branch office of the imperial mint of Japan in this city under regulations, a copy of which, as published officially in the Japan Weekly Mail of the 18th instant, together with the official notification thereof, I have the honor to inclose herewith for your information.

You will observe that the rates for assaying gold and silver bullion are specified in the regulations.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 996.]

regulations for receiving bullion for coinage at the branch office, tokio.

imperial mint, osaka.

Notification A, No. 101 of the finance department.

It is hereby notified that gold or silver bullion imported by the public (both Japanese and foreign) for the purpose of being coined will, for the sake of convenience, be received at the branch office of the mint, established in the premises of finance department, in accordance with the following regulations.

Note.—The date of commencing to receive bullion will be notified hereafter.

OKUMA SHIGENOBU,
Minister of Finance.
October 10, 1879.

regulations for receiving bullion for coinage.

Art. 1. Bullion imported into the branch office of the mint will at once be received by the superintendent of the office after weighing it accurately in the presence of the importer (or his representative) and determining its fineness by premelting and assaying; and coin (gold coins for gold and trade silver yen for silver) will be given in exchange within the periods mentioned in Art. 6, deducting the charges mentioned in Art. 4 out of the actual value of the bullion.

All charges with the exception of those for coining will be received in currency.

Note.—The loss of metal incurred in the process of premelting must be borne by the importer.

Art. 2. Bullion will only be received in the following quantities: Gold, 50 ounces and upwards; silver, 500 ounces and upwards; gold or silver, impure bullion, old coins, and gold and silver alloys, of 200 yen in value and upwards.

Art. 3. Bullion will be received daily from 9 a. m. to 12 noon, with the exception of the following days: Sundays, annual and casual holidays, from 1st to 3d January; from 16th June to 15th August, and from 25th to 31st December.

Art. 4. According to the description of bullion, the following charges will be made at the branch office:

For gold bullion requiring or not requiring refining: Charges for Premelting:

Yen.

For less than 500 oz 1

For 500 oz. but under 1,000 oz 2

For every 500 oz. or fraction of 500 oz. over 1,000 oz 1

Charges for assaying:

For less than 500 oz 2

For 500 oz. but under 1,000 oz 4

For every 500 oz. or fraction of 500 oz. over 1,000 oz 2

Charges for coinage:

For any amount, 1 per cent.

Charges for transit and insurance: Yen 65 per yen 10,000.

(If the coin is to be taken delivery of in Osaka, only half of the last-mentioned amount will he charged.)

Note.—In case of impure gold bullion, yen 1.377 of the fees for refining will be charged per 10 oz. of pure gold contained, besides the charges above-mentioned, but in such cases no charge for premelting will be made.

For silver bullion requiring or not requiring refining: Charges for premelting:

Yen.

For less than 1,000 oz 1

For 1,000 oz. but under 2,000 oz 2

For every 1,000 oz. or fraction of 1,000 oz. over 2,000 oz 1

Charges for assaying:

For less than 1,000 oz 1

For 1,000 oz. but under 2,000 oz 2

For every 1,000 oz. or fraction of 1,000 oz. over 2.000 oz 1

Charges for coining:

For any amount, 1 per cent.

Charges for transit and insurance: Yen 65 per yen 10,000.

(If the coin is to be taken delivery of in Osaka, only half of the last-mentioned amount will be charged.)

Note.—In the case of impure silver bullion, yen 0.213 of the fees of refining will be charged per 10 oz. of pure silver contained, besides the charges above mentioned but in such cases, no charge for premelting will be made.

For old gold or silver coins (Japanese) and gold and silver alloys requiring refining: Charges for assaying:

Yen.

For less than 1,000 oz 2

For 1,000 oz. but under 2,000 oz 4

For every 1,000 oz. or fraction of 1,000 oz. over 2,000 oz 2

Note.—If the importer shall desire the bullion to be returned to him after it has been premelted and assayed, or if the bullion is returned to him on account of its being unfit for refining, the following charges for premelting, besides those for assaying will be made:

Yen.

For less than 1,000 oz 1

For 1,000 oz. but under 2,000 oz 2

For every 1,000 oz. or fraction of 1,000 oz. over 2,000 oz 1

Charges for refining:

For bullion which contains less than 100 parts of gold per 1,000:

Yen 3.230 per 10 oz. of pure gold contained.

Yen 0.213 per 10 oz. of pure silver contained.

For bullion which contains over 100 parts but less than 200 parts of gold per 1,000:

Yen 1.904 per 10 oz. of pure gold contained.

Yen 0.128 per 10 oz. of pure silver contained.

For bullion which contains over 200 parts of gold per 1,000:

Yen 1.377 per 10 oz. of pure gold contained.

Yen 0.085 per 10 oz. of pure silver contained.

Note.—The above rates are fixed, on the condition that the bullion contains less than 100 parts of impurities per 1,000. If, therefore, the bullion contains over 100 parts of impurities per 1,000 the following additional fees will be charged, and if the bullion contains over 200 parts of impurities per 1,000 the said additional fees will be doubled. Bullion which contains over 250 parts of impurities per 1,000 will not be received.

Yen 0.349 per 10 oz. of pure gold contained.

Yen 0.022 per 10 oz. of pure silver contained.

Charges for coinage:

For any amount 1 per cent. of pure gold or silver contained.

Charges for transit and insurance: Yen 65 per yen 10,000.

(If the coin is to be taken delivery of in Osaka, only half of the last-mentioned amount will be charged.)

For gold or silver bullion, the fineness of which is apparently known and which does not require premelting. (Foreign gold or silver coins will be received only by the mint in Osaka, but if already premelted, will be received at the branch office.)

Charges for check assay: The same charges as those for assaying gold or silver bullion (as previously given).

Charges for coinage: For any amount, 1 per cent. (for either gold or silver).

Charges for transit and insurance: Yen 65 per yen 10,000.

(If the coin is to be taken delivery of in Osaka, only half of the last mentioned amount will be charged.)

Art. 5. Should the amount of bullion imported by the public be in excess of the operative capacity of the office, acceptance of the bullion will be refused.

Art. 6. The coin will be delivered on the expiration of the following periods, after the bullion has been assayed and its fineness determined. When old coins (Japanese) are received the delivery will be made as early as possible after the completion of the assays.

After the date of the completion of the assays (except holidays).

In case the gold or silver bullion is fit for coinage 25th day

The bullion is of impure gold or silver or of gold and silver alloy over yen 200 28th day

Same, over yen 500 30th day

Same, over yen 1,000 32d day

Same, over yen 5,000 35th day

Same, over yen 10,000 40th day

Note.—To those who wish to obtain com before the above dates, com will be delivered after deducting yen 1 per yen 10,000 for each one of the days previous to the expiration of the above periods.

Art. 7. The impurities, other than gold and silver, which may be contained in the bullion imported will not be returned to the importer.

No. 421. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 421.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, October 22, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 997.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 722, of date of 31st January, 1878, in which I had the honor to inclose the report of His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s department of education, showing the number of schools in this empire, the number of pupils in attendance thereat, the number of instructors employed, the amount annually expended in the support of the schools and the amount of the surplus school fund, I now take pleasure in further acquainting you that by a notification issued by his excellency, the prime minister of His Majesty, certain school regulations have been adopted and published by which the schools are open to all the children of Japan between the ages of six and fourteen years, and by which their education for at least four months annually for the period of four consecutive years is made compulsory upon their parents and guardians.

I beg leave to call your attention to articles 13 and 17 of the regulations, a copy of which, together with the notification thereof, as published in the Japan Weekly Mail of the 18th instant, I have the honor to inclose.

It is certainly greatly to the credit of His Majesty’s Government that in some measure the liberty to learn and to know has by law been assured to all the children of the empire.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 997.]

(Extract from the Japan Weekly Mail, October 18, 1879.)

educational regulations.

Article 1. All affairs connected with education throughout the country will be under the sole control of the minister of education. All public and private schools, and all public libraries, &c., will therefore be under the supervision of the minister.

Art. 2. Schools will be divided into primary and high schools, colleges, normal schools, technical schools, and others of different kinds.

Art. 3. Primary schools are for giving general education to children, and the subjects for study will be the elementary parts of reading, writing, mathematics, geography, history, moral science, &c. According to the state of the district, drawing, music, gymnastics, &c., or the outlines of natural philosophy and history, &c., will be added. Sewing classes will be established for girls.

Art. 4. High schools are for giving general education to advanced students.

Art. 5. Colleges are for the study of special branches, such as law, science, medicine, literature, &c.

Art. 6. Normal schools are for the instruction of teachers.

Art. 7. Technical schools are for the study of special branches of science or industry.

Art. 8. Every person will be allowed to establish any of the schools above mentioned.

Art. 9. In all the provinces a primary school will be established by the government in every town or village, or in several towns or villages where the population is small.

Note.—But in case there should be a good private primary school in any town or village, the government need not establish one.

Art. 10. Officers will be appointed to take charge of educational affairs in towns and villages.

Note.—The number of the officers and their salaries will be decided according to the convenience of the towns or villages.

Art. 11. Such officers will be selected by the people of the town or village to which they are appointed.

Art. 12. The officers will be under the supervision of the governors of Fu or Ken, and will control all matters connected with the education of children and the establishment and maintenance of schools.

Art. 13. From their sixth to fourteenth years shall be considered the “educational age” of children.

Art. 14. All children should receive general education for a period of at least sixteen months during the “educational age.”

Art. 15. The parents, guardians, &c., of children will be responsible for seeing that children during their educational age receive the required instruction.

Note.—Those who are unavoidably prevented from letting their children receive the required instruction must report the reasons to the educational officers.

Art. 16. In the primary schools established by the government, eight years are fixed as the period of study, and although this period may be shortened according to the circumstances of the locality, it must not be shortened to less than four years, and during those four years children must receive education annually, for a period of at least four months.

Art. 17. Even though children do not enter the school, if they have the means of receiving general education otherwise, they shall be considered as having complied with the requirements of the regulations.

Art. 18. In those provinces where the people are unable to provide the funds required for establishing schools, arrangements may be made for visiting teachers, so that the children may receive instruction.

Art. 19. The schools will be divided into two kinds, public and private. The schools established by means of the local tax, or by the public funds of a town or village, will be called public schools, and those established at the cost of private individuals will be called private schools.

Art. 20. The establishment or abolition of all public schools must be with the approval of the governor of fu or ken.

Art. 21. The establishment or abolition of all private schools may be done by simply reporting the fact to the governor of fu or ken.

Art. 22. The rules for education in public schools must receive the approval of the minister for education.

Art. 23. The rules for education in private schools must be reported to the governor of fu or ken.

Art. 24. The cost of maintaining public schools which have been approved of by the fu and ken assemblies will be defrayed out of the local tax, and the cost of maintaining public schools established with the consent of the people of a town or village will be defrayed out of the public funds of such town or village.

Art. 25. If it is necessary to grant a subsidy out of the local tax, to the schools established and maintained out of the public funds of a town or village, such subsidy must be granted with the approval of the fu or ken assemblies.

Art. 26. No tax will be levied upon the ground occupied by public schools.

Art. 27. Gifts from the people for educational purposes must not be used for any other object than those indicated by the donor.

Art. 28. The minister of education will grant to every fu and ken an annual sum as a subsidy to the public primary schools.

Art. 29. The governors of fu and ken will distribute the subsidy thus granted by the minister of education to every public primary school.

Art. 30. To those public primary schools which were opened for less than four months in the previous year a subsidy will not be granted.

Art. 31. Even to private primary schools a subsidy will be granted, if the governors of fu or ken consider them to be useful to the people of the town or village.

Art. 32. Such subsidy will also be granted to the towns or villages where the system of having visiting teachers is established, provided that the classes are open for over four months in a year.

Art. 33. Public normal schools may be established in every fu or ken according to circumstances.

Art. 34. The public normal schools will grant, after examination, certificates of the completion of their studies to the students of the schools.

Art. 35. The public normal schools will also grant such certificates, on application, to those who have not studied in those schools, after examination, and if they are found suitable in other respects, for the post of teachers.

Art. 36. The minister for education may grant a subsidy to any fu or ken, in order to perfect the establishment and working of public normal schools.

Art. 37. All teachers, male or female, must be above the age of eighten years.

Art. 38. The teachers of all public primary schools must, as a rule, hold certificates of competency from the normal schools.

Note.—Persons who do not hold certificates may be appointed if they are found to be competent.

Art. 39. The minister for education will dispatch officers occasionally to fu and ken to inspect the actual state of educational affairs there.

Art. 40. Both public and private schools must not object to be inspected by the officers dispatched by the minister for education.

Art. 41. The governors of fu and ken will forward a report annually to the minister for education, containing the actual state of educational affairs under their respective control.

Art. 42. In all schools the rooms for teaching males and females will, as a rule, be separate.

Note.—In the ease of primary schools the male and female scholars need not always be separate.

Art. 43. All schools may or may not, according to circumstances, charge fees for teaching.

Art. 44. Children who have not had the small-pox or who have not been vaccinated will not be admitted into the schools.

Art. 45. No person suffering from epidemic disease will be allowed to have access to the schools.

Art. 46. In all schools no corporal punishment (such as striking or binding with rope) will be allowed.

Art. 47. On the occasion of the examination of students, their parents, guardians &c. will be allowed to be present.

No. 422. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 422.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, Japan, October 24, 1879. (Received November 28.) No. 999.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of the report of the committee of the Tokio general chamber of commerce, upon the revision of the existing treaties between Japan and the treaty powers.

* * * * * * *

This report of the Tokio committee (composed of Japanese) furnishes, in my opinion, very strong reasons for such a revision of the treaties as Japan has asked for, and which it has pleased our government to favor and approve.

The committee declare that the present treaties have worked injuries to the commerce and industries of Japan, and that if the treaty powers refuse to revise the treaties as petitioned for by this government, the treaty powers should be regarded as thereby “breaking moral obligation as well as justice.”

The committee note with truth that the present treaty (1866) was concluded at the close of the late government of the Shiogun, when Japan was without experience in foreign trade; and that the tariff thereby established “was fixed without any consideration of the interests that might be thereby affected.” The committee compare the tariff thus dictated to and imposed upon Japan with the tariffs now in force in European and American States. In this comparison the committee show that of the total revenue of 55,651,379.34 yen for the twelfth fiscal year in Japan, the amount thereof derived from land taxes was 41,376,458 yen, or 74 per cent. of the whole, while the amount from customs duties, import and export, was but 2, 181,310 yen, or only 2.7 per cent. of the whole revenue.

By a comparative table appended to the report it is shown that Great Britain collects 25 per cent. of her total revenue from imposts upon imports, Canada 57 per cent., France 10 per cent., and the United States 50 per cent. The committee also show that the exports of Japan being almost exclusively agricultural productions, the export duty falls largely upon the producers, and should be abolished. (Table 2.) They also set out in a table the import and export to and from Japan of gold and silver coin and bullion for six and a half years, showing that from the fifth to the first half of the eleventh year of Meiji the export thereof was in excess of the import thereof 43,398,529,395 yen.

They state that the demand made by Japan is as just as it is necessary to the welfare of this people, and very significantly declare that should the treaty powers refuse the revision so needful and equitable, “then the obligation of Japan toward the treaty powers to maintain friendly relations as heretofore would thereby be absolved. The absolute sovereign right of the government to adjust its tariff is undeniable.”

The report also contains valuable information of the various productions of Japan; of the amount of rice produced to the acre, its value, and the small margin left to the farmer after the payment of the land tax; also of the tonnage of the empire. The committee insist that, in addition to the need of the revision asked for of the tariff provisions of the treaty, Japan should be allowed, as provided in our treaty of last year, to regulate her coast trade, and also to require the payment of her customs duties exclusively in Japanese silver yen.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 999.]

Report of the committee of the Tokio General Chamber of Commerce in respect to the pro-posed revision of the existing treaties between Japan and the treaty powers.

The question of the treaty revision is so essential and important that the consequences arising or growing out of it most seriously affect the interests of the nation and the safety of the state. The imperial government has been prompt in attempting 1he revision of the treaty, and has complained to the several foreign courts of the necessity of revision, through its ministers accredited to the different governments of Europe and America, and also has made investigation into the commercial requirements and economical conditions of the country. The government has also endeavored to ascertain the opinion held regarding the same among foreigners and natives as well as of official and private individuals. To the Chamber of Commerce has been also referred several questions regarding the foreign and domestic commerce. The chamber has since been diligent in investigating into the questions submitted to it to enable itself to present its views without delay. But before we proceed to give any answers to the questions so submitted, we believe it is the duty and obligation of the Chamber of Commerce to state its own views respecting the whole question. We have, therefore, the honor to make several remarks as hereafter mentioned regarding the same.

After considering what influence has been exerted upon the country by the present treaty, the Chamber of Commerce is led to believe that not only the present treaty has been disadvantageous to Japan, but it has defeated the general principles of commerce which are to promote the interests between this country and foreign nations. The present treaty has, therefore, been injurious to both Japan and foreign countries. We have no hesitation in believing that the imperial government has already perceived the injuries so inflicted, and that the treaty powers also must have regarded the present treaty to be injurious to commercial interests; so, then, they ought undoubtedly to be quite willing to agree to the revision of the treaty, especially to those articles respecting trade. If, however, on the contrary, they should have any occasion to raise objections to our claim for revision of the treaty, we should regard them as thereby breaking the morality as well as justice. We shall now proceed to relate the reasons why they should be so regarded.

The present treaty was concluded at the close of the late government, when Japan had been secluded from foreign intercourse and had had no experience of that nature, and, among others, the tariff attached thereto was fixed, as it is, under unavoidable circumstances then existing in this country, without any consideration of the national vicissitudes or interests that might be thereby affected in future. A comparison of that tariff to that now in force in any of the European or American countries will soon show that such partial and unjust one as that of Japan does not exist in any of those countries.

Since the first conclusion of our treaty with foreign nations, Japan has made greater progress every year in her government and civilization, and Japan at the present day cannot be looked upon as the Japan in old times, and, therefore, the imperial government, in claiming the revision of the treaty which is necessitated by the change of national circumstances, and which is based upon proper principles, has a right to have sufficient amendments made in the treaty to be proper and just, notwithstanding the absence of a given time in it for the purpose; but when such time is given in the treaty as really is provided, how much more should Japan be justified in claiming the revision.

Should the treaty powers still raise any objections to a revision of the treaty, notwithstanding the principles and circumstances so much necessitating it, they should be looked upon as disregarding them, and then the obligation of Japan towards the treaty powers to maintain friendly relations as heretofore would thereby be absolved. The absolute sovereign right of the government to adjust its tariff is undeniable as a question of principle.

We have already related the reasons why the present treaty should be revised, and we shall now give the same reasons upon the other basis, which is through the unjust adjustment of tariff, greatly affecting the national economy as well as the commercial interests.

It is because of the constitutional principles of Japan by which the national economy has depended upon the land and peasants from the ancient time that the agricultural industry of this country is principally cared for, and the national revenue has been principally raised from the land. This system has existed for twenty-five hundred years. But since the restoration of the imperial government, it perceived the burdens of land taxes involving certain impediments in the promotion of agricultural industry, and has greatly reformed the revenue system, so as to lessen the land taxes. In addition to this, an imperial decree was issued in the 8th year of Meiji to reduce the tax to 2½ per cent. on the value of land, and thus the imperial government has been diligently endeavoring to adjust any partiality in the revenue, although the system so reformed for land taxes does not still prove to be quite equitable in proportion to the other kind of taxes. In the budget issued by the minister of finance for the 12th fiscal year we have observed that out of the total revenue of 55,651,379.034 yen, the amount of 53,470,069 yen is estimated on the domestic revenue, and 2, 181,310 yen on the customs duties, and that of that amount of the domestic revenue the land taxation amounts to 41,376,458 yen, which is 74.35 per cent. on the whole revenue, while the customs duties are only 2.7 per cent. on the same, and in comparing such state of the budget with that of any European or American country we find a very great difference existing between them, as shown by the annexed table, No. 1.

From that table it is evident that Japan levies the heaviest domestic taxes and the lightest customs duties. How, then, can we say that our revenue system is founded on an equitable basis! Besides, the principal articles for export are mostly agricultural products.

According to the table of exports and imports for the 11th fiscal year, the total exports amount to 24,614,760 yen, of which the sum of 16,666,730 yen, or about 67 per cent. on the whole export, was paid for the three articles of raw silk, tea, and rice. It is, therefore, just to say that our countrymen principally live upon agricultural products, and any augmentation of the domestic productions of all kind in future should greatly depend on the same resources, and it is now only a mistaken policy of the national economy to levy such heavy taxes on land, which is the important national resource, while imposing extraordinarily light duties on the imports; and with such a state of things existing we can never expect by any chance to promote agricultural industry as well as commercial interests, for the reasons which we shall now proceed to give.

The proceeds from the products yielded by land under the present revenue system are not the same in different localities, but upon an average the value of paddy fields may be estimated at 47 yen per ton (about one-fourth of an acre), and the harvest therefrom may be one koku, 3 to and 3.24 sho (a koku = 5.13 bushels; to = 1’10 of koku, and sho = 1/10 of to), the value of which is estimated by an average of 5 57.74 yen. By deducting from this amount the sum of 1.85.91 yen, or the value of 4 to and .41 sho for the seeds, manure, and other expenses, and the amount of 1.18.5 yen, or the value of 2 to and 8.31 sho, for the land tax of 2½ per cent. on the value; and further the sum of 0.23.77 yen, or the value of 5.66 sho, for the local revenue of 20 per cent. on the land tax, the net income per ton, after cleared of all those charges, will be 5 to and 4.85 sho, the value of which is 2.29.6 yen or 4.8 per cent. on the value of land. The above calculation has been based upon the estimate made by the revenue bureau of the Treasury Department, for the average amount of the proceeds from the paddy fields of the whole empire, when the value of land was fixed by that department including by average, the proceeds from such paddy fields yielding twice a year. But the above calculation excludes local expenses and famine stores, for which the proceeds are also to be deducted.

As to the farms, the proceeds from the mulberry trees and tea are seemingly superfluous, but the average estimate of the proceeds from the different farms, after cleared of land tax and all other charges, shows no great difference from those of the paddy fields. Consequently the subscription to the agricultural fund has been very small from ancient times, and the implements used for the purposes of agriculture have been confined to the spade, hoe, and a few others, and only a few peasants could keep cattle in aid of their human labor in the cultivation of the ground. Therefore, in order to promote agricultural industry, upon which our national interests and economical resources greatly depend, while the proceeds and funds are so limited, it is a matter of vital importance to lessen the land tax so as to make certain allowance for the peasants for their own support. This is indeed the greatest duty of the government and the wisest policy of the state at the present time.

Some might suppose that a large proportion of fifteen millions three hundred and twenty thousand of peasants, including decrepit persons, children, and women, or 4.37 per cent. on the whole population of thirty-five millions, is simply an indication of the profitableness of their occupation, because with so small proceeds from their labor they ought to convert to the other employments. But this does not follow, and is only a sign of the utter ignorance of the opponents of the general usages of this country. The occupation of the peasantry in this country has been inherited from their ancestors, and any negligence of occupation has been regarded among them as a violation of family instructions, and with exception of those having lost their estate or occupation through their indolence and prodigality, they strictly observe the family instructions to adhere to the occupation inherited from their ancestors, and do not care for the prosperous and advantageous condition of the other persons of different occupations, and this has become established and unsophisticated custom among the Japanese peasantry in the long continuance of their strict adherence to the family instructions. But owing to the facilities of communication introduced throughout the whole country by opening the postal and telegraphic lines of late years, it is quite natural that they will soon become conversant with the actual state of social phenomena and perceive the bitter circumstances of their condition so that they will finally appeal against the heavy imposition of land taxes. The imperial government is therefore just in the position to adopt some wise policy to make certain allowance for the peasants for their own support, as no oppressive measures would be effectual after the peasantry have so risen.

We have already stated that the agricultural proceeds are greatly reduced by the heavy imposition of land taxes, and have also given the reasons for which agricultural industry could not be encouraged. The imperial government should therefore make every endeavor to lessen the land tax, and construct and open several roads to give all facility for transports and thereby should carry out its general object. But in order to effect improvements of this kind, the financial condition of the country should be first ascertained. Although at present the imperial government is raising an annual revenue of fifty-five millions of yen, we believe that it has no surplus beyond the expenditure, when all things should be improved in this country. But no more mercantile duties can be raised to make up the deficiency that may be found in the expenditure of the government. The imperial government had already attempted to supply the reduction occurred in the revenue under the reformed system of land tax by levying other taxes, duties in the shape of stamp dues, postage dues, and taxes on pensions, liquor, tobacco, &c. Under these circumstances no more mercantile duties can be raised, while it is essential to lessen the rate of land tax, and we would therefore suggest that it is now time for the imperial government to immediately revise the treaty and adjust the tariff, to the end that the duties shall be levied on imports. The adjustment of the import tariff for the increase of customs duties is not only essential for the reasons above given, but also regarding the principles and interests of foreign loans, which should be paid in coins. The coins of this country have been continually exported to pay for the balance of trade every year occurred since the first opening of Japan to the foreign trade, until at present the remains in this country are found so scanty that they will, it is feared, be finally withdrawn from circulation as the regular currency. If the coin currency should be, indeed, at any time withdrawn from circulation, it is doubtful whether the imperial government, who have had so far a full credit of the public regarding the foreign loans, might be able to escape from serious and critical embarrassment.

To avoid any financial crises in future, customs duties are the only resources upon which this nation can depend. The foreign loans are not the only thing requiring coin for their payment. It is not expedient to pay the internal debt with a redeemable currency. It is, therefore, most essential to revise the treaty and impose additional duties on imports, in order to enable us thereby properly to lessen the land tax, increase internal production, promote commercial interests, and redeem foreign loans, so that the credit of the nation will be firmly secured before the public.

Some might suppose, again, that should the imperial government increase the annual revenue upon the customs duties the export duties would be increased as well as the import duties. But this is a grave mistake. As we have already stated, the land tax should be lessened in order to make certain allowance for the agricultural products, which form a greater part of the exports, as before mentioned, and an imposition of export duties is nothing but that of land tax, and will no doubt affect the condition of the peasantry. We deem it, therefore, not only inexpedient to increase export duties, but advisable to abolish them altogether. Our opponent would still insist upon his opinion that an increase of import duties will immediately affect the price of goods, so that the native consumers will not be able to pay for the foreign articles, and that the consequence so occasioned will be a loss to consumers and the ruin of trade, and Japanese an 3 foreigners will be both brought to the unhappy position to sustain certain injuries from it.

But this is only a superficial idea. What are mostly consumed in the life of Japanese producers are beverages and provisions and clothing; furniture and other articles for their household are next in order, and the foreign goods consumed by them are confined Only to cotton yarn, shirtings, kerosene oil, and a few others, all of which are in value only two or three tenths of beverages and provisions they are consuming. Therefore, any rise of those imports in value will not so much affect the household expenditure of Japanese producers to raise the price of exports.

Whether the articles of import are purchased by the agricultural producers or not, most of them are already accustomed in daily consumption, and ought to increase in importation according to demand, notwithstanding the rise in value, and when the price of imports was raised during late years by the rise of legal-tender, we observed, on the contrary, that foreign articles were more demanded than when they were low in price. This is an evident proof that the quantity of imports greatly depends upon the demands instead of the value, and therefore the reduction of land tax to make certain allowance for the benefit of agricultural products, and the improvement of roads for reducing the expenses of transportation, are not only essential in order to increase the internal products of this country, but are highly important for the increase of demands for the articles of import.

The Japanese products for exportation are mostly agricultural and marine products, such as raw silk, tea, rice, wheat, camphor, vegetable wax, sea-weed, dried awabi, &c. We think, therefore, it is not out of place to refer to the annexed table No. 2, which shows the quantity of products exported during six years from the 7th year of Meiji, as follows:

According to the statistics above referred to, it is apparent that raw and unmanufactured articles must comprise the greater part of the exports, and that they are altogether agricultural products. Under these circumstances, Japan has now by all means to make every endeavor to increase agricultural products, and at the same time to facilitate the demands for foreign articles, so that exports will be gradually augmented, together with imports—the only reliable policy for the promotion of commercial interests. If, however, on the contrary, the thing is conducted without regard to the original cause of the financial condition of the country, we shall have no expectation for the increasing of prod acts, and shall be obliged to make pecuniary payment for imports. This theory has been practically acted on in Japan, by exporting an enormous amount of yen, 43,398,529.31.5 in gold and silver, to pay for the balance of trade, from the 5th year of Meiji to the 6th month of the 12th year, and if this state of things is not changed, it is most probable that the result will be the ruin of the commercial interest of Japan, and reduce the country to the most miserable condition, so that she will he finally obliged to discontinue all export and import trades, as the limited amount of treasure in this country will not answer to pay for the boundless quantity of import from several foreign countries.

It is needless to say that there can be no country or nation in the world which pays all her treasure for the purchase of foreign articles to supply only her own demands without exporting her products in exchange.

It is the true principle of commerce to establish a reciprocity between the buyer and the seller. The necessity to purchase certain articles makes it necessary to sell certain other articles, and so the sale of certain articles is rendered necessary by the purchase of certain other articles. Japan of this day is only purchasing, not selling, and is sure to be brought to the most miserable condition, as before mentioned, and we have no hesitation to foresee Japan so destined, according to the true principle of commerce. Our inconsiderate opponent (who is afraid of the rise of imports in value by an increase of duties, and does not care for making certain allowance for agricultural producers, who must be good mediators to increase demands for foreign articles) may be compared with a botanist who is seeking for the luxuriance of branches and leaves of a tree without nourishing the root. Should the opponent still insist on his erroneous view and object to an increase of import duties, he is only a promoter of selfish interests, and is committing violent action “to make his own good by defrauding another of his dues,” as told in a proverb, and should he regard as guilty of violating the rule of reciprocity, which is the true principle of commerce.

For the reasons repeatedly given in the foregoing articles, it is the most sincere prayer of the Chamber of Commerce that the imperial government shall immediately decide upon revision of the treaty, and make certain allowance for domestic producers, thus encouraging an increase of productions and promotion of commercial interests.

As regards the other demands which we have, regarding the treaty revision, we shall hereafter furnish our views in separate articles.

right of coasting trade.

On the occasion of revising the present treaties, it is one of the most important points, and which the chamber is very desirous of securing, viz, that the right of controlling the coasting trade should be reserved by Japan. Japan is a country surrounded by sea, and the greatest attention should be paid to the carrying trade by sea, of which a mere theoretical study would not answer, but which requires experience and practice.

With this object in view, the government has not failed to cause the carrying trade to be undertaken in the country, and to give it the necessary protection. If now, however, foreign vessels be allowed to carry on this trade in Japan, that of the Japanese vessels must naturally be depressed thereby, in consequence of inferiority in point of experience, and it would result in discouraging our ship-building and the education of mariners. This is the real cause why the right of coasting trade should be reserved by Japan under the present state of things.

It may be supposed that our carrying trade is not still in an advanced state; there is now only the Mitsu Bishi Company, which carries on this trade in Japan, but it, subsisting under government protection, and being of the nature of a monopoly, is not to be relied upon, and as any one will find it impossible to undertake a competition with such a subsidized company, it is necessary to grant foreign vessels the liberty of carrying on the coasting trade, and thereby to increase the means of conveyance in this country.

This the chamber must say is an opinion arising out of an insufficient knowledge of the facts. According to the table showing the number of vessels belonging to Japanese, prepared by the general post-office on the first month of the present year, the number of merchant vessels has been annually increased since the 3d year Meiji, as follows: In the 3d Meiji 48

In the 4th Meiji 72

In the 5th Meiji 30

In the 6th Meiji 31

In the 7th Meiji 20

In the 8th Meiji 41

In the 9th Meiji 32

In the 10th Meiji 52

In the 11th Meiji 89

The number of steamers and sailing vessels on the 1st mouth of the 12th year Meiji: Description. Ships. Tons.

Steamers 168 40,669

Sailing vessels 146 23,966

Store vessels (property of M. B. Co.) 8 8,416

Total 322 73,051

Of the above ships: Description. Ships. Tons.

Steamers over 100 tons 59 36,228

Steamers under 100 tons 109 3,441

Sailing vessels over 100 tons 70 20,110

Sailing vessels under 100 tons 76 3,856

From this rapid increase of vessels Japan appears to have made considerable advance in its marine trade, and although it is true that the Mitsu Bishi Company receives the protection of the government, it can never be satisfied with that, and it appears endeavoring to further extend their trade. The said company has now in its possession thirty-three steamers and seven sailing vessels, and its vessels run between all important ports on our coasts, viz, Kobe, Osaka, Yotsukaichi, Shimidzu, Shimonoseki, Kochi, Nagasaki, Kagoshima, Oshima, Riu-Kiu, Fushigi, Sakai, Hachinobe, Samuaawa, and Fanakawa, and also abroad it has already commenced regular navigation between Shanghai, Hong-Kong, and Korea. Within only a few years past it has made conspicuous advances in its business, and is rapidly more and more progressing. Thus, although that company appears to hold a monopoly, in reality it is not the case. Now to demonstrate this it would be expedient to show to what numbers vessels upon foreign models have increased in Japan and how many persons are the owners of them.

There are now 180 steamers, of which 37 are the property of the Mitsu Bishi Company, while the remaining 143 belong to other owners; and 146 sailing vessels, of which seven are the property of the said company, while the remaining 139 are owned by other companies, or individuals consisting in number of 130 persons.

The sea-carrying trade in Japan is in such progressive state, and as the people have understood the profitableness of this trade, there can be no doubt that they would be willing to offer their capital and undertake the building of new vessels, so as to further promote this carrying trade.

As to the mistaken supposition above alluded to, that the Mitsu Bishi Company enjoys a monopoly, it needs no refutation, because if it should be understood that the government protection given to the said company is not for the company itself, but for the enterprise in which it is engaged, such a misapprehension would not have arisen.

It is not only the Government of Japan which gives protection to its mail vessels; in Great Britain, France, and the United States the same is the case. It must be especially expedient to do so for Japan, when considering the state of affairs under which she is at present placed. But there can be no doubt that if that company would conduct itself wrong and do any injuries to the public, the government should not fail to condemn it, and also the people should never yield to such injuries. Besides, if the foreign merchants be informed of the fact that foreign vessels have not much to interfere with our coasting trade, they would find it inadvisable on their part to give any inconvenience thereto. As is shown in the report of the Kobe foreign chamber of commerce, presented to the British minister at Tokio, the foreign vessels which arrived at and departed from that port with cargoes of Japanese products during the period of seventeen months from the 1st. of January, 1878, to the 1st of May, 1879, were only eighteen, and the amount of freight they realized was only $13,375½, whereas the vessels of the Mitsu Bishi Company made 279 runs between Tokio and Kobe during the period of one year from the 1st of January, 1878, to the 31st of December, 1878, and the freight received amounted to 1,640.26.5 yen. If in comparison with only a portion of trade carried on by one company the foreign vessels were so greatly surpassed in their freight and quantity of cargoes, there will, therefore, be far more difference when compared with many other Japanese steamers, sailing vessels, and junks, as well as those of the Mitsu Bishi Company.

It may be supposed that it cannot be proper to make such a comparison between the native and foreign vessels in the quantity of cargoes they have carried, because there are some very troublesome formalities to be observed in case of loading Japanese products in foreign vessels which make them unfavorable to the public.

Taking this supposition for granted, the chamber is still of opinion that if the Japanese vessels were found insufficient to the public needs, so as to necessitate the service of foreign vessels, the quantity of cargoes carried by the latter must have been greater. But the fact that the case was not so proves that the Japanese vessels are able to meet the need for transportation of our products without requiring the service of foreign vessels.

It may further be supposed that should the right of coasting trade be granted to foreign vessels the rate of freight would be lowered to the great advantage of merchants in consequence of competition taking place between the native and foreign vessels.

This is also an unsustainable view; although as long as they can they could support themselves with low freights in competition, but when one of the rivals should fail it is quite possible that the others would immediately raise again their rates, because the low rate during the competition cannot be a reasonable one.

We admit that Japan is still incomplete in her ship-building facilities, but we have already many docks; they are at Kobe, Nagasaki, Yokosuga, Osaka, Tokio, and Hakodate, of which the first three belong to the government and the others belong to private individuals, and they are all constantly working busily.

The ships constructed at these docks, it is admitted, are not all of a proper method of construction, but there is no doubt that they are by far superior to the old junks in their construction. And besides, as the marine insurance company has been established in this country, and as the ships being insured by that company are to be surveyed by a committee who is sent from the general post-office, those who engage in carrying trade will gradually know that they ought not to construct their ships roughly, but to construct in a proper method; and also there is no doubt that as the transportation of goods can be secured by the establishment of this company, it should be greatly increased in future. Since the establishment of this company, 58 ships, exceeding in all 31,877 tons, have been already insured by them.

It may be expected that when the foreign insurance companies are informed themselves of the above circumstances, they should also be willing to give insurances to the goods to be carried by the Japanese vessels which have once been insured by the Japanese insurance company at Tokio, and which have been surveyed by a committee of the general post-office, so that both the foreign and native merchants shall have no complaint of any inconvenience for the transportation of their goods between the ports in this country. If, however, the right of coasting trade be granted to foreign vessels, it will not only hinder the progress of the carrying trade of our people, but also cause it to be depressed. The chamber consequently urges that on this occasion of the treaty revision the right of coasting trade should be reserved by Japan.

opening of new ports.

In this country we now have only five ports and two cities open to foreign trade, and therefore the products of the interior must be brought to either of these open ports or cities to meet the demand of foreign merchants.

It may be supposed that the trade of our products is accustomed to be carried on at the old open ports and that the products being naturally concentrated at the thriving places, as silk is brought exclusively to Yokohama and tea to Yokohama and Kobe, the opening of any new ports, even in the vicinity of the productive districts, would not do much to induce the foreign merchants to remove there for trade.

In the opinion of the chamber, the opening of new ports is very desirable, the reasons for which are as follows:

Coal of Japan is gradually getting a good demand in the East, and it is chiefly exported to China. During the eleventh fiscal year of Meiji, the amount of 123,382 tons was exported, and it seems to increase year after year, while the consumption of foreign coal is gradually decreasing.

The working of coal mines in Japan is greatly improving by purchasing the necessary machinery and providing steamers for the purpose of transportation, and it will not be long before the people in the East can buy coal at a cheap rate. However, under the present circumstances, to export Japanese coal it would be brought from the interior to some of its nearest open ports, causing thereby much labor and expense; for instance, coal produced at Takashima, Karatsu, and Taku would be sent to Nagasaki for exportation; so, also, coal to be shortly produced from the mines at Horonai and Iwanai, in the Hokkaido, would have to be sent over to the port of Hakodate.

In this state of things, those who engage in coal mining would find it difficult to obtain any profit therefrom; while it would be also disadvantageous to those who consume such coal, and such would not be the way to promote the coal mining in Japan.

Rice of Japan is also of late greatly esteemed in Europe, and is demanded there at much higher prices than that of Indian rice. It was not a fixed goods of export, and only what was stored in the government warehouse has been exported; but the chamber has no doubt that in future it will be made one of the general goods of export. When China or Australia happen to feel the scarcity of provisions, our rice or wheat will be sent to them, and at times of scarcity in Japan it would be necessary to obtain Chinese rice. But rice as well as coal is a very bulky article, inconvenient to be transported. If such bulky article should be sent to the open ports before it can be exported from or imported into the interior of the country, the price of it would thereby more or less be raised. Such would be inconsonant with the principle of developing our national products, and also it would be unfit to save the people at the time of unfruitfulness in this country.

During the 8th and the 9th years Meiji a great quantity of rice was exported from Nügata. This could be done in consequence of that port being an open port. At that port the price of rice was always higher than at any non-open port of that vicinity, and it gave great gain to the peasants of that port, while foreign merchants gained also great profit in that trade, because the goods could be exported directly from that port.

From the actual state of things above set forth, the chamber feels it most desirable that rice and coal being such important products of Japan, certain new ports should be opened for coal trade at the coasts near where that article is produced, and for rice at certain central places, such as Simonoseki, Fushiki, and I’shinomaki, so that unnecessary labor and expense arising out of a circuitous way of transportation may be avoided.

remedying an inequity in the rate of specific duty.

Specific is the better system. Therefore ad valorem duties should be changed to specific duties as much as possible. Some of the specific duties under the present tariff, however, are inequitable, and this must be an injury to trade. For instance, there are different widths and qualities of woollen cloths and cotton cloths, so that it must be inequitable to impose the same duty on all of them.

The chamber therefore feels it desirable that distinction should be made in the duties to be imposed on these goods according to their widths and weight, &c. It would be in the discretion of the government to regulate this matter. But the chamber has also some opinions concerning this subject, and, if desired, will be happy to submit them.

erecting more bonded warehouses for the customs.

It has been desired that there should be erected more bonded warehouses for the customs, to meet the demands of merchants in general at cheaper storage, which, in the opinion of this chamber, would not fail to be of great advantage in the encouragement of our commerce. Hitherto there was not much inducement to the merchants to store their goods in the warehouses, in consequence of the high rate of storage and an insufficient number of them. And it has been the practice that the imported articles were placed in the godowns of foreigners after landing, and when Japanese purchased their articles they were again brought to the landing-place for shipment. As to exports, the process was the same troublesome one, but vice versa, causing thereby unnecessary additional expense.

Goods imported are generally held as security by the banks for money which has been advanced on them, and, therefore, until the advance-money has been refunded the banks do not allow the owners to take the goods from their godowns. Consequently, when Japanese purchase their goods, they first pay the money and then examine the goods and take delivery thereof. As to goods to be sold to foreigners, they are sent to the godowns of foreigners, and after being kept there for some days the foreigners settle the transaction. All this causes great inconvenience to Japanese merchants, and must be remedied.

This chamber desires, therefore, that more bonded warehouses may be erected in the vicinity of the landing-places at the open ports to meet the demand for imports and exports at cheap storage, and that certificates will be issued by the custom-house for goods deposited, and that sales of goods may be made by samples, and that delivery thereof shall be made at the warehouses. Such an arrangement would avoid the labor and expense of frequent conveyance. As to the rate of storage for such new bonded warehouses, the chamber has some opinions, and, if desired, will be happy to submit them.

establishing a system of drawbacks.

There is no doubt that a system of drawbacks is highly advantageous to merchants, and right in principle. The chamber, consequently, supporting the public opinion desires earnestly the establishment of this system.

A system of drawbacks is that by which the custom-house will repay the duty levied on imported goods at the time of their import, when these goods are re-exported to foreign countries. This is a system which is adopted at present in countries of Europe, America, and China. There are systems both strict and loose, but what the chamber demands is a strict one. In other words, we desire to apply the system not only in cases where the goods are exported in the same form, but also in cases where their forms have undergone changes; for instance, when drawn sugar imported from Formosa has been refined at home and changed into white sugar, or white sugar into loaf sugar, or when cloth is woven with English and Japanese cotton threads used in the length and breadth respectively, and it can be shown to the satisfaction of the custom-house that the articles have been manufactured in the way mentioned above, in all such cases we desire to apply a system of drawbacks. It will require a certain amount of trouble, yet the amount of duty to be repaid will not be great; and it will assist greatly in the development of the prosperity of the open ports, and also will stimulate home manufactures.

With respect to the mode and rules, the chamber has its opinions, but a few words of explanation being insufficient to exhaust the subject, they will be submitted in future.

reforming the rules of appraisement of imported goods.

It is the present practice that whenever the custom-house considers the declared value of imported goods unreasonable, it causes the appraisers to determine their value, and the duty is levied according to the value appraised, but when the owners of these goods are unwilling to pay the duty according to the value thus appraised, the custom-house purchases the goods.

It appears that this rule is not without some advantages, but it is liable to make an opening whereby we may be made the victim of cunning merchants; because they, knowing the fact that the custom-house must purchase goods on the appraised value, import spurious goods and intentionally report them at low prices, and contrive to sell them as soon as their value is fixed by appraisement. Since the appraisement is made simply by looking at the trade-marks, if they happen to be false, it becomes nothing more than a means of falling into their contrivance. If it be desired to do away with this bad practice, the existing rule of appraisement must be abolished and the appraisers must be selected from competent merchants, both of Japan and foreign countries. When it happens that the custom-house thinks that the price of imported goods fixed by the owner of these goods is improper, let these appraisers fix their price and levy the duty according to the appraised value. The practice of purchasing imported goods on the part of the custom-house must also be done away with. If the matter be carried on in this way, then the cunning merchants can make no contrivance, and proper duties can be levied. This is the reason why the chamber desires a reform to be made in the rule of appraisement.

reforming the system of imposing duties on imported goods.

In accordance with the existing tariff regulations, it is the practice to impose an ad valorem duty on imported goods according to the value mentioned in the invoice. This is indeed simple in the system and easy in the proceeding. But on careful consideration, it appears to be unsatisfactory and not in accordance with any right principle, for the following reason:

In imposing duties on all goods imported from other countries, it is necessary to make their rates equal. Our present tariff regulations, however, cannot be satisfactory on this point, because the value of goods set forth in the invoice is the value paid at the places of manufacturing, and is not the market value at the port whence they are shipped, and it is quite evident that the value at the manufacturing places is much cheaper than at such port. For instance, if we compare the value mentioned in the invoice of shirting bought at the manufactory at Manchester with that bought in London, we will find the latter higher, because there are added the transportation expenses from Manchester to London. But the duty is levied at our custom-house on such shirting in accordance with the value set forth in the invoice.

There is more inequality of duty on goods brought from different countries. Cotton thread is chiefly imported into Japan from England and India; England being further from Japan than from India. But both countries equally import that article, so that it is supposed that the value of it in the former must be as much lower than that in the latter as the added expenses for transportation. But on the arrival of these goods in Japan from both countries they must pay the duties equally, according to the declared value. It is a heavy duty for India, while for England light; in a word, the nearer country has to pay a heavier duty, and the further country a lighter one.

There must be some differences in the rate of duties according to distance from Japan; therefore the present system cannot he an equitable one. The present system of ad valorem duty being thus inequitable, the chamber desires that, instead of imposing duties according to the value set forth in the invoice, the duty should be imposed on the value, with all the added expenses incurred for transportation of goods from the manufacturing place to port and from port to Japan, so that there may be inequality of duties according to the distances of countries.

limiting payment of customs duties to our standard currency.

When the existing treaty was concluded with foreign powers it was agreed that payment of all duties should be made in silver ichiboos, for this was then the sole currency of Japan, used as a standard of trade. However, in making payment, foreigners often found it difficult to obtain the silver ichiboo; it was accordingly permitted to use Mexican dollars for such payment as well as the ichiboo, at the rate of $100 for 311 boos. But from this improper proportion of exchange our government lost much of its revenue. We have now, however, a standard currency in Japan, and therefore it is necessary for us to receive duties in the standard currency, and it would be right to exclude the Mexican dollars, which have been hitherto the medium of trade in our open ports for the payment of customs duties, because our coin is gradually increasing in credit in China, Singapore, and in many other places, and foreign merchants in Japan also appear to be willing to receive it. We have also a mint, where imported bullion can be easily coined, so that we can help ourselves well without foreign coin. For the above reasons the chamber hopes that in the present treaty revision payment of the customs duties may be limited to trade-dollars of Japan instead of the Mexican dollars.

Table I.

Names of countries. Inland tax. Custom duties. Various incoming. Total. Proportion of customs duties to revenue.

Yen. Yen. Yen. Yen.

Japan 43,884.362 1,379.824 4,460.171 49,724.357 2,774 to 100

England 137,320.000 99,845.000 161,051.495 398,816.495 25 to 100

Canada 4,941.897 12,546.987 4,570.390 22,059.274 57 to 100

France 271,699.360 56,604.000 230,332.201 558,635.561 10.13 to 100

United States 110,581.924 130,170.680 17,011.474 257,764.078 50.5 to 100

Table II.

Total value of raw materials and manufactured articles exported, respectively, during the five years from the 1th year to the 11th year of Meiji.

Description. 7th year. 8th year. 9th year. 10th year. 11th year.

Yen. Yen. Yen. Yen. Yen.

Raw materials:

Dutiable 17,236,846.017 16,357,593.230 24,992,473.201 18,938.340.711 17,994,414.288

Free of duty 828,109.387 815,678.240 1,406,930.824 2,870.704.219 6,127,486.435

Total 18,064,955.404 17,173,271.470 26,399,404.025 21,809.044.930 24,121,900.723

Manufactured articles:

Dutiable 619,848.479 562,827.172 452,594.273 612,843.560 656,580.028

Free of duty 3,770.727 35,460.241 76,080.061 113,256.438

Total 619,848.479 566,597.899 488,054.514 688,923.621 769,836.466

Miscellaeneous:

Dutiable 97,472.116 228,117.570 336,860.699 461,244.970 671,966.665

Free of duty 45.000 19.190 959.370 18,897.160 2,363.795

Total 97,517.116 228,136.760 337,820.069 480,142.130 674,330.460

Grand total of export 18,782,320.999 17,968,006.129 27,225,278.608 22,978,110.681 25,566,067.649

Table II—Supplement.

Manufactured articles of export dutiable.

Bamboo ware.

Bronze ware.

Copper ware.

Cotton manufactures.

Earthenware and porcelain.

Fans.

Furniture.

Fire hand-engine.

Lacquered ware.

Mattings.

Medicine.

Rape-seed oil.

Paper, writing.

Paper, inferior.

Provisions.

Sake.

Screens.

Silk manufactures.

Silk embroideries.

Silk clothes.

Soy.

Tea-packing paper.

Tooth-powder.

Umbrella.

Vermicelli.

Free of duty.

Sulphuric acid. Matches.

Foreign paper, Japanese made. Cotton singlet and drawers.

Cotton flannel (Mompa). Flannel.

Miscellaneous.

Articles not herein mentioned are included within a class of raw materials.

Table of gold and silver coins and bullion imported and exported.

Period. Export. Import. Excess. Import and export compared.

Yen. Yen. Yen.

5th year Meiji 4,524,170.600 3.691.509.600 Export. 832,661.000

6th year Meiji 5,126.227.937 3,080,542.381 do. 2,045,685.556

7th year Meiji 13,995,202.023 1,071,731.220 do. 12,923,470.803

8th year Meiji 12,524,024.519 1,634,289.278 do. 10,889,734.241

9th year Meiji 7,395,304.316 7,977,598.025 Import. 582,293.709

10th year Meiji 10,940,760.983 1,912,640.822 Export. 9,028,120.161

11th year Meiji 11,052,556.735 2,791,405.472 do. 8,261,151.263

Excess of export of gold and silver coin 43,398,529.315

No. 423. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 423.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Japan,
Tokei, October 27, 1879. (Received November 26.) No. 1008.]

Sir: I beg leave to acquaint you that during the stay of the Vega in Japan, after making the northeast passage, and shortly before the departure thereof, some ten days ago, I had the honor to entertain at my table the learned and distinguished Professor Kordenskjöld, chief of the Swedish expedition, to whom the world is indebted for the successful navigation of the northeast passage, and also with him Capt. Louis Palander, who commanded the Vega, and His Excellency Chevalier de Stoetwegen, the diplomatic representative of Sweden at this court.

I learned, among other things, from the professor, that the Lena River, which flows out from Central Siberia, can easily be reached from the Pacific by experienced sailors, and that thereby trade may be opened and prosecuted with the interior of Siberia from our shores.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 424. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 424.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Japan,
Tokei, November 11, 1879. (Received December 16.) No. 1010.]

Sir: On the 27th ultimo this government furnished me with a notification and a copy of the revised conscriptive act of Japan, a translation of which notification and revised act I beg leave to inclose for your information.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 1010.]

(Translated by D. Thompson, interpreter to the United States Legation in Japan.)

No. 46.

Proclamation is hereby made that the conscription law has been revised as follows, and that all previous proclamations, notifications, and instructions relating thereto are repealed.

SANJO SANEYOSHI,
Prime Minister.
October 27, 1879.

CONSCRIPTION LAW.

Chapter I.

the enlisting of conscripts.

Article I. A conscript is a person drafted from the male population of the whole country for military service.

The army is to consist of four principal divisions, namely, the regular force, the first reserve force, the second reserve force, and the national militia; these again, according to the physical qualifications of the men, shall be divided into infantry, cavalry, artillery, and engineer corps.

(Note.—The regulations for navy conscription will be separately enacted.)

Art. II. The regular force is to consist of males twenty years of age and upwards, summoned from the states and counties of each military department, drawn by lot and enrolled for military service during three years in the garrisons of the military departments. Section 1. Any one who has become specially proficient, may, on due deliberation, be allowed to return home provisionally, in time of peace before the expiration of the fixed time of service.

Sec 2. Strong, proficient, orderly persons after six months’ camp-life may be promoted to the imperial guards, to serve there for three years. After which they are to be enrolled in the first reserve force for two years and six months, and then be enrolled in the second reserve force.

(Note.—Regulations for enlisting the imperial guards will be separately enacted.)

Sec. 3. Persons desiring to become superior or inferior officers shall be admitted into the military schools or camps for instruction, after undergoing the prescribed examination.

Sec 4. Proficient and intelligent persons are to be promoted to be inferior officers.

Art. III. Volunteers shall be called out for the transportation and hospital service, and for general work. If, however, the number is insufficient, able-bodied men under the standard height or unfit to bear arms, and also men of the standard height, when needed for special work, shall be called out and made to serve as the regular soldiers are called out. Sec. 1. Persons enlisted for the transportation service shall serve six months with the regular army, and then enter the first reserve force and serve for five years and six months, after which they shall enter the second reserve force.

Sec. 2. Persons enlisted for hospital service, or as workmen, shall serve out the same time as the soldiers.

Art. IV. Regular soldiers, while in camp, shall receive fixed daily wages, besides rations and clothing from the government.

Art. V. The first reserve force shall be composed of those who have served three years in the regular army. These shall, as reserves, serve three years longer, residing at home in some employment. In case of war or of any unusual event they shall be called at once and added to the regular army to fill up its ranks or to form new companies for military service. They are therefore to be summoned to camp for drill once each year.

Art. VI. The second reserve force shall be composed of those who have served three years in the first reserved force. These shall serve four years longer, and shall be called out after the first reserved force. They are, therefore, in time of peace, to be summoned once a year to some convenient place for drill.

Art. VII. The time of military service, even for those who have served their term, may be extended, in time of war, or of any unusual event, beyond the time herein fixed.

Art. VIII. The national militia shall consist of all the males in the whole land between the ages of seventeen and forty. These shall be registered for military service, and in case of any event affecting the entire nation shall be formed into companies, to act as guards in any emergency.

Chapter II.

the boundaries of conscription districts.

Art. IX. The whole country shall be divided into seven great conscription districts.

Those that coincide in boundary with the military departments shall be called military department districts. Those subdivisions that coincide as to boundary with the army-corps districts included in the military-department districts shall be called army-corps conscription districts; those that coincide with the army-division districts included in the army-corps districts shall be called army-division conscription districts; Those that coincide with the brigade districts included in the army-division districts shall be called brigade conscription districts; those that coincide with the regimental districts shall be called regimental conscription districts; and those that coincide with the battalion districts shall be called battalion conscription districts.

(Note.—Conscription districts below the rank of army-division districts have not yet been formed. For the present therefore these shall coincide with the existing shi, fu, and ken (departments, principal cities, and provinces), and shall be known as the shi, fu, or ken conscription districts.

Art. X. Each shi, fu, or ken shall constitute one conscription district, as a general rule; but when its territory is overlapped by two army-division districts, one conscription district shall be formed for each such army-division district.

Art. XI. As the operation of the conscription law is not practicable throughout the whole of the seventh army department this for the present will be included in the second department.

Chapter III.

conscription officers and their duties.

Art. XII A general of the army shall be appointed to the office of superintendent of conscription. He shall visit the shi, fu, and ken and manage the business of conscription in conjunction with the chief conscription officer of the shi, fu, or ken.

(Note.—Deputies may be sent instead of the superintendent, if it is thought best to do so.)

Art. XIII. Deputy superintendents.—A colonel in the army shall fill this post. Two or three deputies shall be appointed for each army-division conscription district. Acting for the superintendent they shall visit the places of inspection, and along with the shi, fa, and ken conscription officers and deputy surgeons shall manage the business of examination and drafting.

Art. XIV. Conscription physician.—An army physician shall fill this post. He shall accompany the superintendent and shall conduct the business of examination as to their physical soundness and their fitness for military duty.

Art. XV. Assistant physicians.—Assistant army physicians or their medical students shall be appointed to fill this post. Three or four shall be appointed for each division conscription district. They shall visit the places of examination along with the deputy superintendents, and perform the same duties as the conscription physician.

Art. XVI. The resident executive officer.—An officer of the second reserve force, resident in the shi, fu, or ken, shall fill this post. He shall visit the county district along with the shi, fu, or ken executive officers and conduct preliminary examinations.

He shall also visit the conscription stations and assist in transacting the business of these stations.

Art. XVII. Conscription secretaries.—Inferior officers of the army or attaches from the tenth to the seventeenth grade shall be appointed. There shall be two or three appointed. They shall make up all the superintendent’s records.

Art. XVIII. Chief director of the shi, fu, and ken.—The chief provincial magistrate or one of his secretaries, shall be appointed to this post. He shall have the direction of the conscription within his jurisdiction.

Art. XIX. The shi, fu, and ken officials in charge of the conscription.—Officers under the shi, fu, and ken shall be appointed. The number of such officers shall correspond to the number of the deputy superintendents whom they shall accompany to the place of inspection. They shall also aid the chief director of the shi, fu, or ken in the performance of his duties, and visit the country district stations along with the executive officer and manage preliminary examinations.

Art. XX. The county district official in charge of the conscription.—The county magistrate shall be appointed to this post. There shall be one such official for each county. He shall conduct correspondence relating to the conscription, report on the condition of the people, and manage conscription examinations in the county.

(Note.—When, from any cause the county magistrate cannot serve, the county recorder shall act in his stead.)

Art. XXI. Provincial conscription physicians.—These shall be appointed by the chief officer of the province in the proportion of one to every eighty or a hundred men.

They shall make preliminary examinations and make up the records under the direction of the conscription physician.

Art. XXII. Writers.—These shall be appointed by the chief officer of the province in the proportion of two to each place of examination. They shall keep a record of examinations and drafting, and have charge of the records of the places of preliminary examination.

Art. XXIII. The superintendent, the shi, fu, and ken director, and the conscription physician shall attend to business at the shi, fu, and ken stations; the deputies, assistant physicians, and the shi, fu, and ken conscription officials shall form parties and visit all the places of examination.

Art. XXIV. The superintendent along with the army officers mentioned in chapter III, shall set out on his visitation on the fifteenth of the second month, visit the shi, fu, and ken, consult with the provincial officials, establish stations at convenient places, oversee all matters relating to conscription, and return and report himself by the tenth of the fourth month.

Art. XXV. The superintendent shall inspect all conscription records sent from the shi, fu, and ken to the garrison, determine the number of soldiers of the proper age to be furnished to the regular army during the year by any given shi, fu, or ken, and examine the records respecting persons exempted or excused from service.

Art. XXVI. The conscription officers shall all be relieved from service when the yearly conscription is ended.

Chapter IV.

exclusion and exemption from service and postponement of conscription.

Art. XXVII. The following persons are exempted or excluded for life from military service: 1. Diseased and maimed persons, who, on examination according to the army regulations, give evidence of being unfit for military service.

2. Persons actually sentenced to imprisonment for a year or more in the chain-gang, or to imprisonment in jail for sedition for a year or more.

Art. XXVIII. The following persons are exempted or excused from all military service except in the national militia: 1st. The heads of families.

(Exception.—No one who has become the head of a branch house before the conscription age, or who has married a woman who is the head of a new branch house, or who has undertaken to raise up an extinct house, or who has retired before the age of fifty, leaving an adopted son or heir to perpetuate his family, will be excused from military service.)

2d. Only sons, who are heirs, and only grandsons, who are the heirs of their grandparents, whether they have sisters or not.

3d. The heirs of parents and grandparents over fifty years of age.

(Exception.—When such heirs are made the heads of branch houses, or adopted without sufficient reason by a man under forty years of age, or when made to raise up extinct houses, or when married to a woman who is the head of a new branch house after they have reached the conscription age, while other sons or grandsons under the conscription age are made heirs, they shall not be exempted from military service.)

4th. The adopted son of a person over fifty years of age, who has no lineal heir.

(Exception.—No one who has been made son in the branch house of a retired man shall be exempted.)

5th. The lineal heir of a father or grandfather or adopted son, when such parents are from sickness or injury unable to work, before the age of fifty.

6th. Government officers, commissioned and non-commissioned, assistants in government training establishments, and the chiefs of wards or districts.

7th. The presidents, vice-presidents, and members of the fu and ken assemblies.

8th. Teachers in the public schools and in the other government schools connected with the department of education or other departments.

Art. XXIX. The following are exempt from military duty in time of peace: 1st. The heirs of persons under forty years of age, or the heirs of their grandfathers.

(Exception.—Such heirs as are of legal age for military service when made the heads of branch houses, or when adopted without just cause by a person under fifty years of age, or when made to raise up an extinct house, or when married to a woman who is the head of a newly established branch house, while other children under conscription age have been made heirs, shall not be exempted.)

2d. Army and navy cadets and workmen employed in arsenals and navy-yards.

3d. The brother of one who has lost his life while serving in the army or navy, or who has been disabled in the government service and has retired.

(Note.—The same rule shall be observed in the case of those who have been injured or killed while serving the government in the first or second reserved forces.)

4th. Persons licensed to practice as physicians.

5th. The graduates of government normal schools.

6th. Graduates of public academies and special schools.

7th. Graduates from government schools connected with the department of educacation or other departments.

(Exception.—The pupils of lower schools connected with the government normal schools will not be exempted.)

8th. Those who can give evidence in writing of having studied two years in foreign countries.

9th. Persons who have been licensed according to the rules to act as ship-captains, navigators, or engineers.

10th. Those who can give evidence of having served as sailors or firemen for three years or upwards, according to the rules laid down to govern the employment and dismissal of seamen.

Art. XXX. The following persons, may have their conscription postponed not longer than one year: 1st. Those who wish to serve in the navy.

2d. When an even number of brothers are drafted at the same time, one-half the number shall be postponed; in the case of an odd number, as three, two shall be postponed.

3d. A brother of an inferior officer serving as a regular in the army or navy.

4th. One brother of an army or navy cadet.

(Note.—A distinction must be made when one of the brothers mentioned above in sees. 2, 3, and 4 is under the standard height.)

5th. Any one who is needed to support a family, on account of the death, disappearance, or sickness of a father or elder brother.

6th. Pupils who have finished a course of a year or more in a government school or public normal school connected with the department of education or some other department of the government.

7th. Those pupils who have finished a course of three years or more in some public academy or special school.

8th. Persons residing in foreign countries for the purposes of study or trade.

9th. Persons not yet grown to the standard height or who may be sick or convalescent, and so for the present unable to endure hard work.

10th. The defendants in criminal cases not decided.

Art. XXXI. The employés and others engaged in the service of the government in the various departments thereof are not exempt from service; but in the case of those whose work cannot be done by a substitute, the decision of the general government will be obtained.

(Note.—The same rule is to be observed in the case of those who are supported at the government expense to require any art under the instruction of foreigners employed in any of the departments of the government.)

Art. XXXII. Persons described in Art. XXVIII, sees. 1, 6, and 8; Art. XXIX, sees. 1, 2, 4, and 9, and in Art. XXXI, who withhold their names until the time of the third year by examination for regulars shall again be treated as conscripted persons.

Art. XXXIII. The cases of all those described in Art. XXVIII, sees. 4, 6, and 8; Art. XXIX, sees. 4 and 10; and Art. XXX, sees. 6 and 7, must fall within the time specified in Art. LXI, as the limit for making reports; otherwise such persons will not be exempted from service nor their conscription postponed.

Art. XXXIV. The cases of those described in Art, XXX, Art. XLI, Art. XLII, and Art. LVI (note) may, like circumstances again recurring, be delayed till the following year. Should this state of things continue till the third yearly examination for the regular army, such persons, in time of peace, shall be exempt from service.

Art. XXXV. During the term of the regular service the principle laid down in Art. XXXIV shall be observed in case of those described in Art. XXVIII, sees. 1, 6, and 8; Art. XXIX, sees. 1, 2, 4, and 9; Art. XXXI, Art. XLI, Art. XLII, and Art. LVI.

(Note.—Only those mentioned in Art. XXVIII, sees. 1, 6, and 8 shall serve in the national militia.)

Art. XXXVI. Those who according to Art. XLIX and Art. LI (note) are in time of peace exempt from service, shall be regarded as reserve conscripts of first class. Those mentioned in Art. XXIX and Art. XXXIV shall be regarded as reserved conscripts of the second class, and till thirty years of age, in case of war or any unusual event, shall be liable to be called out in the order indicated to form new regiments or for the transportation service.

Chapter V.

examination of conscripts.

Art. XXXVII. The superintendent shall give notice beforehand to the shi, fu, or ken of the time of the examination, and the district officials shall collect the men and forward a given number each day.

Art. XXXVIII. At the time of the examination ruled paper shall be issued to the district officials from the shi, fu, or ken.

The district officials shall write from the register of the persons to be examined, their names, birth-place, residence; the day, month, and year of their birth; the name of the head of the family; their religion; the names of father, mother, brothers, wife, children, &c., and forward the same in form, at the time of the examination.

In the form thus forwarded, it is to be noted when one’s birth-place differs from the place of his present residence. The rank and social position is to be noted; also business, when a woman is head of the family.

The fact is to be noted if a man’s father or mother is dead.

The size, height, &c., are to be noted, after examination; as also the division of the army to be entered.

Art. XXXIX. When the conscript undergoes corporal examination he is to be called according to the order of the register, and the physician shall examine him according to the army regulations, and the provincial physicians shall note the points of the examination in the prescribed form.

Art. XL. The deputy superintendents, the shi, fu, and ken conscription officials, and the county conscription officials, shall sit together while conducting examinations.

Art. XLI. When any one is unable to appear when called on to be examined, he shall obtain the certificate of a neighboring physician, stamped by the district official, and forward it through the county magistrate to the place of examination; in which case he may, if convenient, be sent to another place of examination, or be examined at home, or reserved till the next year.

Art. XLII. When one is called on to be examined who is in mourning for a father or mother not yet three weeks dead, or whose father or mother are very sick, or in whose family any unusual event has taken place, a true record of the same shall be made out, stamped by the district official, and forwarded to the place of examination through the county magistrate, in which case the treatment shall be the same as specified in Art. XLI.

Art. XLIII. In the cases of counties distant from the conscription station, the officers charged with conducting the examinations may depute some of their number to visit the place and establish an examination station in some suitable locality, where the examinations shall be conducted just as in the principal station.

Chapter VI.

of drawing by lot.

Art. XLIV. After the examinations have been completed, the number of men fit for service according to the records shall be noted and classified, and the drawing for regular soldiers shall take place in the conscription station of the shi, fu, or ken.

Art. XLV. As to drawing, each one may draw for himself, or the voters of a town or village, or villages, may choose one or three persons to represent them all, to whom the drawing shall he committed.

Art. XLVI. A supplemental company of conscripts shall he formed to fill vacancies in the regular force. These shall serve one year, and shall be called out after the regular conscripts.

Art. XLVII. Before the drawing takes place, a tabulated statement shall be exhibited showing the whole number of persons liable to conscription in each shi, fu, and ken; the kind of soldiers needed, as also the number of regular and supplemental troops.

Art. XLVIII. The method of drawing shall be as follows: The men shall be examined, and a corresponding number of cards, numbered and marked in due form, shall be put in a box, which shall be placed beside the teller, who shall call on the men to draw in the ordor of the roll, and observe whether the drawing is done rightly or not. He shall call out the number drawn in a loud tone, take the card, and record the name and number in the register, and return the card to the drawer.

Art. XLIX. If 500 men are drawn 500 tickets or cards shall be provided. If 200 regulars and 100 supplemental troops are needed during the year, the first 200 shall be regulars, the next 100 shall be supplemental troops, and the remainder blanks. Those that draw blanks shall be exempt from service in time of peace.

Art. L. After the drawing has taken place, forms shall be made out, according to the records kept, and delivered to the conscripts drawn, in exchange for the cards held by them.

Art. LI. The supplemental troops shall remain at home employed, and when vacancies occur in the ranks of the regulars, they shall receive notice from the garrison in the order of their draft number, and be made to enter camp.

(Note.—Those who are not summoned within a full year, counting from the first day that regulars enter camp, that is from the 20th of the 4th month, shall be exempt from service in time of peace.)

Art. LII. Those supplemental troops who enter the regular army shall serve three years, counting from the first day of the period when regulars enter camp, and without regard to the particular month or day of their entering.

Art. LIII. After the superintendent has completed the conscription in any shi, fu, or ken, he shall examine the register and examination papers of the conscripts, and classify them as regulars or supplemental troops. He shall also collect the several registration papers and form them into a book called the “soldiers’ register,” and the several examination papers, and form them into a book called the “register of examinations,” and forward a copy of both books and a copy of the records of the drafting to the army department and to the garrison.

Art. LIV. All documents relating to the conscription, such as the lists of persons called out and of persons exempted, petitions, notices, and the like, are to be kept on record in each shi, fu, and ken, and copies forwarded with the documents mentioned in Art. LIII, to the army department and to the garrison.

Chapter VII.

miscellaneous rules.

Art. LV. Conscripts drawn as regulars shall enter camp between the 20th of the 4th month, and the 1st of the 5th month. The neighboring officials in each shi, fu, and ken shall collect and conduct them to camp, and the expenses shall be paid, according to regulations, by the finance department.

Art. LVI. When any one fails to be in time on account of sickness or of a crime committed, a minute account of the facts in the case shall be made out, stamped, and forwarded by the county official to the garrison or camp. The person taken sick shall inclose the certificate of a neighboring physician, stamped in like manner.

(Note.—Those who fail for the above reasons to enter camp till the 1st of the 10th month, shall defer entering camp till the next year, when they shall be examined again and enter camp before the ordinary conscripts.)

Art. LVII. When any one’s home is removed while he is serving in the regular army, the fact shall be made known at once by the relatives to the person rendering such service, who shall inform the inferior officer to whose command he may belong.

Art. LVIII. Those taken sick while serving as regulars shall be put in the hospital by the army physician and treated. Those who are thereafter unfit for service shall be dropped from the roll, and their regular expenses home be paid by the army department.

Art. LIX. When one in the regular service is needed at home on account of the sickness of his parents, or other sufficient cause, one of his relatives shall obtain the county magistrate’s seal in confirmation, and present the request at the garrison or camp, when, after consultation, he may be allowed to go home, at his own expense, for two weeks, exclusive of the time required to go and come.

(Exception.—Those who have been in camp less than six months, and who are hence untrained, or who are practicing special drill or engaged for review, will not have such leave granted them.)

Art. LX. As all the males in the country are to be enrolled in the national militia when they reach the age of seventeen, all that become of age in any given year between the 1st and 12th months shall, through the head of the family, and between the 1st and 15th of the 9th month, report their names, rank, residence, time of birth, and occupation to the district magistrate, who shall examine their reports and send them to the county magistrate before the 25th of the same month. The county magistrate, after examining them, shall send them to the shi, fu, or ken before the 10th of the 10th month, when the persons thus reported shall be entered on the militia roll.

(Note.—Those who reside temporarily in any shi, fu, or ken need only report to the district magistrate of the place where they are registered.)

Art. LXI. As all the males are liable to military service in the regular army when they reach the age of twenty, all that reach this age in any given year between the 1st and 12th months shall, through the head of the family, and between the 1st and 15th of the 9th month, report in due form to the district magistrate, who shall collect the reports and forward them before the 25th of the same month to the county magistrate, who shall examine and classify them, and forward them with his report to the shi, fu, or ken before the 10th of the 10th month. The shi, fu, and ken officials shall inspect them and enter the names reported on the conscription roll to be forwarded to the proper garrison before the 25th of the 12th month.

Art. LXII. When one is residing temporarily in the shi, fu, or ken he may be conscripted in the place of his registration, or in the place of his temporary residence, at his option.

Art. LXIII. When any one concludes to be conscripted in his place of residence he shall report the fact, vouched for by his security in the place of residence, before the 1st of the 9th month to the government officers of the province where he resides, and of that in which he is registered; the government office of the latter shall inquire for the head of his family in his district and report to the government officer of the former where his name shall be appended to the conscription roll, and an account of the matter recorded.

Art. LXIV. Any one that is conscripted, by the payment of 270 yen, and any one that is exempt in time of peace only, by the payment of 135 yen, may obtain exemption from all military service except in the national militia.

Art. LXV. Any one wishing to obtain exemption shall, through a relative, present his petition to the district magistrate before the arrival of the superintendent.

The district magistrate shall stamp the petition and forward it to the county magistrate, who, after inspection shall forward it to the shi, fu, or ken, from whence it shall be sent to the conscription station.

Art. LXVI. Persons liable to conscription who shall falsify as to their ages or their relatives, or who shall injure their persons or make themselves sick, or attempt in any other dishonest way to evade conscription, and the county or district magistrates who vouch for such persons and acts, shall be dealt with in the manner prescribed by law.

Art. LXVII. Those who attempt in the way indicated in Art. LXVI to escape the conscription, and those who fail to report themselves as required by Art. LXI shall be examined at the next year’s conscription and put in camp before those mentioned in the note under Art. LVI.

Chapter VIII.

the number of conscripts.

Art. LXVIII. In the six garrison districts the number and class of conscripted soldiers shall, in general, be as follows:

First military department.—The Tokei Garrison.

Infantry, three brigades; cavalry, one regiment; artilery, two regiments; engineers, one regiment; transportation, one company; coast-guards, three companies; total, 7,020, of whom 2,340 enter camp each year.

The first department includes the districts of Tokio, Kanagawa, Saitama, Shidzuoka, Yamanashi, Gunba, Chiba, Ibaragi, Tochigi, Nagano, and Nügata.

Second department, Sendai.

Infantry, two brigades; artillery, one regiment; engineers, one battalion; porters, one company; total, 4,260, of whom 1,420 enter camp each year.

The second department contains the provinces of Miyashiro, Tukushima, Aomori, Iwate, Akita, and Yamagata.

Third department, Nagoya.

Infantry, two brigades: artillery, one regiment; engineers, one battalion; porters one company; total, 4,260, of whom 1,420 enter camp each year.

The third department contains the provinces of Aichi, Sanuki, Ishikawa, and parts of Shidzuoka, Echizen, Nagano, Shinano, and Iga.

Fourth department, Osaka.

Infantry, three brigades; artillery, two regiments; engineers, one regiment; porters, one company; coast-guards, two companies; total, 6,700; proportion for each year, 2,233⅓.

The fourth department contains the provinces of Osaka, Hiogo, Sakai, Wakayaina, Kioto, Miiè, Iga, and Okayama.

Fifth department, Hiroshima.

Infantry, two brigades; artillery, one regiment; engineers, one battalion; porters, one company; coast-guards, one company; total, 4,340; or 1,446⅔ for each year.

This department contains the provinces of Hiroshima, Shimane, Yamaguchi, Kochi, Ehime, and Bichu, in Okayama.

Sixth department, Kumamito.

Infantry, two brigades; artillery, two regiments; engineers, one regiment; porters, the company; coast-guards, two companies; total, 4,780; or 1,593 each year.

The sixth department includes the provinces of Kumamito, Kagoshima, Owake, ukaoka, and Nagasaki.

Seventh department.

At present united with the second department.

Coast-guards, one company; total, 80; or 26⅔ for each year.

The territory included in this department is one county under the jurisdiction of the Hakodate branch of the colonization department.

Grand total, 31,440 regular troops in the army, of which number one-third or 10,480 enter camp each year.

Art. LXIX. The classes or kinds of supplemental soldiers are the same as those of the regular conscripts.

Art. LXX. The standard height of the different classes or kinds of soldiers is as follows:

Of artillery and coast-guards, 5 feet 4 inches and upwards.

Of cavalry, engineers, and porters, 5 feet 3 inches and upwards.

Of infantry, 5 feet and upwards.

Of porters and hospital men, unfixed.

Art. LXXI. The number of supplemental conscripts for one year is, on the whole, as shown above; but the number may be increased or diminished as circumstances require.

No. 425. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 425.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Tokei, December 29, 1879. (Received Jan. 27, 1880.) No. 1040.]

Sir: Herewith I beg leave to transmit for your information the fifth annual report of His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s minister of education for the tenth year of Meiji (1877).

I take pleasure in saying that I have been furnished with this interesting report through the courtesy of his excellency Mr. Terashima, now the minister of education, and formerly the minister for foreign affairs.

You will observe that the empire is divided into fu and ken, the former being cities, the latter being political departments, and that the tables annexed to the report show the expenditures in each per annum for school purposes, and also the salary paid to teachers in each, and also the value of public school property in each.

The total value of the public school property is estimated at 12,389, 138 yen, of which the permanent school fund is 7,521,459 yen; the value of school-houses 3, 164, 114 yen; of school grounds, 265,261 yen; the revenue from school land, 149,844 yen; the value of school apparatus and books, 1,868,458 yen. It also appears that the interest from the school fund for the year amounted to 827, 173 yen.

It is stated that the voluntary contributions made in money by the people during the year to the school fund amounted to 809,745 yen; in lands, to the amount of 115,506 tsubos or more than 96 acres; also 310 buildings; 26,507 complete sets of books, &c; and that the total number of persons who thus contributed during the year to the public schools was 499,767.

It is well said by the minister that “the table of contributions (from 1873 to 1877, inclusive, pp. 21, 22) shows that the local interest in education has been so great that fortunes have not been spared” in promoting the good cause.

The table shows that during the five years the money contributions amounted to 8,504,000 yen; and the land contributions to 853,000 tsubos, about 700 acres.

During the year 1877 the government contributed to the elementary schools 562,500 yen, and to the public normal schools 28,875 yen.

It appears (p. 6) that the entire population in 1877 of the seven school districts in the Empire was 34,245,323, and that the number of children who received instruction during the year was 2,094,298, while the whole school population was 5,251,807.

The new code of education just issued and forwarded in my No. 1039 will in future prevent the exclusion from the public schools of any of these children.

This report speaks well for this government and its people, and is another evidence that both the novernment and the people of Japan esteem education to be essential to the general welfare.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 426. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 426.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, December 29, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880.) No. 1042.]

Sir: I have the honor to acquaint you that on the 15th instant I received a dispatch from Mr. Duns, the United States consular agent at Hakodate, in which he says that on the 7th instant the consulate was burned, and that he had lost everything, save fifteen books, and that he had “lost all the letters and archives.”

* * * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 427. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 427.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,,
Tokei, December 30, 1879. (Received January 27, 1880.) No. 1043.]

Sir: I regret to say that on the 26th instant there occurred in this city a most destructive lire with great loss of property, over 10,000 houses having been consumed, and large quantities of goods.

More than 50,000 people were rendered houseless. Many persons were greatly injured, and quite a number of lives were lost. The legation made a very narrow escape, and for a time was saved by the great exertions of the firemen and police of the capital, but was only finally saved from destruction because of the fact that the course of the wind, which was blowing a gale, suddenly changed and carried away from the legation buildings the flames of the burning city. The danger of the immediate destruction of the legation buildings was so great that it was deemed necessary to remove the legation archives and also the legation library, which was most carefully done with the assistance of good friends.

Among the many friends who lent assistance to me in providing safety for my family and in saving the property of the legation were the minister of foreign affairs, Mr. Inouye, the vice-minister of foreign affairs, Mr. Enomoto, his excellency Mr. Eisendecker, the German minister, and also his excellency Mr. Struve, the Russian minister. His excellency Mr. Iwakura sent his most trusted servants to guard the archives of the legation, as did also others of His Majesty’s ministers.

The archives of the legation were all brought back in good order on the evening of the same day, having been under cover in my carriage in the street until the danger was passed.

This is the second time within three years that our legation here and all the government property has been exposed to imminent danger from fire. It does seem to me that it would be a wise economy if Congress would appropriate $25,000 for the construction and furnishing of United States legation buildings in this city on the grounds offered to our government as a gift by His Majesty’s Government, and on which the legation buildings would be so isolated and so constructed as to secure them against the fires so frequent and so destructive in Tokei.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 428. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 428.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, January 16, 1880. (Received February 19.) No. 1050.]

Sir: Herewith I have the honor to inclose for your information two copies of the official report* of the commissioner of the imperial mint of Japan for the year ending June 30, 1879.

It is to be noted that the whole amount of gold received at the min for the year was but 48,853.81 ounces troy, and that the amount of silver imported into the mint for the year was 1,638,082.97 ounces troy (pages 3 & 4).

The entire coinage at the mint from the commencement thereof up to the 30th of June, 1879, amounted in value to 86,219,050.57 yen, of which amount 52,562,739 yen were gold.

On the 30th of June last the amount of gold, silver, and copper bullion and coin held by the mint was as follows: gold, 3,829.28 ounces; silver, 351,587.20 ounces; copper, 5,342,997.86 ounces.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

* Omitted herefrom, owing to its length.

No. 429. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 429.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, January 16, 1880. (Received February 19.) No. 1051.]

Sir: By the latest report of the ravages of the cholera in Japan from its appearance in April last until the 27th ultimo, it is shown that the whole number of persons attacked was 168,344, of whom 101,364 died, 47,885 recovered, and 19,065 remained under treatment.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 430. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 430.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, January 21, 1880. (Received February 19.) No. 1059.]

Sir: I have the honor to acquaint you that on the 15th ultimo his excellency the minister for foreign affairs addressed to me a communication, a copy of which is herewith, advising me that an imperial notification had been issued declaring quarantine against the importation to Japan of cattle from Shanghai, China, by reason of a cattle plague which prevailed at that place, but also providing that all cattle snipped at Shanghai for Japan before the notification had been issued would be purchased by the Japanese Government and destroyed.

To his excellency’s communication I replied, acquainting him of my purpose to enforce the cattle quarantine, and that I would advise our consuls and consular agents accordingly, a copy of which reply is herewith. I also inclose a copy of my letter to Consul-General Van Buren, in which I requested him to publicly proclaim (by advertisement) the quarantine, and that it should be observed, and to notify our other consuls in Japan thereof, which the consul-general did promptly and satisfactorily.

It has been privately stated to me that the representatives of the European powers accepted the situation and recognized their obligation to enforce this cattle quarantine, which I may be allowed to say suggests that in the opinion of some of the European states a quarantine by His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government against the importation of cattle suffering from an infectious disease is altogether allowable, although the same powers last year, and before, denied the right of His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government to quarantine against the importation of men infected with an infectious plague. It would seem from this that in the judgment of some of the representatives of the foreign powers the lives of cattle are of more value than the lives of human beings in Japan; or, stating it in another form, that while it is lawful for His Imperial Japanese Majesty to protect his cattle from an importation of a cattle plague, it is unlawful to protect himself or his faithful people from the importation under the nags of all nations of a destructive human plague into His Majesty’s Empire.

It will always be a satisfaction to me that, under your wise administration, our government took no part in this denial of the inherent right of His Imperial Majesty’s Government.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 1059.]

Mr. Kaosa to Mr. Bingham.

Foreign Office, Tokei,
The 15th, the 12th month, the 12th year Meiji.

Sir: I have the honor to inform your excellency that in consequence of a credible report to the effect that an epidemic prevails among cattle at Shanghai, China, the inclosed notification has been issued, prohibiting the landing at the open ports of any such cattle brought from Shanghai, and beg that your excellency will be good enough to communicate the same to the consuls of your country.

I avail myself, &c.,

INOUYE KAOSA.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 1059.]

Mr. Bingham to Mr. Inouye Kaosa.

United States Legation,
Tokei, December 16, 1879. No. 1136.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s communication of yesterday, informing me that owing to a prevailing epidemic among cattle in Shanghai, China, the landing of cattle shipped from that port is prohibited by His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government, and that all cattle shipped from that port before the issuance of the notification of his excellency Sanjo Saneyoshi, His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s prime minister, will be purchased by the government and destroyed. In accordance with your excellency’s request, I will communicate the notification to our consuls, to the end that the same may be duly observed by citizens of the United States.

I beg leave to suggest that the notification should be printed in English in one or more of the foreign newspapers in Japan.

Accept, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 1059.]

Mr. Bingham to Mr. Van Buren.

United States Legation,
Tokei, December 16, 1879.

Sir: Herewith I inclose a notification of his excellency Mr. Sanjo, His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s prime minister, to the effect that owing to the prevailing epidemic among cattle at Shanghai, China, the landing of cattle shipped from that port for Japan is prohibited within the ports of Japan.

I have to request that you will give public notice of this order and that citizens of the United States will be expected to duly observe the same.

I will also thank you to forward me copies of the notice you may publish to our several consuls and our consular agent in Japan.

I am, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 431. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 431.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, February 6, 1880. (Received March. 15.) No. 1070.]

Sir: Herewith I have the honor to inclose for your information copies of the “eighth report of the postmaster-general of Japan,” for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1879.

From this report it appears that the revenues of the postal department for the fiscal year were 949,357.01 yen, and that the expenditures for the; year were 826,378.98 yen, showing that the revenues exceeded the expenditures by 122,000 yen in round numbers, a showing by which other governments might profit.

Of mails the report shows that 55,775,206 letters were transmitted during the year.

The aggregate length of mail routes was 36,052 English miles, and this within a territory of about 150,000 square miles. The whole number of post-offices, as reported, is 7,439.

The report also refers to the Paris postal convention of June 1, 1878, and the connection of this government therewith, and states that by ts operation over nearly the entire globe, while there has been a large increase in the postal service there has been a decrease of postal expenditure.

Of the foreign mails from Japan, of letters, the total, in round numbers, was 174,000, of which 72,000 were dispatched to the United States, and 55,000 by way of the United States.

Of foreign letters received, the total number of letters was 105,000 in round numbers, of which 55,000 came from the United States. Of printed matter forwarded and received by the foreign mails, fully one-half went to and came from the United States.

Of letters actually lost through the mails during the year, there were but 341, and the total loss of money transmitted through the mails was but 44.59 yen.

The aggregate value of the postal money-orders for the year was 3,704,383.78 yen.

In the post-office savings-banks there was an increase of deposits over the preceding year of 172,000 yen, in round numbers. The total number of these banks was 507, and the whole amount of deposits for the year 393,000 yen, in round numbers.

The reports are in all respects creditable to this government.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 432. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 432.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, March 1, 1880. (Received April 2.) No. 1077.]

Sir: On the 22d ultimo, near 1 o’clock a.m., this city and vicinity were visited by an earthquake, which, it is said, was the most severe of the many shocks annually felt here since that of 1854–’55, when it is estimated that from 30,000 to 100,000 people were in this city alone destroyed by the earthquake.

It is gratifying to know that no lives were lost by the visitation of the 22d ultimo, although many houses were greatly injured in the neighboring city of Yokohama, as were also some houses here.

I inclose herewith a notice of the occurrence as published in the Japan Daily Herald of the 23d ultimo.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 1077.—Extract from the Japan Daily Herald, February 23, 1880.]

the earthquake.

We announced in one of our recent numbers that the volcano of Asama Yama was showing signs of activity, and that the inhabitants in its vicinity were in dread of an eruption. This fear has not, at least up to the present time, been realized; but in its place the inhabitants of this neighborhood have been subjected to the most severe earthquake which has occurred in Japan since the memorable one of 1855, which forms a landmark in the modern history of this country, from the wide amount of damage done and the great loss of life which resulted. There is but little doubt that during the last few years the symptoms of volcanic activity have increased in importance in this neighborhood, as witnessed in the threatenings of Vries and Asama; still, no actual eruption of any magnitude has taken place; but, on the other hand, earthquakes have been unpleasantly frequent in number and of more than ordinary severity.

The chemical and mechanical forces which are working in the earth must, in one way or another, find a vent, and we are almost tempted to wish that one of the adjacent volcanoes would break out into activity, and thus form a safety-valve for the locally pent-up forces of nature. The destruction in the immediate neighborhood might be great, but it is questionable whether it would equal the wide-spread and ruin which would be caused by another earthquake of equal severity to that of 1855.

Fortunately in that of last night, although the shock was heavy enough to do great damage and to cause excited people to objurgate “the land we live in,” and to express an intention of leaving for Europe by the next mail steamer, we have not to chronicle, so far as is as yet known, any loss of life, the destruction being confined to property only.

At a few minutes before one o’clock yesterday morning slumberers were aroused by a premonitory but comparatively a mild shock. Then came another, but a very heavy one, in the middle of which was heard the crash of falling chimneys, walls, articles of furniture, &c. The panic—for the alarm reached that stage—was intense, and people might have been seen flying to the doors of their respective habitations and into the streets in the airiest of drapery. An interval of about thirty seconds elapsed, and then another but less violent shock occurred, after which mother earth again sank to repose and left the bewildered inhabitants to inspect damages to household goods, and too seek such repose as their fears permitted them to obtain.

The Japanese Government established some years ago the necessary apparatus at Tokio for registering the duration, force, &c., of these very unpleasant phenomena. From the native papers of to-day we learn the exact details. The first shock took place at 0h 49m 22s, and lasted fourteen seconds; the second one was at 0h 50m 19s, and lasted for one minute twenty-six seconds; whilst the third was at 0 h 52m 15s, and lasted only six seconds.

Of these, the second one was, as already stated, by far the heaviest. The index of the seismograph showed that the shock was in a north-northwest and south-southeast direction. The force of the shock was registered at 79°.

The scene of the greatest damage is the bluff; but a narrow strip, the eastern end of the settlement, bordering the creek, has also suffered severely. On the bluff it is difficult to discover a house which has not suffered to some extent, although there are a few such. A walk around the road shows a melancholy panorama of fallen and twisted chimneys, tiles which have slid into the road from unroofed houses, walls cracked, and in many cases partly fallen, exposing the wooden frame-work of the houses, &c.

Nor does the external view alone show the real extent of the damage. In many cases houses which have apparently suffered but little, upon a more particular examination show a large amount of internal injury, caused by falling chimneys and plaster, by which furniture has been irretrievably rained, and valuable china and curios broken or injured. In several cases cracks are plainly visible in the ground in different portions of the bluff. In the settlement, the Grand Hotel has lost five stacks of chimneys, and a portion of the stone facing of the inner wall of the building has fallen. The side of a small house on No. 130 has also been leveled, and No. 123 has suffered very considerably.

It must be considered a very fortunate occurrence that in the midst of all this destruction no injury to life or limb has occurred, and this is the more remarkable, inasmuch as on the bluff many of the chimneys crashed through the roofs into rooms in which persons were sleeping; in one case, a portion of the débris actually falling on the bed in which a gentleman was reposing without injuring him. Another danger was also added by the overturning of kerosene lamps, which were in most cases, extinguished without further injury. One fire, however, occurred from this cause, but it was extinguished without doing much damage.

Probably it is rather under than over the mark if we place the losses in Yokohama alone, incurred in the few moments of Sunday morning, at $50,000.

No. 433. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 433.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, March 1, 1880. (Received April 2.) No. 1078.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose for your information copies in duplicate of a memorial to his excellency Mr. Sanjo, prime minister of His Imperial Majesty, as published on the 29th ultimo in the Japan Weekly Mail, on behalf of the local assembly of the ken of Miyagi in this empire.

I beg leave to note that this memorial sets forth that the people of Japan appreciate thoroughly the respective rights of the monarch and the people, and therefore demand the establishment of a national constituent assembly and the full recognition that all legislative power is vested in and to be exercised by the people through the representatives of their choice. The memorial very significantly declares that this movement will never cease until the required object is attained; that is to say, “a constitutional government,” the advantages of which, the memorial asserts, “every nation in Europe enjoys.”

Soon after this memorial was received, viz, the 28th ultimo, there was a very marked change made in the organization of the imperial government. The following ministers, heads of departments, resigned, viz: Okuma, minister of finance; Ito, minister of the interior; Terashima, minister of education; Oki, minister of justice; Saigo, minister of war; Kawamura, minister of marine; and Yamada, minister of public works, each of whom is now a sangi or imperial councilor, and, in conjunction with Sanjo, prime minister, Iwakura and Prince Arisugawa, junior prime ministers, Inouye, minister for foreign affairs, and Kuroda, chief of the kaitakushi or colonization bureau, form the imperial council (Daijo-kuan), and, under the Emperor’s approval, enact general laws for the empire, and also special laws for the government of all the several departments of state.

The names of the heads of the several departments under this new-organization are as follows: Mr. Inouye, minister for foreign affairs.

Mr. Matsukata, minister of the interior.

Mr. Sano, minister of finance.

Mr. Kono, minister of education.

General Oyama, minister of war.

Admiral Enomoto, minister of marine.

Mr. Kuroda, chief (choki-kuan) of the kaita-kushi or colonization bureau.

Mr. Yamao, minister of public works.

Mr. Tanaka, minister of justice.

You will observe that Mr. Inouye and Mr. Kuroda are not only members of the imperial council, but still retain their positions as ministers for foreign affairs and chief of the kaita kushi, respectively.

It would seem that this change was made in obedience to the demand of the people that there should be a law-making power independent of the executive departments. Hitherto all the heads of departments were members of the imperial council. The action taken, apparently at the instance of the people of the empire and of the local representative assemblies of its several provinces, seems to import that the chief advisers of His Majesty the Emperor appreciate the demand for a constitutional monarchy, a national legislature, and a system of civil policy which will combine centralized power with decentralized administration limited and regulated by general and local laws.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 1078.—Extract from the Japan Weekly Mail, February 28, 1880.]

a national assembly.

[Translated from the Mainichi Shimbun.]

The following memorial praying for the establishment of a representative assembly has been presented to His Excellency Sanjo Sanetomi, the prime minister, by Messrs. Masnda, Yendo, Akiyama, Minegishi, Chiba, Atami, &c., acting on behalf of the local assembly of the prefecture of Miyagi:

To His Excellency Sanjo Sanetomi,
Prime Minister:

We have the honour to present to your excellency the following memorial:

We consider that in a great many respects the management of the country is like the regulation of water. It is impossible altogether to restrain the force of a running stream, and therefore those who are acquainted with hydraulics learn how to humor and direct the force of the current so as to avoid damage. When a flood occurs, the surface of the adjoining land is submerged. The same happens to the administration of the country. When the pent-up excitement of a nation breaks forth, no force can restrain the people from accomplishing their desires; they must be allowed to attain their ends in order to avoid disastrous consequences. This submission to the will of the people is, we consider, the proper way to control their actions.

We have ascertained, as the result of careful investigation, that the people of Japan have developed a spirit of independence, and now thoroughly appreciate the respective rights of the monarch and the general mass of the community. The result of the knowledge is an ever-increasing demand for the establishment of a constituent assembly, vesting legislative power in the people, and it is now very apparent that the movement will never cease until the required object is achieved.

We respectfully submit that, until legislative powers are lodged in the hands of the people through their representatives, the judicature cannot be placed on a thoroughly satisfactory footing; and if this be the case with the judicature, with how much more force does it apply to the executive! When the people are properly represented in the government, and the judicature and executive are in a satisfactory condition, then the wealth and prosperity of a nation increases. Every nation in Europe enjoys the advantages which are termed “constitutional government.”

His Imperial Majesty, the great and gracious Emperor who now rules over us, with the assistance of your excellency’s wisdom and experience, leaves nothing to be desired in conducting the administration of the country, and yet dissatisfaction is prevalent at home, while abroad we suffer by reason of the exaction of foreigners. How is this to be explained? Is it not because no proper feeling of harmony has been established between the governors and the governed?

The prosperity of a country is inseparable from the prosperity of its inhabitants; the government and people should therefore act in unison. Can it be right that the government should alone be charged with all affairs pertaining to the welfare of the state?

It is indisputable that the most urgently pressing measure is the establishment of a constituent assembly, so that the people shall take a part in legislative functions. Thus the three great bodies which go to build up prosperous communities would be working in harmony, and the welfare of the empire advanced as that of a single individual.

It is within our memory that His Majesty the Emperor, when he first ascended the imperial throne, made solemn oath before Heaven that “the will of the people shall be ascertained and the administration of the empire carried on conformably with their wishes.” Seven years afterwards His Imperial Majesty issued an edict that “constitutional government shall be gradually introduced.” His Majesty’s virtues are indeed great and his wisdom profound. Is there any other means of ascertaining the will of the people and introducing constitutional government, except by the establishment of a national assembly?

At the time we refer to, His Majesty evidently desired to grant political rights to the people, but they treated the matter with an indifference born of ignorance, and although the ex-privy councillor Goto Shojiro and others presented a memorial on the subject, there were many among the public who expressed a conviction that the country was not ripe for so radical an innovation. Thus the matter has been put off until the present day.

The circumstances of the empire are, however, very different now to those of the 7th year of Meiji (1874). Not only do the people no longer think that the establishment of a constituent assembly would be premature, but societies and leagues have been formed throughout the length and breadth of the land, in order to secure the boon. Who therefore can now affirm that the people are indifferent, or that they cannot be intrusted with participation in legislative functions?

Troubles and disturbances often take place in a country from unexpected causes, and if those members of the political societies who are desirous for a national assembly should find their hopes frustrated, it is to be feared that they will rise in insurrection and refuse to be pacified.

Again, if your excellency, taking advantage of your exalted position and acknowledged popularity, despises the current of public opinion, and does not seek a suitable outlet for its violence, future history in speaking of your excellency will say that you “occupied the position of prime minister, but did not inforce the imperial edict, allow the people to succeed in their reasonable desires, or carry on the administration of the empire so as to meet with the approbation of the public. On the contrary the people were dissatisfied, and foreigners still maintained their haughty disregard for the independence of the nation.” How could your excellency’s admirers rid you of this blame? The subject has caused us much perplexity and embarrassment.

Your excellency is well aware of all these circumstances, and will doubtless take the necessary steps to carry out the desired reforms with due care and prudence. We feel assured of this from the establishment of local and other subordinate assemblies in the cities and prefectures with the view of educating the people to the proper use of their political rights when intrusted into their hands.

But what course is to be adopted if the people are not content with the existing assemblies? We are anxious to avoid any statements which might prove unpalatable, but it is undeniable that the clamor of the public, and more especially the inhabitants of our prefecture, for a constituent assembly, is now like that of a hungry man for food. This is why we have addressed a memorial to your excellency on the subject, as we have no intention of forcing the question upon you by a conspiracy or the assemblage of multitudes of people. We do so simply because we consider it our duty, having regard to the present state of the empire. We have not considered ourselves in this matter, but only our beloved country, and if, in the fullness of our feelings, we have exceeded the bounds of politeness, we pray your excellency to excuse our offense and regard only the meaning and spirit of our memorial.

No. 434. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 434.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, March 4, 1880. (Received April 2.) No. 1079.]

Sir: Some months since Mr. Matthew Scott, a citizen of the United States, for several years in the service of His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Finance department, died at Kobe. His remains were sent to San Francisco for sepulture. It gives me pleasure to acquaint you that it has pleased His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government, in token of the high respect and esteem in which the deceased was held by the Japanese Government, and of its appreciation of the valuable service rendered by him, to transmit to our consul at Kobe, Mr. Stahel, the sum of 900 yen kinsatsu, to be appropriated in the erection of a suitable monument to the memory of Mr. Scott.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

No. 435. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 435.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, March 15, 1880. (Received April 26.) No. 1088.]

Sir: On the 11th instant His Imperial Japanese Majesty’s Government issued a proclamation to the effect that all persons having claims against the late Lew Chew Han must present the same for payment to the Finance department of His Majesty’s Government before the 30th of May next, stating the total amount of such claim, principal and interest, and that claims not heretofore presented, and which shall not be presented before the 30th of May next will not be accepted.

It is also notified therein that payment of claims so presented, if contracted since 1844, will be paid in government bonds and money, as may be agreed upon by the claimants and the government; and that obligations for payments to the Lew Chew Han will be enforced and payment thereof accepted according to the terms of the original contract.

I have the honor to inclose herewith for your information a translation of the proclamation, and of the rules prescribed for the payment of claims against the late Han, and for the collection of debts due to the late Han.

I have thought it possible that some of our people may have had commercial dealings with Lew Chew.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 1088.—Translation.]

No. 7.

Proclamation is hereby made that the following method of paying the debts of the old Lew Chew Han, and of collecting the money and grain lent out by said Han, has been decided on.

Note.—Those who have claims against said Han must forward them, along with a written calculation of the principal and interest, through the proper government office, to the finance department before the 30th of May next. Claims already forwarded to the finance department or claims for old loans made before 1843 need not be forwarded. Claims not forwarded within the time above given will not be accepted.

SANJO SANEYOSHI,
Daijo Daijin.
March 11, 1880.

method of paying the claims.

I. Debts contracted by the old Lew Chew Han since 1844 will be paid in government bonds, as far as possible, and the remainder of the principal and interest will be paid in money at once.

II. Old debts contracted before 1843 will not be converted into bonds.

method of collecting dues.

I. Money, grain, and other things payable to the old Lew Chew Han will be collected according to the contracts made with said Han.

II. Money, grain, and other things lent out before 1844 will not be collected.

No. 436. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 436.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, April 13, 1880. (Received May 11.) No. 1101.]

Sir: This government, on the 5th instant, issued an imperial decree for the regulation of political meetings and associations which has excited some unfavorable comments in the foreign and native public journals of the empire.

I have the honor to inclose for your information copies in duplicate of a translation of this decree as published in the Japan Mail of the 10th instant. It is therein provided that no political meetings shall be held for the discussion of political subjects, nor shall any political association be organized until permission shall have been first obtained from the police.

It is also provided that persons belonging to the army or navy, or persons of the first and second reserves, or public officers, or professors or students in the government service, or in the public or private schools, or students in the schools of art and agriculture, shall not be permitted to attend or become members of political societies or to attend political meetings or lectures.

Political societies are prohibited from advertising the subjects of lectures or debates and from issuing or sending out agents or circulars to influence the public to attend their meetings, and from communicating with each other. All such political meetings maybe dispersed by order of the police. Penalties are prescribed for all violations of the regulations. It is said that these restrictions are needful for the good order and peace of the empire.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 1101.—Extract from the Japan Daily Mail, April 10, 1880

.]

the new regulations respecting political meetings or societies.

(Came into force on the 6th of April, 1880.)

1. If any one shall desire to give a lecture on political subjects, or assemble a meeting to debate such subjects, the promoter, president or manager, shall, three days at least before the lecture is to be given or meeting held, send in an application to the nearest police station for permission. Every such application shall state the subjects of the lecture or debate, and the names and addresses of the lecturers or speakers.

2. Every person desirous of forming a political society shall, before doing so, make application for permission at the nearest police station. Every such application shall give the name of the proposed society, the rules for its government, the place of meeting of the society, and the names of the members. Any alterations in the rules of the society or in the members, after the establishment of the society has been authorized, shall be reported to the police authorities, who shall at all times have power to make such inquiries as they may deem expedient, respecting the affairs of the society.

3. After the establishment of a society has been once authorized, three days’ previous notice of the first meeting must be given at the nearest police station. After the first meeting has been held, it shall not be necessary to give notice of the subsequent regular meetings, but any alterations must be notified as provided in article No. 1 of these regulations.

4. Whenever the police authorities consider that granting the applications referred to in the three preceding articles would be prejudicial to the interests of the public, they may decline to do so.

5. Police officers in uniform shall have power to visit all lectures or meetings, and demand the production of the license to hold same.

6. If the license shall not be produced when demanded, or if any subject not specified in the report shall be lectured upon or discussed, or if the lecture or debate is considered prejudicial to the public interest, or liable to incite the hearers to commit offenses against the laws, or if persons are in attendance who ought not to have been admitted, and who refuse to leave when requested to do so, then and in every such case it shall be lawful for the police officers to close the meeting.

7. The following persons are forbidden to attend or take part in political lectures or meetings, or to become members of political societies: men belonging to the army or navy, the first and second reserves, police officers, professors, and students in government, public or private schools, and students in the schools of art and agriculture.

8. Every political society is prohibited from advertising the subject of its lectures or debates, or sending out agents or circulars to induce the public to attend its meetings. The combination of one society with another, and all communication between societies, is strictly forbidden.

9. Open-air lectures or debates upon political subjects are hereby prohibited.

10. If any lecture shall be given or meeting held without the permission mentioned in Article 1 being first obtained, the promoter of the lecture or meeting shall be liable to fine not exceeding 20 and not less than 2 yen, or to imprisonment not exceeding three months and not less than eleven days. The person who lent or rented the place of meeting, the president, manager, lecturers, and speakers shall severally be liable to a fine not exceeding 20 and not less than 2 yen, and every breach of Article 3 shall be punished in like manner.

11. For every breach of the provisions of Article 2 the president of a society shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 20 and not less than 2 yen. If false regulations or fraudulent lists of members of a society are forwarded to the police authorities, or incorrect answers returned to questions asked, the president of the society shall be liable, in addition to the monetary penalty hereinbefore mentioned, to imprisonment not exceeding three months and not less than eleven days.

12. If a police officer is refused admission to any lecture or meeting, contrary to Article 5, the promoter of the lecture or meeting, the president, and the manager shall each be liable to a fine not more than 50 and not less than 5 yen, or to be imprisoned not more than one year and not less than one month. Every person who refuses to answer questions, or returns false answers, respecting any lecture or debate, shall be liable to a similar punishment to that hereinbefore mentioned. In the event of any person being guilty of a similar offense a second time, he shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 100 and not less than 10 yen, or to be imprisoned not more than two years and not less than two months.

13. When the persons assembled at any meeting are ordered to disperse, every one refusing to do so shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 20 and not less than 2 yen, or to be imprisoned for not more than six months and not less than eleven days.

14. For every breach of Article No. 7, the conductors and president of a meeting, or the president and officers of a society, will be severally liable to a fine not exceeding 20 and not less than 2 yen, or to be imprisoned for not more than three months and not less than eleven days. If the offense committed shall be considered aggravated, the society maybe suppressed altogether, and should any persons persist in holding a meeting after being prohibited from doing so, they shall each be liable to a fine not exceeding 20 and not less than 2 yen.

15. For every breach of Article No. 8, the promoter of a meeting, the manager and president, and the president and officers of a society, shall each be liable to a fine not exceeding 50 and not less than 5 yen, or to be imprisoned not more than one year or less than one month. In addition, the society will be suppressed, and all persons found implicated in a breach of the said article will be liable to a similar punishment to that hereinbefore provided. Any person who shall compel another to join a society, or who has been previously convicted of a breach of Article No. 8, shall be liable to a fine not exceeding 100 and not less than 10 yen, and to be imprisoned for not more than two years and not less than two months. The president and director shall also be prohibited from forming or joining any other society for a term of not more than five years or less than one year.

16. The foregoing regulations do not extend to meetings held in accordance with established custom.

No. 437. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 437.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Tokei, April 13, 1880. (Received May 11.) No. 1102.]

Sir: Herewith I beg leave to inclose for your information a translation of the significant address which His Majesty the Emperor of Japan made on the 25th ultimo to the provincial governors of the empire.

His Majesty remarks that upon his accession to the throne in 1868 “the general government was re-established,” and that “the feudal system of government was immediately abolished.”

At that day and for centuries before the provinces of the several feudal lords or daimios were military encampments numbering hundreds of thousands of trained soldiery enforcing the orders of their several chiefs, who were the government in fact and rulers of the country.

The emperor declares that it has been his constant endeavor “to establish order and promote the welfare of the country and the interests of the people.”

His Majesty assigns the provincial administration exclusively to the several governors, and directs them to second his endeavors to promote the cause of progress “gradually.”

It seems that the Emperor intends that the people shall hasten slowly towards constitutional and representative government.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

[Inclosure in No. 1102.—Translation from the Hochi Shimbun of March 25, 1880.]

[We have had the good fortune to obtain a copy of His Majesty the Emperor’s address, which we have heard was sent down to the Kuan, Sho, and In, where it was made known to the officials on the 22d instant. His address is as follows.—Ed.]

To-day, when I have the pleasure of feasting with you, the provincial officials, I have a matter to communicate to you.

When I first ascended the throne, by the awe-inspiring spirit of my ancestors, the general government was re-established, the feudal system of government immediately abolished, and an extensive and remarkable revolution effected. Then I was still young; but with you, my officials, I have labored early and late till now only to promote the welfare of the country and the interests of the people.

All that you have accomplished during several years in gradually marking out the foundations for established order is so much done towards the attaining of my prime object.

To take a résumé: Since the revolution we have reached the beginnings merely of many enterprises for the public good; but there is much still before us yet unattained.

The people have recently ceased from war; education is not yet universal. Many of the educated in the armed class are without an occupation, and most of the farmers and merchants who have the means of living are ignorant, as you all know.

What I and you, the officers of my court, should thoroughly ponder, profoundly consider, and seek to promote is the gradual progress and improvement of the government of the country.

You, provincial officials, know the desires of the people, and will doubtless express to them my mind.

The provincial administration I commit entirely to you. You are to lead those that are without employment to take up some occupation. Those of the farmers and merchants who are uneducated, you are to mold so as to increase their intelligence. Those of the people who are addicted to political discussion without understanding the whole subject, and who are hence liable to rash into outbreaks, you are to instruct and warn, so that they may make no mistake.

In fine, you are to observe your instructions, improve and succor the people, and second my endeavor to promote the cause of progress gradually.

No. 438. Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts. No. 438.
Mr. Bingham to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Tokei, July 24, 1880. (Received August 27.) No. 1159.]

Sir: On yesterday His Majesty the Mikado returned to this capital, and was received by Her Majesty the Empress, the imperial household, the ministers of state, and multitudes of his subjects, having been absent about fifty days on an imperial progress through the western provinces of the empire.

This is the third imperial progress made by His Majesty since my service here. It is but the truth of history to say that since his accession to the throne, in 1868, this young Emperor, now but twenty-eight years of age, and representing the oldest continuous dynasty on earth, a dynasty which outdates the Roman Empire, has, though clothed with imperial and absolute sovereignty, been constantly mindful of the rights of his people, and, aided by his enlightened advisers, has labored effectively for the promotion of the general welfare, and, to the end, has, within his short reign of twelve years abolished the feudal system, emancipated four-fifths of his subjects from feudal vassalage, and made them possessors of the soil; disarmed a feudal soldiery numbering probable 600,000 men trained to arms: reorganized the order of society; established and equipped an army 40,000 strong, and also a navy equal in number and appointments to our own; assured the freedom of conscience introduced the press, the telegraph, the railway, steam navigation, a general postal and savings system, and, above all, ordained a free system of compulsory education for the instruction of all the children of the empire, thereby in effect declaring the equality of all before the law, and the right of each to the equal protection of the law.

It may be said that seldom, if ever, in the history of civil administration, has any other ruler done so much within so brief a period for the reformation and well-being of a people numbering five and thirty millions.

In his long journey, his loyal and faithful subjects came out en masse to meet His Majesty, and gave every evidence of their affection and reverence for him.

It is apparent that this Emperor, who has so largely incorporated the philosophy of humanity in his laws and administration, is believed by his confiding people to be endowed with something of divineness.

I have, &c.,

JNO. A. BINGHAM.

LiberiaLiberia

[439] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, August 13, 1879. (Received September 15.)

[440] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, November 18, 1879. (Received December 27.)

[441] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, December 12, 1879. (Received January 26.)

[442] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Smyth.

Department of State, Washington, January 27, 1880.

[443] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Liberia, January 21, 1880. (Received February 26.)

[444] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, February 12, 1880. (Received April 14.)

[445] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, February 12, 1880. (Received April 14.)

[446] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, April 13, 1880. (Received May 19.)

[447] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, April 14, 1880. (Received May 19.)

[448] . Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Monrovia, Nov. 22, 1880. (Received Jan. 3, 1881.)

No. 439. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. No. 439.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, August 13, 1879. (Received September 15.) No. 42.]

Sir: I have the honor respectfully to inform you that on the morning of the 12th of August I received a dispatch from the Department of State of Liberia, inviting me to attend an interview to be held at the executive mansion, between the President and Mr. Fanba Sissi, who bore a message from King Blanca Sissi to the government.

At 10 o’clock a.m. of August 12, I reached the mansion, and was presented to Mr. Fanba Sissi, and listened to the following interesting conversation—message and reply from and to the King through his relative:

Mr. Sissi began by saying that the King desired to live in peace with the Americans (the aborigines so style the Liberians) and carry on trade with them instead of with the settlement of Sierra Leone, and gave as a reason the fact that when he sent a caravan from Musardú to Sierra Leone the distance was much greater than between Musardú, his country, and Monrovia, and required a period of three months in going and three months in returning, which was to the King’s disadvantage; whereas the distance between Musardú and Monrovia could be compassed in twenty-four days going and the same length of time returning, or one-third the time and distance as compared with Sierra Leone, which the King regarded as mutually advantageous to him and to Liberia, could the governments agree to keep the roads open.

The King also stated through the messenger that there were between his country and Liberia three predatory chiefs, whose interference with travelers would need to be put a stop to, and said he held himself ready to aid Liberia in conciliating these chiefs or chastising them.

On being asked by the President how the King proposed to conciliate them, the messenger said by a joint palaver of the King’s men and Liberians, and in giving these people an interest in keeping peace and protecting travelers on the road; should this course fail, then Liberia and the King to make these chiefs powerless to interfere, by a “war palaver.”

The King’s messenger said, as to the products and trade of the King’s country, that the land was good, affording abundance of food; that much gold was produced, and immense herds of cattle, goats, and horses were owned by the people, and the King was able to raise an army of 10,000 horsemen and many more foot-soldiers.

When the messenger ceased to speak, the President looked directly at me; and I said, “Sir, should you make a treaty with King Blanca Sissi, and this trade be diverted from Sierra Leone and come here, your administration would be regarded as the most illustrious of Liberian administrations.”

To which the President replied that he fully appreciated the good results that would accrue to Liberia by friendly relations with so powerful a king; and said to Mr. Fanba Sissi that he might inform the King of the pleasure his offer gave him, and that he would direct Minister Blyden on his part to write a letter in Arabic which he would give him to convey to the King in respect to the proposed treaty.

The question arose as to the sending of commissioners to confer with the King as to the prospective treaty, when the following suggestions were made by Mr. Fanba Sissi:

That it would be necessary to send men who were sober—who did not drink spirits—because such men talked two ways, and the King and his people talked one way; also, that they be Mohammedans, book people, and have sense. He said as to a friendship, that Mohammedans liked all book people, and never wanted to make war with them. (The King and his people are Mandingo Negroes.)

Here the conference ended.

The President assured Mr. Sissi that he would act promptly in the matter.

Should the trade of this interior Mandingo kingdom be diverted from Sierra Leone by a wise action on the part of the Liberian Government in concluding a treaty, and emigrants should settle in and near the dominion of Blanca Sissi, the benefit to the commerce of Liberia could not be too highly estimated, since the time would not be distant when the trade beyond Musardú, in the heart of Central Africa, would reach the sea, and thence Europe and America through the Republic of Liberia.

I am, &c.,

JOHN H. SMYTH.

No. 440. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. No. 440.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, November 18, 1879. (Received December 27.) No. 52.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instruction, No. 35, dated September 8, 1879, as to the overtures reported to have been made through the Liberian consul-general to the Liberian Government looking to the extension of French protection to that government and to the declination of the French Government to entertain any scheme looking to such a result, and beg to submit in respect thereto the following remarks:

The department has received my No. 30, dated May 30, 1879, diplomatic series, and by this time should have received my No. 30, dated August 21, 1879, consular series. From the latter it will appear that Mr. Leopold Carrance, Liberian consul-general at Bordeaux, has led the Liberian Government to believe that France desires to take the republic within its protecting embrace.

Mr. Carrance is on record to this effect. The address of the dispatch from which I make quotation in my No. 30, dated August 21, 1879, is Bordeaux, and was written in the handwriting of the consul-general and received by the secretary of state of Liberia through due course of mail, and the presumption is in favor of its authenticity, so far as the Liberian Government is informed.

* * * * * * *

Within the present year Mr. Adolph Houard, consul of the Republic of Liberia in Paris, and Mr. Eugéne de Vignaux, in Havre, have presented a convention setting forth a mining project to the President for ratification by his official signature.

The text of this proffered contract briefly is, the granting to them all mines now in known existence, and all that may be discovered by the concessionaries, with exclusive control for a period of fifty years, with reservation to said concessionaries of renewal of lease, unless the government shall “denounce” the first lease within a year of its termination by limitation.

The consideration of the grant to be the payment to Liberia of 10 per cent. of the net profits on gold mined, and 1 per cent. on all other metals. Protection, full and ample, to be guaranteed the concessionaries, their agents, and employés.

This convention was not entered into by the President, because its provisions were found to be in conflict with the mining laws of Liberia passed 1868–’69.

* * * * * * *

Is it surprising that France should desire to possess Liberia, in view of the projected railway from Algeria through Soudan and Senegal to the Niger, mentioned in my No. 27, dated August 7, 1879, consular series; the recent troubles between the colonial government of Sierra Leone and France as to the island of Matacong, and the present complications in the Scarces River and other tributaries between Senegal and Sierra Leone; disagreement brought about by the desire of France to extend her African trade? Trade in the products of Liberia offers valuable inducements to the commercial enterprise of France. Liberia’s 600 miles of coast, her rich, highly productive soil, and the absence of formidable interior nations between the sea-board and the valley of the historic Niger, would seem to make her a desirable annexation to any nation ambitious of African possessions.

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

No. 441. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. No. 441.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, December 12, 1879. (Received January 26.) No. 58.]

Sir: I have the honor to respectfully call attention to a copy of the message of the President of Liberia, which I forwarded by the last mail, and which I failed to refer to or comment upon owing to the fact that I could not procure a copy of the document until within a half hour of the departure of the mail.

This state paper deals with the projected policy of the President in relation to the aboriginal inhabitants of the country, to ports of entry, to the consolidation of the public debt, to education, and to a resolution of thanks to the United States for the services rendered the Government of Liberia by Commodore Shufeldt “in the adjustment of the northwest boundary question.”

Recently I informed the Department of the arrival at this port of the Dutch man-of-war Alkmaar, with instructions from the Hague to urge upon the Liberian Government the wisdom of opening additional ports of entry, having joined with the Netherlands commander Doermann, in advising such course in the interest of our commerce.

I am pleased to quote this language from the President’s message: We have an extent of sea-coast of about 600 miles, teeming with hundreds of thorn-sands of aborigines who might by their commercial operation pay hundreds of thousands of dollars into the public treasury. But owing to a circumscribed trade, and living at a great distance from ports of entry, their industrial pursuits are paralyzed, and they are made to suffer the want of necessaries and comforts of life, and the government, the loss of a large amount of revenue.

Now, unless we change our policy and give greater latitude to trade and the interchange of commerce, as well as afford encouragement to a division of labor, we must be content to suffer the charge of indiscretion and want of political sagacity, to say nothing of great lack of economy which such a course indicates.

The time has fully come in the history of the republic when we should adopt more liberal laws for the admission of foreign capital.* * * We have applications from various quarters urging the opening of our coast more extensively to foreign intercourse.* * * And I am persuaded that under certain restrictions we may with safety and advantage accord larger privileges to foreigners, admitting them not only to more numerous points of our coast, but to our various rivers, where they may be permitted to lease lands for a term of years for carrying on their operations with some degree of responsibility to the local chiefs, conforming at the same time to the revenue laws of the republic, and being solely responsible for any disorder arising from their conduct.

Attention is next called to the Barline, Pessa, Mar, Sorake, and Mandingo peoples—all interior nations. After speaking of the wealth of the country occupied by them, the designation of a commission to consist of Dr. Ely den, Dr. Priest, and the Hon. B. J. K. Anderson, the enforcement of a law creating an interior department by an appropriation for the same, the discussion of the interior question is concluded by a correct appreciation of the course to be pursued by Liberia, if a stable Christian Negro state is to exist here: For I beg to assure you that this division of national concern, always important, is to us now, more than ever, a matter of absolute necessity, in view of the leading policy of the government at this time, viz, interior developments, and the incorporation of native tribes into the Liberian body-politic.

The consolidation of the public debt is recommended by calling in all evidences of the government’s indebtedness, and the issuance to creditors of bonds paying an annual interest of 6 per cent. in gold and silver. Should the citizen creditors and foreign creditors assent to such course it might be the means of relieving the government of its financial embarrassment.

A renewed interest is asked to be taken by the legislature in the subject of education, and attention is directed to Liberian colleges and to the public schools. Should wise legislation follow these recommendations, should the Liberians fraternize with the native inhabitants, and should the laws be faithfully enforced, I am persuaded that the success of the republic would be assured.

The message closes with the following recommendation: * * * the passage of a resolution thanking the United States Government for having so generously sent Commodore Shufeldt in the flag-ship Ticonderoga to aid in the adjustment of the northwest boundary question. The remarkable patience with which the commodore and his gallant officers waited upon the movements of the commission to its adjournment cannot soon be forgotten by the government and people of the republic.

The earnestness of tone and correctness of conclusions which characterize this message must commend it to Liberians and foreigners.

The message was read to Congress by the secretary of state, the President being present in the hall of the house of representatives, at twelve o’clock, December 10, 1879, the senate and lower house having met in convention for the purpose of hearing the message.

With regrets for unavoidable delay,

I am, &c.,

JOHN H. SMYTH.

[Inclosure in No. 58.]

Message of the President of the Republic of Liberia to the first session of the nineteenth legislature.

Monrovia, December 10, 1879.

Fellow-citizens of the Senate and House of Representatives of the Republic of Liberia:

Gentlemen: In keeping with the constitution, and through the blessings of a kind and beneficent Providence, we have, after the lapse of another twelve months, met again for the purpose of enacting such laws as will, I trust, enhance the highest interest of our common country.

We have abundant reasons to be thankful to the Great Arbiter of all human events for the privileges and for the blessings of the past year, in that our several communities have enjoyed a reasonable portion of good health, and prosperity has attended our labors. Notwithstanding the abundance of rain, the farming season has been generally good, and coffee-planting largely increased throughout the republic. And it is to be hoped that our citizens will see the propriety of continuing to plant this important article of produce, as the most reliable source of revenue to the country, and of individual wealth to the nation. Owing to the unusually low prices of palm oil and camwood in foreign markets the trade in these articles with Liberian merchants is somewhat discouraging, and no less so to the government, as the revenue is derived chiefly from this source. And unless some other avenue be opened which will supply the deficiency growing out of this cause, the current expenses of the fiscal year cannot be met.

And just here I would remark that it is neither the depreciation nor the burning of the currency that has brought about our financial depression. The cause in my opinion is to be sought for in another direction, viz, the inadequacy of the revenue to meet the demands of the government.

If the expenses can be curtailed, or in any way brought within the receipts at the custom-house, matters and things will work easily, and no doubt satisfactorily to the laboring class. Otherwise we must expect to endure hardships and privations, as well as the inconvenience growing out of a gradual increase of the public debt.

And I would further remark that the very slow and uncertain process by which the revenue is obtained, owing to the want of a large and inviting commerce, is another cause of our present monetary difficulties. Our commerce to a good extent is locked up, impeded, and rendered inaccessible to the great commercial world by restrictions the most detrimental to free trade and suicidal to the well-being and happiness of the nation.

It is fully evident that we have not the capital to develop and utilize the vast resources of the country, and yet we appear unwilling to allow others to do so, or even to assist us in an enterprise so very desirable and upbuilding to a nation favored with a domain of such unbounded wealth.

We have an extent of sea-coast of about 600 miles, teeming with hundreds of thousands of aborigines who might by their commercial operations pay hundreds of thousands of dollars into the public treasury. But owing to a circumscribed trade, and living at too great a distance from the ports of entry, their industrial pursuits are paralyzed, and they are made to suffer the want of the necessaries and comforts of life, and the government a loss of a large amount of revenue.

Now, unless we change our policy and give a greater latitude to trade and the interchange of commerce, as well as afford encouragement to a division of labor, we must be content to suffer the charge of indiscretion and the want of political sagacity, to say nothing of the great lack of economy which such a course indicates. We have not only failed to utilize and enlarge the coast trade as we ought, but have also neglected to give encouragement to our interior traffic, which is far more advantageous in every respect than that on the sea-board and should claim the fostering care of the Government and people of Liberia, which care should be demonstrated in the full protection given to its development, even though it may possibly at times render the resort to an armed force necessary. These of course should always only be adopted when all other methods prove unavailing and when it becomes an absolute necessity.

I am glad to be able to inform your honorable body that the chiefs and head men of the Barline country have made an application through Mr. Rose to the government for assistance to enable them to bring down their trade to the sea-board and also to protect them on the road against the intermediate tribes who are accustomed to rob and maltreat them with impunity. They allege that when thus treated by marauders from the border tribes, they get no redress except by resorting to predatory wars, in which, to use the language of the chiefs, both parties suffer most seriously and without reparation. But they allege that if the government, which commands the respect and fear of all the tribes, will interpose, the highway to the interior will be rendered free and safe to all who may travel to and fro with their articles of trade. The King of Barline, through his son, represents the country as abounding in cattle, rice, cotton, country cloths, palm oil, palm kernels, and camwood. He also assures the government that laborers can be supplied in large numbers from this populous section of country.

The Passas are said to be a hardy and industrious tribe, capable of enduring great fatigue and labor like the Kroomen. And what is especially gratifying is their great inclination to civilization and Christianity—more so perhaps than any other tribe about us. Such a people, then, should have special encouragement, not only by the government, but also by the bold and enterprising merchants, in offering every inducement to bring them and their trade among us. I have also to state further in this connection, that I have had the pleasure of receiving recently a messenger from Ibrahim a Sissi, sovereign ruler and commander of the faithful of the Kingdom of Medina, requesting the Liberian Government to assist in opening the roads for trade from this wealthy commercial emporium to Monrovia. He represents the road to be infested with robbers, which he advises must be removed in order to secure a free egress and ingress to trade. Ibrahima Sissi is of the opinion, however, that the chiefs residing on the road may be conciliated and easily controlled by the payment of a yearly stipend; but adds, in case of the failure of this method, he is prepared to join the government in a military force of horsemen and foot soldiers, to co-operate with the Liberian troops in removing the obstructions. He states that he sent a thousand horsemen to Musardú to escort the government commissioner, Hon. B. J. K. Anderson, to Medina, in the year 1868, but Mr. Anderson, for some reason unknown to him, declined the invitation. Medina is represented as abounding in cattle, hides, goats, sheep, horses, asses, rice, pease, corn, ground-nuts, cotton country cloths, butter, rock salt, and gold in great abundance. All he wants is free and uninterrupted intercourse between Medina and Monrovia, in order that the wealth of this interior region may pour down into our markets.

In reply to this message I have dispatched a communication to him in the Arabic language, prepared by Dr. Blyden, with the view of arriving at a full and definite understanding with him. This letter was sent by his messenger, Vumbah Sissi, who left here on the seventh day of October, hoping to return by the middle of January or the first of February next. Should he return at the time mentioned, I purpose with your permission to send three commissioners, viz, Dr. Blyden, Dr. Priest, and Hon. B. J. K. Anderson, to have an interview with the King, and arrange the preliminaries for opening up the roads for trade and other important interests of the government. Vumbah Sissi, the King’s messenger, having read my letter and noted in his book some important points therein contained, is of the opinion that it will be cordially received and entertained by the King and people of Medina.

And permit me to remark to you, gentlemen, constituting this honorable body, our duty to our brethren of the interior is providentially plain before us. Let us heed the Macedonian call now, lest we have cause when too kite to regret it. God in his overruling providence has inclined and predisposed the hearts of our aboriginal brethren toward us for good. Let me urge upon you the importance of heeding the divine monition and of engaging in the work of enlarging our borders and making strong our bands, by uniting with this intelligent people, who, like ourselves, can read and write (though in a different language) and who occupy no mean rank in mathematical and classical literature—a people who for many generations have been free from the destructive effects of intoxicating drinks, and are therefore in the happy enjoyment of an unimpaired body and mind, an undwarfed manhood, and a soul that delights in the free worship and adoration of the great God, the merciful and the compassionate.

I have also to state that the honorable superintendent of Grand Bassa County has received a deputation from the “Mar” people, asking the intervention of the government to protect them and their property in their passage to and from that place to Buchanan. And shall we, gentlemen, be indifferent to the interest of these people, so intimately connected with our own? Surely not.

The “Mar” Country, lying in the northeastern part of Grand Bassa County, and about twelve days’ journey from Buchanan, was ceded to this republic in 1874, under the administration of President Roberts, and is entitled to the protection for which the chiefs ask. I have directed Superintendent Smith to assure the King’s messenger that the government will do all within its power to protect person and property on the highway as well as to foster interior commerce. This we must do if we would have a revenue with which to support the government. I believe in the doctrine of Rev. Elijah Johnson, “Protect your commerce and it will protect you.”

The aboriginal tribes also in and about Cape Palmas, with the exception of the Bereby section, present a most encouraging and gratifying aspect. The honorable superintendent, under date of November 11, writes: “Several of the interior tribes have recently sent in their chiefs and other representatives to enter into more intimate terms of friendship with the government.”

Several quasi treaties have been made, and more friendly relations never existed than at the present time. The Sorake people, now an important tribe, who remained friendly during the Grebo war, have engaged to assist the government in keeping the roads open for eighteen miles interior-wise. “The Grebos,” he writes further, “are on the most friendly terms with the government.

“The educated young men, some eighteen or twenty in number, have recently taken the oath of allegiance. The natives far and near seem to be becoming awake to an important fact, viz, that God intends them to become one with us, a part and parcel of Liberia in all her interests. And the interior tribes particularly are very anxious for the opening of schools among them.”

From these references, gentlemen, your honorable body will be able to form some idea of the vast and favorable opportunities presented to government for uniting our brethren of the tribes around and beyond with ourselves, and thus laying the foundation of a powerful future state. And I fondly cherish the hope, gentlemen, that in view of the gigantic proportions of the work before us, and the important bearing it has upon the vital interests of the nation, the Executive shall have your hearty cooperation in all judicious measures tending to carry out and perfect an enlightened and wise domestic and interior policy. I believe that there is sufficient tact and experience in this honorable body to seize hold of these favorable opportunities and render them subservient to the best interests of all concerned. I believe that, with me, you will invite the friends of Africa in foreign lands to come with their railroads and other appliances and join us in our efforts to reach the kingdom of Soudan, the garden spot of our country, and open its rich treasures to the commercial world. I am willing, gentlemen, and I believe you are, to follow the indications of the Great Arbiter of all events in the work of civilizing and evangelizing Africa.

Who can divine the motive that induced the Mohammedan King Ibrahima Sissi to seek the co-operation of the Liberian Government? Who can foresee the sublime results that may hang upon the appeals echoing from the Barline, Mar, Sorake, and Grebo tribes for a more intimate connection with Liberia in all her interests? Admit that their motives are wholly selfish and mercenary. Admit that their object is only for gain. Even in that case they will compare favorably with other nations and people on the globe who make a much louder boast of having higher aims in view than the mammon of this world. But can you positively assert that there may not be a background of the most thrilling events, pregnant with the highest interests of African elevation and redemption, behind the scenes! You cannot; you dare not. It seems to me that I can see in the call of the Mohammedan chief the fall or the bowing of the Crescent before the Cross, at least in Africa. And who can tell the part that Christian Liberia is to play in this great drama?

Gentlemen, allow me to repeat, we have a great work before us, and it is our duty as a Christian government to go forward and do all we can in our day and generation to bring about the grand result, not only of the unification, but the civilization and Christianization of the thousands of heathens now sitting in darkness and in the region and shadow of death. And in order that these important matters may receive due attention, I would most respectfully recommend that the act creating and regulating the Interior Department be enforced, and that a suitable appropriation be made by you for carrying out the same. I sincerely trust that no considerations of economy or retrenchment will prevent you from making provision in the appropriation bill for a salary for the officer to be put in charge of this department; for I beg to assure you that this division of national concern, always important, is to us, now more than ever, a matter of absolute necessity, in view of the leading policy of the government at this time, viz, interior development and the incorporation of the native tribes into the Liberian body-politic.

To put this department in proper working order, with an able, discreet man at its head; one who can comprehend and appreciate the vast responsibilities it involves; one who has experience in and respect for the character, opinions, prejudices, and even customs of our aboriginal population, will be setting in motion a machinery fraught with the highest interest to this nation.

This department, properly managed, will do more to build up the nation, to consolidate the Americo-Liberian and native citizens, to enlarge our borders, to multiply our inhabitants, to put us in a condition to defend and protect our national institutions, and to develop the manifold resources of our country than can be easily imagined. It will give to the republic of Liberia an impetus forward which will result in growth, strength, and development far beyond the expectations of the most sanguine among us.

I am aware that the act regulating the highway gives the Executive great discretionary power as well as eight thousand dollars annually to carry into effect that law; but the President personally cannot attend to the duties prescribed in said act.

In fact, the several requirements therein set forth are matters of record, and a proper person should have the entire management of the interior department, under the direction of the President. The government has nothing to lose, but everything to gain, by the immediate revival of this office.

Recurring to the subject of the coast trade, while I would not be understood as advocating the doctrine of throwing open our coasts indiscriminately, I do say we need more ports of entry to command a larger trade and an increased revenue. The greater the commerce of any country, the more advantage to the public exchequer; and the government should, by all possible means, adopt such a policy from time to time as will conduce to the national progress. Commerce and agriculture are the ordinary sources from which most governments derive their support.

The time has fully come, in the history of the republic, when we should adopt more liberal laws for the admission of foreign capital. In view of our peculiar circumstances, it is our duty to avail ourselves of every means by which we may enhance our material as well as moral prosperity, and thus increase our usefulness on this continent.

We have applications from various quarters urging the opening of our coast more extensively to foreign intercourse; and I am persuaded that under certain restrictions we may, with safety and advantage, accord larger privileges to foreigners, admitting them not only to more numerous points of our coast, but to our various rivers, where they may be permitted to lease lands for a term of years for carrying on their operations with some degree of responsibility to the local chiefs, conforming at the same time to the revenue laws of the republic and being solely responsible for any disorder arising from their own conduct.

We have also applications to lease portions of the public domain along our extensive sea-coast. If the legislature would authorize the Executive to carry out such concessions as may be deemed advisable, this would be a source of large income to the government.

With regard to our deranged finances, I would recommend the consolidation of the public debt; that is to say, the enactment of a law calling in all papers and scrip, whether paper currency, debenture, or checks, which represent any claims against the government. These obligations should be received into the treasury, not to be reissued, and bonds given to their holders as receipts for the amount deposited, upon, which an interest of 6 per cent. per annum shall accrue to the depositor, in gold or silver coin, to take effect after the 30th day of June, 1880. The government must have money, and it is for your honorable body to devise ways and means or to adopt those suggested to you for relieving us from the constant financial pressure which hampers all our operations.

I call upon all merchants, mechanics, and farmers—upon all patriotic citizens—to assist the government to place itself in a position to enforce the laws of the republic and to command respect.

In the progress of events, the demands made upon us, both from the interior and from abroad, are increasing in importance and urgency; and we should be recreant to our trust and unfaithful to our responsibilities if we do not come up to the reasonable expectations both of foreign observers and our aboriginal brethern. We have great opportunities for enlarging the area of Liberia’s usefulness at home and her influence abroad, but we cannot avail ourselves of these opportunities without money. I trust that no local prejudice or fancied personal interests will make us indifferent to the great question. We should all seriously consider of adopting ways and means for relieving the government and the mass of the citizens from the pressure now so generally felt.

Our common-school interest is one of paramount importance to the country, and should claim far more of our attention. We should be willing to pay for the education of our children, in such money as the teacher can make available in supplying the necessaries of life. Teachers are hot prepared at all times to wait for their salary longer than the close of the quarter; and if then they are paid in irredeemable checks, they are prevented from paying their quarterly bills, and are therefore made to suffer privation and want during the succeeding term. This often causes worthy and faithful teachers to engage in other occupations, and thus the public schools are neglected. I would recommend that the law regulating common schools be so amended as to bring about results more favorable to the educational demands of the country. I beg to recommend also a large appropriation for common schools, in order to supply in some measure the increasing number of applications for schools on the part of the native tribes around us. Funds to meet the support of these schools can be raised from taxes as soon as there shall be a proper circulating medium established.

It is worthy of note in this connection that many of the aborigines are willingly paying taxes to aid in the maintenance of the schools accessible to them. To meet the requirements for a higher education, I most earnestly recommend that the Liberia College—a national institution, the benevolent gift of good men in America, men who were true friends to negro elevation in this country—be more highly appreciated and sustained by the government and people of Liberia.

The support of this important institution should not be left solely to the trustees, of donations. The government should not stop at supporting the preparatory department, but should appropriate at least $3,000 annually for ten years to aid in keeping up repairs and the payment of professors. And I have to request that you will, at your present session, pass a resolution to that effect.

The time has fully come, fellow citizens, when we should address ourselves to the work of maintaining our literary institutions. As a government we cannot he too careful in looking after and guarding the educational training of the youth of the nation. Not only should we know that they are under instruction, hut we should also know what is the character of the instruction they are imbibing; whether it is such as will inspire them with sentiments of personal and national self respect, loyalty, love of race, patriotism, and virtue, or the reverse of all these. To provide in some measure for this kind of supervision, the government has already directed that no books shall be used in any of the public schools except such as shall have the approval of the government through the secretary of state and school commissioners. And plans are in progress for the securing of a series of approved school books to be used in all the state schools. Other measures are in contemplation with the view of obtaining such a course of early training for our children and youth as will tend to implant in their minds sentiments of love for and appreciation of their race and country.

Too much of the indiscriminate training, recklessly lavished upon Liberian youth heretofore, has had just the opposite tendency.

The time has come, fellow citizens, when we should look these matters squarely in the face, and take the necessary precautions to guard against the disastrous effects that they will naturally produce.

It is gratifying to know that there are considerable funds held by the trustees of donations in Boston, and the New York State Colonization Society, the bequests of benevolent Mends of Liberia, to be used in maintaining the Liberia College, and if you will supplement these amounts by the appropriations above recommended, the institution can soon be put on a career of further, and more extensive usefulness to our growing republic.

I am happy to inform your honorable body that our public buildings have not failed to claim the attention of government during the past year, notwithstanding the monetary pressure under which we have been laboring. In fact so urgent was the demand for these edifices that their supply had become a positive necessity. And while much remains yet to be done in this respect throughout the different counties, I am glad to be able to say that something has been accomplished.

The court-house and Senate chamber, a structure of this city, has undergone a thorough repair, and is now, as you see, completed and ready for use. This building, erected in the early stage of the colony by Governor Buchanan, is a relic of the past that should be sacredly preserved, especially as it was in this building that the constitution was framed and the declaration of independence made in the memorable year of 1847. Would that I had the means not only to repair, hut to enlarge and rear up here on the original foundation a stately edifice of exquisite beauty and worth, to hand down to future generations as a monument to the self-sacrificing zeal, energy, and patriotism of our fathers.

Permit me, gentlemen, just at this point, to make honorable mention of the credit that is due to our enterprising fellow citizen and master workman Mr. Bacchus Matthews, for the faithful and persevering manner in which he followed up the labor assigned him in this building, at much sacrifice, and in the face of great difficulties and formidable obstacles, to its present stage of completion.

The erection of a court-house and prison in Grand Bassa County, for which your honorable body was pleased to make an appropriation, has been retarded, I regret to say, to the great inconvenience of the citizens as well as the government. I had reasons to suppose from preliminary arrangements made by the honorable superintendent that ere this an iron building would have adorned and beautified Buchanan Hill, but this is not the case. I shall endeavor, however, during the ensuing year to urge forward this operation with as much dispatch as possible.

A custom-house is being erected in this county at Lower Buchanan, by the superintendent, with commendable diligence. Such a building has been much needed at that port for many years.

In the county of Sinoe, the new court-house is completed. It is a fine wooden edifice of the most durable timber, and reflects much credit upon the zeal and energy of Messrs. Harris and Ross, the contractors. The jail-house is in progress. At Cape Palmas, Maryland County, the honorable superintendent has nearly completed the fortifications that were deemed necessary to put certain frontier settlements at that point in a proper state of defense. The block house at Jacksonville has been erected; and the stone wall of the fortress at Mount Tubman is nearly completed also. These military precautions were deemed expedient at the time they were ordered, for the purpose of keeping down disturbances and disorder in that vicinity, and for affording peace and security to the agricultural districts of that county. From present indications, however, we have every reason to believe that they will not soon, if ever, be called into requisition for any warlike purposes.

The northwest boundary question, owing to a difference of opinion that arose between the English and Liberian commissioners, is, I regret to say, still unsettled.

For your further information, I shall have the honor to lay before you the papers connected with this important matter.

Our foreign relations are of a peaceful and friendly character. I have every reason to believe from consular correspondence that the Christian governments of Europe and America desire to see a prosperous and happy negro state, capable of exerting a beneficial influence upon this continent, firmly established here.

I have to recommend to you the passage of a resolution thanking the United States Government for having so generously sent Commodore Schufeldt, in the flag-ship Ticonderoga, to aid in the adjustment of the northwest boundary question.

The remarkable patience with which the commodore and his gallant officers waited upon the movements of the commission to its adjournment cannot soon be forgotten by the government and people of this republic.

It would be a grave omission on my part, gentlemen, should I close this communication without recording an expression of appreciation by the government of the service of the Liberian commissioners, the patriotic citizens who accompanied them as witnesses, and the honorable Liberian consul at Sierra Leone, in their efforts to facilitate the termination of the boundary question.

The honorable secretary of the treasury will, at an early day of your session, lay before you the public accounts, with such recommendations as he may deem necessary to improve the financial condition of the republic.

Relying, fellow citizens, upon your patriotism and hearty co-operation in all measures that may be laid before you tending to advance the welfare of the state, and trusting that your session will be harmonious in character and beneficial in its results, I must close by asking appropriations for the following objects, viz: Civil and legislative service.

Public buildings.

Internal improvement generally.

Naval service, special and general.

Internal department, including the mission to Medina.

Military service, including pensions.

General contingent, including diplomatic service.

Public schools, including Liberia College.

In all the above, gentlemen, you shall have my hearty co-operation.

And may the Great Arbiter of all human events bless you in your efforts for the good of the nation.

ANTHONY W. GARDNER.
Monrovia, December 10, 1879.

No. 442. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Smyth. No. 442.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Smyth.

Department of State,
Washington, January 27, 1880. No. 42.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 58, of the 12th ultimo, communicating and commenting upon the recent message of the President of the republic to the legislature, has been received.

The statesmanlike views expressed by the President will, doubtless, commend themselves to the good judgment of his countrymen. This government cannot but regard with sympathetic interest the suggestion of wise and pacific measures to extend the foreign commerce of Liberia and to strengthen its material relations with the tribes in the interior; and shares in the desire, to which his excellency refers, of seeing a prosperous and happy negro state, capable of exerting a beneficial influence upon the great African continent, firmly established in Liberia, and meriting the confidence and good will of all Christian powers.

You are at liberty to say as much in conversation with the officers of the Liberian Government.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 443. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. No. 443.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Liberia, January 21, 1880. (Received February 26.) No. 66.]

Sir: The President, a few days before the adjournment of the legislature, which occurred on Tuesday, January 20, 1880, sent to the Senate for confirmation the names of the gentlemen who composed his former cabinet, together with the name of Dr. E. W. Blyden as secretary of the interior, and M. W. Davis as attorney-general, All were confirmed.

The importance of the appointment of a secretary of the interior can only be properly appreciated by a recollection of the systematic neglect of the aboriginal people in the past.

In the selection of a gentleman of so large a knowledge of his race in Africa and his known devotion to their interests, and of so good and ripe scholarship, foreshadows great promise for Liberia for the aboriginal man, and is a display by the President of wisdom and zeal in the public service.

The members of the Senate, who, by virtue of their offices are trustees of Liberia College, met immediately after adjournment, and proceeded to elect a president for Liberia College, and the choice was Dr. Blyden.

A resolution was passed creating a professorship of Arabic and of the Mandingo or Vay language.

A resolution or act passed the legislature removing the college from Monrovia to a port near the headwaters of the St. Paul’s River. This will make the college easy of access to aboriginal students.

The fame of the accomplished President will influence the sending to Liberia College of many students from the northern and southern portions of the coast, who would otherwise be sent to England, America, or France to complete their training, and the fame of his Oriental learning, which extends to Bornu, Kana, Falaba, Sego, and Timba, will no doubt bring many persons as students from these portions of Central Africa.

I have, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

No. 444. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. No. 444.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, February 12, 1880. (Received April 14.) No. 69.]

Sir: I have the honor to send by this mail, as book-postage, a copy of the Bulletin de la Société de Géographic de Marseille, for November, 1879, containing an account of the discovery of the source of the Niger, and a translation of some extracts from the same, from the letter of appointment of the gentlemen, and from their letters containing facts connected with the discovery, which discovery was made the latter part of the year last past by two Frenchmen, Messrs. Zweifel and Moustier, who started from Sierra Leone under the patronage of M. Vermincke, merchant at Sierra Leone and at Marseilles, following as far as Falabah, in Soolima or Soolimana country, the route pursued by Winwood Reade in 1869, and earlier by Major Laing in 1823, and by Professor Blyden on his return from the interior, in 1872.

It has been said that “since Park’s discovery of the Joliba (Niger) every point of the compass has been assumed for the ulterior course and direction of that river.” Its sources have now been definitely fixed in latitude 8° 45’ north, and longitude 12° 45’ west from Paris, and in latitude 8° 36’ north, and longitude 12° 53’ west from Paris.

The French are making the most vigorous efforts throughout Senegambia for the command of the trade of Soudan and even for political influence.

I learned a few days ago from a friend of the late French commandant of Mellicouria, a French station about forty miles northwest of Sierra Leone, that 500 troops are now stationed at Sego, the capital of the most powerful kingdom of Nigritia, and that a portion of these troops will soon be transferred to Barnillo, the head of navigation on the Niger, visited by Mungo Parkin 1797.

The military occupation of Sego now just effected by the French is no new idea in European enterprise in West Central Africa. Mungo Park, on his return to England, suggested to the British Government that a commercial military station should be established at Sego. But it would seem that since the days of Sir Charles Macarthy, the energetic governor who lost his life in the Ashantee war some fifty years ago, a singular apathy has marked the policy of the English Government in its dealings with interior Western Africa.

General Faidherbe, one of the ablest of the recent governors of Senegal, strove for a long time to carry out Mungo Park’s idea, and sent two French officers, who spent three years at Sego.

I regard the recent movement of the French, and it is regarded by experienced men in Western Africa, as one of the most important in the history of this particular portion of Negroland. They seem determined to work their way down along the interior” of the western coast and to establish an invincible prestige among the tribes.

The appointment of a French consul at Monrovia (of whose arrival I notified you in my No. 64, dated January 15, 1879, diplomatic series) is a part of their commercial plan.

The Liberians are trying to push their settlements to the interior, and to make treaties with the powerful tribes within three or four hundred miles of the coast, but in their feebleness it is very little that they can do. They deserve all the assistance and encouragement which it may be in the power of the government to render, in view of the intimate relations which a portion of the Negro race bears to the United States, and which has been borne by their immediate ancestors for upward of two hundred years.

The newly appointed secretary of the interior of Liberia, Hon. E. W. Blyden, is now on his way to the United States. I hope that he may have an opportunity of giving some information bearing on the subject of his country and of Africa in general to the Department.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

[Inclosure in No. 69.]

Translation of extracts from letter of instruction and direction, addressed Messrs. Zweifel and Moustier dated May 20, 1879.

The essential object of your voyage will be at once geographical and commercial. As to astronomical observations, I have selected M.—— captain of the ship ——, who will arrive at Sierra Leone by the first opportunity, and who, with his professional knowledge, will certainly be of great assistance to you in all that pertains to the scientific part of your journey.

The commercial object is to extend our business relations with the countries situated near the Niger, to study their productions, to ascertain the easiest routes for reaching our factories, and, in a word, to examine with care all the questions which relate to the development of our commercial activity in those countries.

The geographical object will be the discovery of the sources of the Niger. I attach to this the greatest importance; and it is principally in view of this discovery that I have formed the project of the expedition which you are called to direct.

Other travelers have explored the Niger, and have followed and determined its course, but the source itself is yet unknown.

But little attention is given to this subject at present. “Caput Nili quӕrere” (the search for the source of the Nile) has for a long time been the watchword of explorers.

This problem is now on the eve of being solved, but the sources of the Niger remain untouched.

It is probable that very soon public attention will be directed to this quarter. Numerous indications justify this expectation.

Let us take the lead; to us will redound the honor of this discovery.

* * * * * * *

If your expedition succeeds and leads to useful results, I desire that France shall be the first to profit by it. This being said, I think that the less you make of politics in your voyage the better.

I said to you at the outset of this letter that the expedition must have a character chiefly geographical and commercial. I shall complete my idea by adding that it must have a character essentially French. I mean to say by this that you must have in j view in your researches and various studies the interest of French commerce, and study the ways and means the most favorable for its extension and prosperity in those countries.

[In pursuance of the foregoing instructions, the expedition started from Port Lokkoh, July 11, 1879, and reached the Big Boumba, the capital of Limba, during said month, on the 25th.]

(Extracts from the letters of the exploring party, p. 267.)

We arrived here on the 25th instant, in good health, but somewhat fatigued. We intend to start again to-day, the 27th.

* * * * * * *

The route which we have followed is a little to the south of Reader’s. In the narrative of his journey, Reade says that he found forests of large trees from Port Lokkoh to Big Boumba. It is only ten years since this voyage took place and already everything is changed. The country through which we have passed is thus far little wooded. Large trees are now found only at rare intervals.

It is probable that the forests which Reade saw have been destroyed to give place to plantations of rice and grain.

There are numerous palm trees in Lokkoh and Limba, and a law exists in those countries which condemns to slavery any one who destroys one of these trees.

* * * * * * *

(Ibid., page 268.)

Falabah, August 20, 1879.

We arrived here on the 10th instant. It was our intention to change the route from Salaga and proceed directly to Mount Lomah, but everywhere along the road we were advised not to take that route, as war and famine prevailed in Koranko. We were obliged therefore to go on to Falabah, as Major Laing and Reade did. You are aware that the latter in his second journey proceeded from this town to the Niger at Farabanah and not towards Mount Lomah.

* * * * * * *

On the 18th instant an embassy from the King of Mount Lomah made us a visit. We asked indifferently for information in relation to their country and their mountains. We then spoke of the great river Diolibah (Niger). They told us that the great river passes between Mount Lomah and another mountain, and that the source is found two days’ walk beyond this mountain.

The source consists, according to their account, of three branches, each of which bears a particular name, but these branches soon reunite and form a small lake, from which flows the river under the name of Diolibah.

This morning we made our present to the King (Sewa of Falabah) and told him of our desire to see the great river. * * * He told us that the source of the Diolibah is found altogether in the territories of the Korankas, six or seven days’ journey from here (Falabah), and that, the source being discovered, we should be able to descend the river, but that instead of traversing it, to go to the east or the north, we should do better to return to him, for in Koranka as in Sangara there was famine.

Socorah, September 12, 1879.

We are near the frontier of Koranko and Kissi, and we have already crossed three branches of the Mger, viz, the Tentabara, the Tamicond, and the Falico. We were nearly drowned in the Falico.

It is probable that in three days we shall see the source of this branch. * * *

We have seen the source of the Sili, which is no other than our river Rokelle (or the Sierra Leone).

We are not able to describe the trouble we have had and that we have continually. At each town or village obstacles of all kind were put before us. Happily we are better acquainted with the customs of the natives than Reade or Blyden, or we should have long since lost all hope. We are always being much fatigued.

Koulanko, October 3, 1879.

We have accomplished the object of our journey. The source of the Niger has been discovered. We have succeeded, but with what troubles God only knows.

We have discovered moreover the source of the river Kamaranka, and we have visited the source of the Rokelle, discovered by Major Laing.

We are wet nearly every day to the bone; then we are exposed to a sun of 50° to 60°, but the bodily fatigue is nothing compared to the moral fatigue which these savages have caused us to endure.

We are now between Koranko, Kissi, and Cond.

[The explorers returned to Sierra Leone November 10, 1879, and concluded the subject of their explorations under the date of November 15, 1879.]

November 15, 1879.

From what precedes you have seen that the Niger is formed by the three branches, Tamicond, Falico, and Tembi.

The longitude of the source of the Falico is 12° 45’ west from Paris, and the latitude is 8° 45’ north; the longitude of the source of the Tembi is 12° 53’ west from Paris, and the latitude 8° 30’ north.

On the western side of the falls which give rise to the Niger is found the source of the river Kamoranka, which empties into the ocean opposite the Plantain Islands, north of the Shirbra. The Falico and Bafi flow from Mount Tantafria; from Mount Timbi-Coundon flow to the Tinibi and the Babbe; the Bafi (black water) from the river Kamaranka.

We reserve a complete narrative of our journey, to be given a few weeks later.

We remain yours, truly devoted,

ZWEIFEL,

M. MOUSTIER.

Sierra Leone, November 15, 1879.

No. 445. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. No. 445.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, February 12, 1880. (Received April 14.) No. 70.]

Sir: On or about March. 15, 1878, certain French troops landed at the island of Matacong, an island about twelve miles off the mouth of the Mellicourie River, and took possession of it for purposes of revenue.

The governor of Sierra Leone protested against their occupation, on the ground that a treaty ceding this island to the British Government was negotiated between Kenneth Macauly, acting governor and commander-in-chief of Sierra Leone, and the native authorities in 1826. But this treaty was never ratified by the British Government, and remained in abeyance until last year, when the governor of Sierra Leone attempted to enforce the terms of it by exacting custom dues for vessels trading there. These dues have been paid under protest, and are-likely to restrict if not destroy the trade.

American ships have always been accustomed to go to Matacong to trade or take in wood and water free of charge. But a short time ago the American bark Fury, Captain Burgess, was forbidden from going to Matacong without taking on board a revenue officer from Sierra Leone. To this the captain or his agents objected, and she cleared for Boston.

The native, authorities, alarmed at the threatened disaster to trade of the country, have united to protest against the possible occupation of their country by either English or French, and they have addressed a communication to the English and French Governments protesting against the occupation of their country, and expressing an earnest desire to be left to themselves to govern their own country and to admit foreigners as they have already done under the treaty regulations.

Inclosed please find a copy of their communication in the Arabic language, with a translation of same, setting forth the sentiments of the people, which may not be found without interest to the department.

The document is a true copy from the original.

I have, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

[Inclosure in No. 70.]

Translation of the Arabic letter inclosed, addressed by the chiefs of the Moriah country to the British and French Governments.

In the name of God the most merciful. O, God, bless Mohammed, and the people of Mohammed, and grant them peace.

This to his excellency the minister of foreign affairs.

We desire most respectfully and earnestly to lay before you the following true statement of facts:

For many years we, the people of the Moriah country, have been in treaty with the English Government, binding ourselves to respect and protect the lives and property of British traders residing in our territory, and have lately made a similar treaty with the French Government. And these treaties have been faithfully observed, with one exception.

We have noticed lately a desire on the part of the English and French Governments to take possession of our country—to have it under their protection, as they say—but we think that the meaning of that is that one or the other of these governments wishes to own the country.

Now, we send this letter to inform you that we do not desire nor accept any union with either of the governments, either the English or the French, and to ask the English and the French people to let our country alone and let us govern it in our own way, and to be satisfied with the treaties which we have entered into with them to trade in our country while they obey the laws of the country.

We ask further to be allowed to add that we are not willing, and we refuse, as we have always done, to sell or to give our country to any one; but we are willing that they should trade in all parts of our country, both the French and the English.

We know that we are not able to engage in war with you, and if you take our country from us you will do it by force and against our consent.

We ask for no help, only to be let alone.

In testimony we put our hands.

No. 446. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. No. 446.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, April 13, 1880. (Received May 19.) No. 77.]

Sir: I have the honor to advise the Department of the arrival, on Sunday, April 11, 1880, at the port of Monrovia, of M. Jules Thierry, captain commanding the frigate Talisman.

The French consul being absent from Monrovia, at Lagas, Captain Thierry requested of me advice as to how he should proceed to have an interview with the President of Liberia.

I took pleasure in acceding to his request by giving the desired information. The preliminaries being settled, Monday, April 12, at 11 o’clock a.m., was fixed as the time for the reception or interview by the President.

The captain and suite, consisting of six officers, came to the United States legation a short time before the hour named for the interview and at his request I accompanied him to the executive mansion, and presented him to the honorable the secretary of state, who presented the captain and suite to the President.

The captain informed the President that he had been instructed by the admiral of the republic of France to salute the Liberian flag, and to express to the President his best wishes for the prosperity of the republic of Liberia.

In addition, the captain proffered his good offices to perform any commission the President might give to him anywhere upon the Liberian coast, and in ardent language hoped for the success of Liberia.

On leaving the President, Captain Thierry and suite returned to the legation and enjoyed a cup of Liberian coffee.

* * * * * * *

On Tuesday, April 13, 1880, the Talisman weighed anchor for Gaboon, her destination.

I have, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

No. 447. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. No. 447.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, April 14, 1880. (Received May 19.) No. 78.]

Sir: I have the pleasure to say to you that the legislature of Liberia has adopted a resolution as to the prospective settlement of the claim of the United States Government for ordnance, &c.

The following resolution, passed by the legislature of 1879–’80, was approved January 17, 1880: Upon the settlement of the postal claim against this republic, the whole of the one-tenth of the revenue or moneys accruing therefrom shall be paid in regular quarterly installments to the United States minister resident, on account of the United States claims before mentioned; any laws or parts of laws to the contrary notwithstanding.

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

No. 448. Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts. No. 448.
Mr. Smyth to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Monrovia, Nov. 22, 1880. (Received Jan. 3, 1881.) No. 90.]

Sir: I have the honor to advise you of the fact of the desire of the Pope of Rome to be represented in Liberia.

Some time since a communication was received at the foreign office from the Pope, in which he requested of this government the privilege of sending a legate to reside near the republic.

His Holiness has been replied to and the request granted.

The constitution of Liberia as to religion is liberal, although the people are Protestants and heathen, and the former are not more liberal toward Catholicism than Protestants elsewhere.

I am, &c.,

JNO. H. SMYTH.

MexicoMexico

[449] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, September 26, 1879. (Received October 14.)

[450] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, October 1, 1879.

[451] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, November 4, 1879.

[452] . Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, November 26, 1879. (Received December 11, 1879.)

[453] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 18, 1879. (Received January 5, 1880.)

[454] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 24, 1879. (Received January 13, 1880.)

[455] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 24, 1879. (Received January 13, 1880.)

[456] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 26, 1879. (Received January 13, 1880.)

[457] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, December 27, 1879. (Received January 13, 1880.)

[458] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, January 7, 1880. (Received January 26.)

[459] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, January 12, 1880. (Received January 24.)

[460] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, January 14, 1880. (Received January 26.)

[461] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, January 23, 1880.

[462] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, February 5, 1880. (Received February 24.)

[463] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, February 20, 1880.

[464] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, March 1, 1880.

[465] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, March 1, 1880.

[466] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, March 1, 1880. (Received March 22.)

[467] . Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, March 15, 1880. (Received March 29.)

[468] . Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, April 2, 1880. (Received April 19.)

[469] . Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, April 12, 1880. (Received May 3.)

[470] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State, Washington, April 20, 1880.

[471] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, May 4, 1880. (Received May 20.)

[472] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, May 18, 1880.

[473] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State, Washington, June 12, 1880.

[474] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, June 15, 1880. (Received July 1.)

[475] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State, Washington, June 26, 1880.

[476] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, June 29, 1880. (Received July 15.)

[477] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, June 29, 1880. (Received July 15.)

[478] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, July 13, 1880. (Received July 29.)

[479] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, July 16, 1880. (Received July 29.)

[480] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, July 17, 1880. (Received August 6.)

[481] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, July 24, 1880. (Received August 5.)

[482] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, July 24, 1880. (Received August 6.)

[483] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, July 27, 1880. (Received August 12.)

[484] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, August 10, 1880. (Received August 26.)

[485] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State, Washington, September 15, 1880.

[486] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, September 16, 1880.

[487] . Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Mexico, September 21, 1880. (Received October 7.)

[488] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State, Washington, October 9, 1880.

[489] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State. Washington, October 20, 1880.

Contents

Correspondence with the Mexican Legation in Washington. (Documents 490-503)

No. 449. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 449.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, September 26, 1879. (Received October 14.) No. 1041.]

Sir: Under date of April 29 last, Mr. Ruelas sent me a note in which he informed me that a Mexican soldier, named Zeferino Avalos, had been convicted in a Mexican court for the murder of another Mexican, committed in Texas, and that he had been condemned to death and executed, and the minister requested me to communicate the fact to you as an evidence of the efficiency and energy with which his government proceeds when convinced of the justice demanded.

I answered Mr. Ruelas on the next day that I would cheerfully forward his note to you with a dispatch calling attention to the case; but I said to him that, as it was likely to be esteemed a precedent for future cases, I would be gratified if he would favor me with a copy of the judicial proceedings for your information.

The minister replied that the record of the trial not being on file in his department he could not comply with my request.

I then asked him if the information existing in his department indicated whether the trial took place before a civil or military tribunal, as a knowledge of that single fact would in itself be valuable.

Whereupon the minister responded that he expected a copy of the proceedings of said trial, and that as soon as received a copy would be sent me.

I have now waited near five months for the record of the trial, and not having come to hand, I have not thought it advisable to delay further to comply with the minister’s request.

If the murder had been committed upon an American citizen by the Mexican criminal, and if the trial and conviction had occurred before a civil tribunal, and not a military court, the case might well be regarded as of special significance.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTEE.

[Inclosure in No. 1041.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, April 29, 1879.

Mr. Minister: When Mr. Zamacona resided in Washington in the character of confidential agent of the Government of Mexico, he learned, through General Ord, that a Mexican soldier called Zeferino Avalos had committed a cold-blooded homicide in the territory of Texas, upon the person of Antonio Muñoz, also a Mexican. The circumstance of the murdered man being blind, imparted to the crime a character of notable atrocity. General Ord manifested the desire that the extradition of Avalos should be facilitated, which it was necessary to refuse for the reasons given to the Government of the United States previously in regard to other delinquents. Notwithstanding this, Mr. Zamacona reported the foregoing to this department, and immediately the necessary orders were issued for the apprehension and trial of the murderer, in conformity with article 186 of the penal code.

The criminal, Zeferino Avalos, was condemned to the last penalty, and after resorting to all the expedients permitted by law, including petition for pardon, the sentence of death was executed on his person the 20th of March last past.

Upon making this communication to your excellency, I request that you will be pleased to transmit to your government, as demonstrating the efficacy and energy with which that of this republic proceeds when, convinced of the justice demanded, it can administer it in accordance with the laws in force.

I have, &c.,

M. RUELAS.

No. 450. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foster. No. 450.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, October 1, 1879. No. 682.]

Sir: The consul of the United States at Chihuahua having, in a dispatch written in July last, stated that Indians from the reservations of Arizona and New Mexico were in the habit of making predatory raids into the State of Chihuahua, carrying off much stock, and murdering citizens of Mexico, the Secretaries of the War and Interior Departments were addressed upon the subject. In reply, a letter has been received from the former, accompanied by a report from the commanding officer of the Department of Missouri, copies of which are herewith inclosed for your information. Embodied in the report of the Commanding General of the Department of the Missouri is a communication of Colonel Hatch, Ninth Cavalry, from which it appears that not only are the people of Mexico occasionally afflicted by incursions of roving bands of Indians from the United States, but that this country likewise suffers from the raids of Indians domiciled in the States of Chihuahua and Sonora, who have taken up their abode there from the United States, and Colonel Hatch suggests that the Mexican authorities should co-operate with the officers of the United States Army in returning these Indians to their proper reservations.

You are Instructed to take an early opportunity to urge upon the Government of Mexico the propriety of co-operating with the military forces of the United States in suppressing Indian raids upon the border, and returning to their proper jurisdictions Indians who may have strayed from the territory of one nation into that of the other, especially those referred to in the letter of Colonel Hatch, now sojourning in the States of Chihuahua and Sonora.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 682.]

Mr. McCrary to Mr. Evarts.

War Department,
Washington City, September 22, 1879.

Sir: Acknowledging the receipt of your letter of the 13th ultimo, transmitting copy of dispatch, from the United States consul at Chihuahua, relative to raids into Mexico by Indians from Arizona and New Mexico, I have the honor in reply to inform you that the statement as requested has been made the subject of an investigation, and to invite your attention to the inclosed copy of report from Commanding General, Department of the Missouri, and accompanying papers, in relation thereto.

I have, &c.,

GEO. W. McCRARY,
Secretary of War.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 682.]

General Pope to Colonel Whipple.

Headquarters Department of the Missouri,
Fort Leavenworth, Kans., September 4, 1879.

Col. W. D. Whipple,
Assistant Adjutant-General, Chicago, Ill.:

Colonel: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt by reference from your office of copy of a letter from the Secretary of State to the Secretary of War with indorsements thereon, relative to alleged raids of reservation Indians in New Mexico and Arizona into Mexico.

If the military authorities had charge of these reservations and control of the Indians on them, this reference of the subject-matter of these complaints would be quite just, and would properly be considered a severe reproach to the military, but it is certainly not unknown to the Secretary of State that Indian reservations and the Indians upon them are in no manner under the control nor subject to the supervision of the military authorities, and that unless the Indian agents in charge of such Indians and their reservations choose to inform the military officers of the absence or presence of their Indians, or of any purposes they have in view, the military officials are wholly without information until they hear of Indian raids and depredations from the parties injured, and at points far distant from their posts.

The reservation of the Mescalero Apaches (the only Indians in this department subject to this complaint) is 30 or 40 miles distant from Fort Stanton, the nearest military post, the garrison of which, under the orders of the President, has been occupied, for many months in aiding the governor of the Territory to suppress disorders, amounting to practical anarchy in several of the counties of that Territory adjacent to this post.

Even, however, if no such duty had been imposed upon it, the garrison is of necessity a small one, and being prohibited from demanding any information of the condition of affairs on the Indian reservations; of the passes and permits given by the agents; of the presence or absence of the Indians under such authority; of the arms and ammunition furnished them; of the amount or sufficiency of food given them; indeed, of their necessities of any kind, it is hard and, I venture to say, not entirely just, to hold the military responsible for the conduct of such Indians so situated.

If the Army be given control of this reservation, security against raids of any kind may be safely guaranteed. Under present circumstances this is simply impossible, unless a line of sentinels be placed around this great Indian reservation, with orders to permit no Indians to pass outside with or without authority from the Indian agent, a process manifestly impracticable with the small force of troops and the onerous duties already imposed upon them, or in view of the orders and authority of the military forces in the matter of Indian reservations.

The evils of this divided jurisdiction over Indians and Indian reservations on the frontier have been sufficiently manifest for many years, and great injury to the inhabitants of the whole frontier has been largely occasioned thereby, which has been pointed out in official communications almost as numerous as the outrages themselves.

The Indians and their reservations being exclusively under the control of the Indian Department, it is not clearly understood why complaints against them are not referred to the Indian Department, instead of the War Department.

Everything that can be done has been and will be done by the military to prevent these raids; but I would respectfully ask, what can be expected of the military, who are prohibited from exacting any information whatever of affairs on Indian reservations and from taking any precautionary measures whatever to prevent such raids.

It is the practice in Texas to attribute every Indian raid into that State to the few miserable Indians of the Mescalero reservation, and it has been made a very convenient scapegoat for all the depredations not prevented. It has been only recently (papers forwarded yesterday) that a party of five Lipan Indians from Mexico were followed into this reservation by a party of the Ninth Cavalry and one killed and the other captured. It was immediately reported from Texas that this party of Indians was from that reservation and had been into Texas, whereas the Indians belong in Mexico, and came from there through Texas, committing some depredations on the way. They were followed so closely by the troops that they were compelled to run into that reservation for safety. Nine-tenths of the reports concerning this reservation have as little foundation as this.

I will do, as indeed I have done, everything possible, considering the very unfortunate and embarrassing relation the Indian reservations bear to the military, to prevent such raids, and with the very insufficient force in New Mexico I can do no more. If the Mescalero reservation and the control of the Indians on it be turned over to the military authorities I will put a stop to all raiding or any absence of the Indian from his agency in very short order.

The letter of the Secretary of State above referred to will be sent at once to the commanding officers in the section of the country concerned, and every effort will be made to stop such raids if it be possible.

I would respectfully, however, here enter a protest against what I conceive to be a grievous injustice to the Army, viz, the practice of holding the military forces of the United States responsible in official communications for the conduct or the movements of Indians over whom and over whose reservations the military authorities have no more jurisdiction nor even supervision than over the doings of the street laborers of New York City.

In order that the subject, as it relates to the Mexican authorities may be clearly understood, I inclose in this connection a report just received from Colonel Hatch, commanding district of New Mexico.

Very respectfully, &c.,

JNO. POPE,
Brevet Major-General, U. S. A., Commanding.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 682.]

Report of Colonel Hatch.

Headquarters District of New Mexico,
Santa Fé, N. Mex., August 14, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to forward copy of telegram from department commander of Arizona, requesting that the Indians now on Mexican soil be returned to commanding officer of the post most easily reached by Mexican authorities, or delivered to United States troops at some point the Mexican Government may designate on the frontier of New Mexico.

The band of Indians referred to are made up of renegade Indians from the Warm Spring, Chiriquis, and White Mountain Indians, and have for some years been domiciled in the States of Chihuahua and Sonora. They repeatedly raid in New Mexico, Arizona, and Texas, and when closely pursued by our troops take refuge in Mexico. If the troops were allowed to follow them their capture or destruction would follow.

Concert of action with the Mexican troops at the time they are committing depredations in New Mexico and escaping to the mountains of the State of Chihuahua, would end in their destruction. At present no arrangement for this end between the two countries, by concert of action, is probable, and I am under the impression the suggestion contained in telegram inclosed of General Willcox commanding department of Arizona, is the proper way to dispose of these Indians. Prior to the survey marking the boundaries of Mexico, the Apache Indian, looking upon the region on both sides as his country, was the common enemy of all civilization of this part of the continent. The country now being occupied by two nations has given him the advantage of securing a home when pushed by one or the other of the governments. John Ayers, referred to was long time Indian agent of these Indians, and, therefore, could readily recognize them.

The telegram is not distinct regarding L. H. Scott, American consul, but presume he is a business partner of Macmanus, of Chihuahua. These Indians were lately driven over the line by Major Morrow, commanding Fort Bayard, who visited a town, in Mexico near the line, of which the Mexican Government complained officially.

The Mexicans are sensitive regarding American troops following up hostile Indians on their trail. Therefore I respectfully ask the Mexican Government be requested to return these Indians as prisoners to United States troops, when they can be turned over to their proper reservation where the tribe is held.

Very respectfully, &c.,

EDWARD HATCH,
Colonel Ninth Cavalry, Commanding.

[Copy of telegram received.]

Headquarters Department of Arizona,
Prescott Barracks, August 9, 1879.

(Received at Santa Fé August 12, 10.30 a.m.)

General Hatch,
Commanding Department of New Mexico, Santa Fé:

Following dispatch transmitted to you. General Willcox, now absent at San Francisco, suggests that you make application direct through the United States consul.

MARTIN,
Assistant Adjutant-General.

“Camp Thomas, August 9, 1879.

“Assistant Adjutant-General,
Department Arizona, Prescott:

“John Ayers, formerly agent of Gila Apaches, at Tularosa, N. Mex., has just returned from Chihuahua with a band of cattle for San Cárlos, reports that he saw some Warm Spring Indians belonging to Ahoo’s band at Casa Grande. Saw about 25. Was told there were about 80 in all.

“Believe Mexican authorities would be willing to arrest and turn these Indians over to the United States officials, as they want them out of the country, as they steal cattle and commit other depredations.

“Additional particulars can be obtained from L. H. Scott, American consul and of McManus, at Chihuahua. Ayers thinks these Indians will cross the line and commit depredations upon our settlers residing in Arizona and New Mexico.

“STACY, Commanding.”

[Indorsement.]

Headquarters Military Division, Missouri,
Chicago, September 8, 1879.

Respectfully forwarded to the adjutant-general of the army, inviting attention to previous indorsements from these headquarters on papers relating to this subject.

P. H. SHERIDAN,
Lieut. General, Commanding.

No. 451. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foster. No. 451.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, November 4, 1879. No. 695.]

Sir: I transmit herewith a copy of a letter under date of the 23d ultimo, addressed to this Department by the Hon. John R. McPherson, of the Senate, and of the correspondence and other papers which accompanied it, in relation to the arrest on the 18th of September last, and imprisonment, of Captain William Metzger, of the steamer Newbern, by the Mexican authorities of Mazatlan, on a charge of smuggling.

It appears from the protest of Captain Metzger that certain 104 packages of merchandise were landed from the steamer Newbern which were not entered on the general manifest of the steamer; that he declared to the judge of the district that he had no knowledge of the 104 packages; that no bill of lading had ever been given or signed for them by any agent of the steamer; that he believed that no agent or employé of the Newborn had received the 104 packages on board the steamer, and hence they could not have been delivered by any agent or emyloyé of the steamer.

It further appears that, notwithstanding this declaration, Captain Metzger was imprisoned and tried on a charge of smuggling and acquitted by the judge, from whose decision the district attorney appealed, and the case was transferred to the circuit court, before which he was required to answer. Since this stage nothing further in regard to his case has been received by the Department.

You will make fitting representation of the case to the Mexican Government, and ask for an investigation of the facts, to the end that, if they be substantiated, due redress may be voluntarily and adequately tendered to Captain Metzger, against whom no evidence is believed to appear to justify the penal and unbailable charge of smuggling, or even to identify the suspected packages as having come from the vessel he commanded.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

[Inclosure in No. 695.]

Mr. McPherson to Mr. Evarts.

October 23, 1879. (Received October 24.)

Sir: I inclose herewith letter of Mr. B. M. Hartshorne, a citizen of New Jersey, who is largely engaged in the Mexican trade. He requests me to forward to yon the accompanying correspondence in relation to what seems a great outrage on the part of the Mexican authorities, and to ask if nothing can be done by way of redress. Your early attention is respectfully solicited.

With great respect, &c.,

J. R. McPHERSON,
United States Senator, New Jersey.

[Annex to Mr. McPherson’s letter of October 23, 1879.]

Mr. Hartshorne to Mr. McPherson.

“The Highlands,” October 19, 1879.

Dear Sir: Referring to our interview yesterday, I have to ask your assistance in calling the attention of the Department of State to the facts contained in the letter from Captain Metzger to Mr. Bermingham. I think this matter calls for prompt action on the part of our government, for this American shipmaster may now be in a Mexican jail for no crime and through no fault of his. I would respectfully suggest that a United States vessel be ordered to Mazatlan to inquire into the circumstances connected with this gross outrage; and that a demand be made on the Mexican Government for such reparation for Captain Metzger as our authorities may deem proper.

I am, &c.,

B. M. HARTSHORNE,

[Annex to Mr. Hartshorne’s letter of October 19. 1879.]

Captain Metzger to Mr. Bermingham.

Mazatlan, September 18, 1879.

Dear Sir: This afternoon I was arrested and taken on shore because there were 104 packages of freight discharged that were not on the manifest. There was one invoice of 104 packages that was not on, and the ship paid a fine of $100, and added them on; but these 104 packages they have not found an owner for (and we, not knowing anything about them, did not put them on the addition), and in the absence of any one else being found, the captain is considered the responsible party. By the new law, smuggling is a criminal offense, and I am considered as a smuggler at present, and I have to go to jail to-night, although the judge himself considers it a hardship, hut says that such is the law. I am to have a trial, and, if pronounced guilty, the penalty is two years’ imprisonment. They would not accept bail. I thought it best to send the ship away, and it is uncertain when I will get through. I may get through in time to come on the mail steamer. If not, I will have to wait for the return of the Newbern, as I know nothing of the packages, and have always been very particular about smuggling, and tried to prevent it. I hope for the best, but I expect the company to get justice for me for this outrage. I have cautioned Mr. Rogers to be careful and not run any risk. So I will close, as I want the ship to get to the cape before dark to-morrow evening.

Yours, very respectfully,

WM. METZGER.

(Note.—The Mr. Rogers mentioned in the letter is the first officer of the Newbern.)

No. 452. Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts. No. 452.
Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, November 26, 1879. (Received December 11, 1879.) No. 1054.]

Sir: I inclose here with a note from the Mexican Government, in which it is stated that the United States steamer Tuscarora, engaged in the Coast Survey, recently landed a part of her crew on the coast of Oaxaca, without due notice having been given to the Mexican authorities, but that these authorities had been ordered nevertheless to furnish the officers of said steamer with any assistance required.

The minister of foreign affairs also said in his note that he had been instructed by the President to call attention to the convenience of advice being given to the authorities of Mexico whenever works of this nature are undertaken on its coasts. In my reply I thanked the minister for the assistance ordered to be given, and stated that I would forward a copy of his note to my government and call attention to the part referring to the convenience of notice being given to the Mexican Government when it is necessary to land men.

I am, &c.,

EDWARD M. NEILL.

[Inclosure in No. 1054.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Neill.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, November 22, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to state to you that the government has learned that the United States war steamer Tuscarora arrived some time ago on the coast of Oaxaca, for the purpose of making scientific reconnoissances, landing for this object a part of its crew, without notifying the Mexican authorities. The government, nevertheless, has issued the necessary orders to the end that these authorities may furnish the officers of said vessel any aid and assistance they may require.

In this connection I have been instructed by the President to state to your legation the convenience of advising the Government of Mexico, as has been done on other occasions, in order to avoid difficulties, of whatever works of this kind that may be undertaken by the Navy of the United States of America, so that in each case the necessary measures may be dictated.

I improve, &c.,

M. RUELAS.

No. 453. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 453.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 18, 1879. (Received January 5, 1880.) No. 1073.]

Sir: In my dispatch No. 1041, of September 26 ultimo, I reported that the Mexican minister of foreign affairs had informed me of the trial and execution of a Mexican in Mexico, for the murder committed upon another Mexican in Texas.

In referring to the fact that I had asked the minister for a copy of the record of proceedings of the trial, I said if the trial and conviction had occurred before a civil tribunal and not a military court, the case might well be regarded as of special significance; and a reference to the record of proceedings which has been furnished this legation, and of which I herewith inclose a copy, shows that such has been the case.

In the decision of the magistrate of the first chamber of the superior tribunal of the State of Coahuila, it is stated that the jurisdiction of the Mexican courts in the case is not disputed in any part of the proceedings, and that this jurisdiction is provided for in the Mexican penal code.

The execution of Avalos in Mexico, by sentence of a Mexican tribunal, for a murder committed in American territory, is the first instance on record in this legation of punishment having been inflicted for a crime perpetrated under the same circumstances.

This precedent is considered valuable in showing that Mexican law provides for such punishment, and that it can be enforced when the Mexican authorities are disposed, as in this instance, to execute it. Although the murdered man was a Mexican, the article of the penal code invoked by the tribunal already referred to is equally applicable to foreigners.

For your information I inclose a translation of the article of the penal code under which the trial and conviction was had.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in 1073 — Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, October 13, 1879.

Sir: Referring to the note of your legation dated the 3d of last June, and complying with the desire expressed by said legation, I have the honor to remit to you copies of an extract of the principal proceedings in the case instituted against Zeferino Avalos for the crime of homicide, as well as of the sentence of execution which was pronounced in the case.

I have, &c.,

M. RUELAS.

Superior Tribunal of Coahuila.

[Extract of the principal proceedings in the case of the criminal Zeferino Avalos.]

On the 26th of November, 1877, the chief of the custom-house guard on the Rio Grande turned Second Sergeant Zeferino Avalos over to the judicial authorities on account of the homicide perpetrated on the person of his fellow-citizen Antonio Muñoz, on the other side of the Rio Grande.

The trial having been instituted, the judge ascertained that the body of Muñoz had on it a wound made by a pistol, the ball entering on the left side of the nose, thus breaking the superior jaw and entering the brain.

The professional experts, Drs. Pablo Valadez, Toribio Muzquis, Cárlos Frederick, and Cárlos Estraus, testified that the wound received by the blind man Muñoz was necessarily mortal; that it caused instantaneous death, and that it would have been impossible for science to save the unfortunate man.

As the homicide was committed in the American town called Eagle Pass, a summary investigation was instituted there, which was presented to the respective jury, which in its verdict declared: 1st. That the blind man, Antonio Muñoz, received a wound in the face, inflicted with a fire-arm, which caused instantaneous death.

2d. That the Mexican Zeferino Avalos is the author of the crime.

The criminal having been apprehended by the authorities of Mexico, the trial was commenced, and the criminal Avalos expressly confessed that he killed the blind man Muñoz, stating that he did it because the latter fought him, trying to take from him his pistol.

The eye-witnesses of the act, Cárlos Sandoval, Nicanor Castro, Rafael Bernal, and others, declared that Zeferino Avalos took a skirl to cross the left bank of the Rio Grande; that while in the middle of the river he fired two shots with his pistol towards where some women were washing, and being rebuked for this, he replied that “when he wished to Mil a man he killed him that having reached the shore, he went towards the unfortunate blind man Muñoz, drew his pistol and fired, killed him instantly, without the eye-witnesses, notwithstanding that they were very near, being able to notice any quarrel or other motive for this atrocious crime.

But the youth Cárlos Farias, the blind man’s guide, testified that Zeferino Avalos approached, asking the blind man to say a prayer for him, which the latter declined to do, stating that he lived by his work and not by charity, and with no other motive than this Sergeant Avalos drew his pistol and killed him.

A judicial investigation being made into the lives and habits of the criminal and his victim, all the witnesses testified that Zeferino Avalos was a vicious, incorrigible man, a very bad husband, a deadly, passionate, and cruel enemy; that the blind man, Antonio Muñoz, on the contrary, was docile, peaceable, and of an agreeable and beneficent character.

The criminal having been heard in defense, the judge of letters of Piedras Negras condemned him, on the 17th of May, 1878, to the death penalty, ordering that he should be shot, which sentence was confirmed the 29th of January of this year by the magistrate of the first chamber of the superior tribunal of justice.

The judge of letters of Rio Grande notified the criminal Zeferino Avalos of this sentence, whereupon he applied to be pardoned, which application being presented according to the laws in force, on the 3d of March last the legislative power of the State decreed the following:

“Sole article. There is no reason for granting the pardon asked by the criminal convicted of homicide, Zeferino Avalos, of the penalty of death, to which he was sentenced by the superior tribunal of justice of the State.”

In view of this result, the execution of the criminal Zeferino Avalos was ordered, which took place in Piedras Negras the 25th of March last, having been attended by the Twenty-sixth Battalion of the line, commanded by its worthy colonel, Pedro Troncoso, which execution was reported in the note herewith inserted.

“To-day, at 7 o’clock a.m., the penalty of death was executed on the person of Zeferino Avalos, for the crime of homicide, in the cemetery of this town, which act I attended in compliance with the communication you were pleased to send me for such purpose under date of yesterday, which I have the honor to report to you for the proper ends.

Liberty in the constitution.

Piedras Negras, March 20, 1879.

F. M. GALINDO. (A rubric.)

To the Judge of Letters of the District of the Rio Grande, Present.”

By order of the magistrate of the first chamber I have made this hasty extract of the cause of Zeferino Avalos.

Saltillo, September 29, 1879.
FELIX M. SALINAS,
Secretary.

A seal which says: “Superior tribunal of the State of Coahuila.”

Compared.

The president of the superior tribunal:

MARTINEZ ANCIZA.

I, Hipólito Charles, constitutional governor of the free and sovereign State of Coahuila, Zaragoza, certify that the signature authorizing the extract of the principal proceedings in the case of the criminal Zeferino Avalos is that of the president of the superior tribunal of justice, Licentiate Jesus Maria Martinez y Anciza, and which he uses in his official acts, to which may be given the faith and credit which the laws authorize.

Palace of the Government, Saltillo, September 29, 1879.
H. CHARLES.

Miguel Gomez y Cardenas,
Secretary.

A seal which says: “Government of the free and sovereign State of Coahuila de Zaragoza.”

Superior Tribunal of Coahuila.

Superior Tribunal of Coahuila,
Saltillo, January 29, 1879.

Copy of the final sentence pronounced in the court of last appeal in the case instituted against Zeferino Avalos for the murder of Antonio Muñoz, perpetrated in the territory of the United States of the North.

Having examined the proceedings in the trial commenced on the 26th of November, of the year before last, before the first local judge of Piedras Negras, against Zeferino Avalos, a resident of that town, who is twenty-six years of age, married, and second sergeant of the Corps of Military Colonies, for the murder on the left bank of the Rio Grande, United States of the North, perpetrated on the person of Antonio Muñoz, having seen the original and the translation of the evidence taken by the judge of Maverick County, concerning the crime and its author, with the verdict of the coroner’s jury, which declared: “First, Antonio Muñoz died in consequence of a bullet wound inflicted with a fire-arm, the projectile entering on the left of the nose, following an upward, oblique direction, thus fracturing the superior jaw, and penetrating the brain; and, second, said bullet wound was inflicted by Zeferino Avalos, the 26th of November, 1877, on the (left) bank of the Rio Grande, town of Eagle Pass, Maverick County, State of Texas, thus causing instant death;”

Having examined the proceedings of the local judge of Piedras Negras, embracing the declaration of the criminal, testimony of the witnesses, investigations, certificates of the death of the deceased, the confession and self-accusation of the criminal, the defense made, and the sentence pronounced by the judge of letters of the district of the Rio Grande, which, considering the killing committed by Zeferino Avalos as premeditated, with advantage and treacherously, the death penalty was pronounced against him in accordance with article 561 of the penal code in force, and leaving the resources of the law upon civil responsibility to the relatives of the deceased;

Having examined the petition in which it is asked that the sentence of the lower court be revoked, and that the penalty of fifteen years’ incommutable imprisonment be imposed on the criminal, said petition being based upon the extenuating circumstances that the criminal was intoxicated, and that there not having existed any cause for the perpetration of the crime, it should be considered that there were no premeditation, advantage, and treachery;

Having examined the sentence pronounced by the third chamber of this superior tribunal, reversing the sentence of the lower court and condemning the criminal to fourteen years’ imprisonment and detention for a time equal to one-fourth of that term, the magistrate of that chamber having based his action on the extenuating circumstance of partial intoxication, as well as on that of the crime having been committed without a cause, and considering the case comprehended in article 552, clause 3 of the penal code;

And, finally, having examined the note addressed by the secretary of foreign affairs to this superior tribunal, asking a report as to the state of the cause in which sentence was pronounced as far back as the 17th of May of the last year by the judge of letters of Piedras Negras, as well as asking for a certified copy of the final sentence that may be pronounced, from which it appears; 1st. That on the 26th of November, 1877, Zeferino Avalos, second sergeant of the military colonies, took a skiff to go on a visit to the other side of the Rio Grande.

2d. That while in the middle of the river he drew his pistol and fired two shots toward the Mexican side in the direction of several women washing.

3d. That being rebuked for .this by the boatman, he replied in a naughty tone that “when he wished to kill a man he killed him.”

4th. That having crossed the Rio Grande, he went toward an unfortunate blind beggar, who, guided by a boy about twelve years old, was six or eight yards from the water’s edge, and Avalos, having drawn his pistol, pointed it at the unhappy blind man at a yard’s distance from him, when he fired, the victim falling to the earth, dying instantly.

5th. That the murderer returned immediately; he wished to take a skiff to recross the Rio Grande, and fearing he would not be permitted to do so, threatened the owner of the skiff with his pistol, who was thus forced to cross him.

6th. That the crime, although committed within the sight of several persons, they were not at such a distance as to be able to hear what passed between the victim and the murderer, but that the boy, Celso Farias, who was guiding the blind man, says that when Avalos approached he said he wished a prayer said, to which Muñoz replied, refusing, saying that he did not know how to say prayers; that he lived by his work, so as not to ask alms; and that as he said this the murderer fired the shot which deprived him of his life.

7th. That the criminal has confessed in several parts of the proceedings that he was the author of this grave offense, and, although at the commencement he gave as a reason that the blind man had insulted him and threatened to take his pistol from him, besides this being improbable, he afterwards contradicted himself, stating that he had committed the murder under the influence of liquor, and it should be held as undeniable that neither the one nor the other is the real cause for the perpetration of the crime.

8th. That from the evidence of several witnesses it appears that Zeferino Avalos, while intoxicated, is a provoking, quarrelsome, and cruel and treacherous man, which detestable qualities caused him to be feared by the people.

9th. That on the other hand, the unfortunate blind man, Antonio Muñoz, was of a prudent and peaceable character, and having an unimpeachable name.

10th. That all the eye-witnesses declare, with one accord and unanimously, that Avalos at the moment of the murder did not appear to be intoxicated, because he acted as though he were in the full enjoyment of his mental faculties, taking rapid flight, getting into the skiff, threatening the owner with his pistol in case he should not be permitted to repass the river, &c.

Considering: 1st. That the fact of the crime, which must be the base of all judicial proceeding, has been thoroughly proven in this case by the following proceedings: the depositions of the American physicians, Drs. Charles Frederick and Charles Strauss, and the Mexican experts, Manuel Herrera and Rafael Bernal, according to which the wound received by Muñoz deprived him instantly of his life, without it being possible for human skill to have saved him, or anybody in his situation; the certificate of death by the judge of Eagle Pass, certifying to the act of the coroner, and a multitude of other relative proceedings.

2d. That with respect to the author of this crime, there are two classes of proofs against Zeferino Avalos, his judicial confession, which is repeated several times, and the uniform depositions of four or more persons who witnessed the act.

3d. That, as to motives, there is no information of any, except that stated by the boy Farias, who was guiding the blind man, which motive for an able and overbearing man might have been sufficient of itself to produce rage, upon seeing himself treated contemptuously by the unfortunate blind man, whom he intended to make sport of by asking him to say a prayer.

4th. That it may be held as undeniable that the homicide was committed with advantage, which is proven, according to article 517, clauses 1, 2, and 4, of the penal code, by a young, strong, and armed man attacking an unfortunate blind man, who is weak, old, and without the means of defense.

5th. That another evident truth is that the homicide was perpetrated with treachery, which, according to article 518 of the said code, consists in attacking a person by taking him unawares, or by employing means which do not give time for defense nor to avoid the injury intended.

6th. That there appeared in this grave offense the aggravating circumstances referred to in article 44, clauses 1, 5, and 8; article 49, clauses 9 and 14; article 46, clause 11; article 47, clauses 3 and 10.

7th. That with respect to extenuating circumstances, the only one it has been attempted to allege, is the plea of partial intoxication; further, it is another fact, thoroughly evident, that said circumstance should not be accepted, in the first place, because it is not proven in these proceedings, as is stated in paragraph 10 of the results; and, secondly, because article 41, clause 1, of the penal code, positively provides that it must be accidental or involuntary, and exactly the contrary appears respecting the drunken, vicious, and incorrigible murderer.

8th. That in virtue of the foregoing the inferior court has judged the acts properly and made a proper application of the penal laws, in imposing on Zeferino Avalos the punishment which he deserves, and as the third chamber has revoked that sentence, it is necessary to give the reasons the first has for not agreeing with such a respectable authority.

9th. That the decision of the third chamber is based on article 552, clause 3, of the penal code, which says: “Twelve years’ imprisonment shall be imposed for simple intentional homicide, when the criminal commits it without cause and only on account of his brutal ferocity.”

10th. As it is necessary to fix with all clearness the true meaning of the article of the code, it is proper to note that chapter 6 speaks of simple homicide, and that name is given, according to article 550, to homicide not premeditated, nor committed with advantage, by treachery or by treason. In consonance with this principle, article 552, upon which the third chamber based its action, says that twelve years’ imprisonment shall be imposed upon whoever shall commit homicide without cause, and on account of his brutal ferocity, if it is simply intentional (let this phrase be well understood); hence, if the homicide was not simple but qualified, that is to say, committed with premeditation, advantage and treachery, or treason, the criminal deserves the death penalty, although he may have perpetrated the crime without any cause whatever, and only on account of his brutal ferocity. Such is the argument called contrario sensu, which in law has great force, as it is derived from the very prescriptions of the law

11th. That examining the definition which, according to the first chamber, should be given to article 552, clause 3, of the penal code, the case provided for in it would, for example, be the following: If the criminal Zeferino Avalos, thirsting for human blood, should attack, without any cause whatever, a passer-by, who being opportunely warned of the danger, should make use of his arms, defend himself, and be killed in the fight; but if the said Avalos, with no other motive than his ferocious pleasure, should arm himself with a knife, go into the streets of a city, and commence to cut the throats of the women, children, blind men, cripples, and all other defenseless persons, to qualify those acts as simple homicide, thus freeing from the death penalty that savage beast in human shape, would be contrary to common sense, and it should not be supposed that the legislator desired to decree such an absurdity.

12th. That on the other hand it cannot be maintained that Zeferino Avalos acted without any motive whatever when he murdered the defenseless blind man, Antonio Muñoz, because to the passionate and cruel character of the criminal, the fact of the blind man having refused to comply with his humiliating demand to say a prayer in order to mock him, might have been deemed sufficient motive for the commission of the deed.

13th. That even if it is the duty of the third chamber to blindly follow the law, according to the principle, judices non de lege sed secundum legem debent judicare, clause 3 of article 552 having no application, the observation is permitted that it would be extraordinary or, rather, impossible for a crime to be committed without any cause whatever. The magistrate occupying the first chamber professes the philosophic principle taught in law schools, that nihil est in mundo materiale sine ratione sufficiente. That principle has exact application in the physical and moral orders: there is no effect without a cause, and no human action without a motive to cause it.

14th. That even supposing a homicide should be committed without any cause whatever, the law, by insuring life to whoever kills only on account of his brutal ferocity would establish this repugnant and absurd principle: taste for human blood constitutes an extenuating circumstance.

15th. That the principle established by law should have a general application, and if in the article discussed it is maintained that there may be a homicide without a cause, then it should be allowed that robbery, rape, and other crimes may be committed without a cause, and merely from ferocity, which consideration taken in connection with the others mentioned should, in the humble opinion of this chamber, influence the legislator to derogate clause 3 of article 552.

16th. That it is a badly applied compassion to preserve the lives of such criminals as Avalos, because, although the death penalty is cruel, it is more so for the judicial authorities to permit outlaws to impose it on innocent persons, upon the beneficent members of society.

17th. Considering, finally, that the right of the authorities of Mexico to try this crime committed in the territory of the United States of the North, is recognized in-various parts of the proceedings, as well as authorized by article 186 of the penal code in force.

In view of the said considerations and legal grounds, the magistrate who constitutes the first chamber of the superior tribunal resolves: 1st. The sentence of the third chamber, which condemned the criminal Zeferino Avalos, for qualified murder, to fourteen years of imprisonment with an additional time equal to one-fourth of the term, in detention, is revoked.

2d. The sentence of the judge of letters of the district of the Rio Grande is confirmed in all its parts, which condemned the criminal to the death penalty.

Let notification be given, and send the proceedings of this cause to the said judge of letters that this sentence may be executed in conformity with the prescriptions established by the laws, and, this being done, he will return the proceedings to the secretary of the tribunal to be placed in the archives.

Thus decreed, ordered, and signed the magistrate.

I bear witness.

Licentiate JESÚS MA. MARTINEZ ANCIZA. (A rubric.)

Felix Maria Salinas, Secretary. (A rubric.)

A true copy, to which I certify.

Saltillo, September 29, 1879.
Licentiate JESÚS MA. MARTINEZ ANCIZA.

Felix Ma. Salinas, Secretary.

A seal which says: “Superior tribunal of Coahuila.”

I, Hipólito Charles, constitutional governor of the free and sovereign State of Coahuila de Zaragoza, certify that the signature of Licentiate Jesus Ma. Martinez Anciza, president of superior tribunal of justice of the State (of Coahuila), which certifies to the foregoing copy of the final sentence, is that which the said magistrate uses on Ms official acts, to which the faith and credit authorized by law may be given.

Palace of the government, Saltillo, September 29, 1879.
H. CHARLES.

Miguel Gomez y Cardenas, Secretary.

A seal which says: “Government of the free and sovereign State of Coahuila de Zaragoza.”

[Inclosure 2 in No. 1073.]

Mexican penal code.

[Extract.—Translation.]

Article 186.

The offenses committed in foreign countries by a Mexican against Mexicans or foreigners, or by a foreigner against Mexicans, can be punished in the republic and in accordance with its laws, if the following circumstances concur: 1st. That the accused party be in the republic, whether he may have come voluntarily or his extradition be obtained.

2d. That if the offended party be a foreigner, the complaint be made from a legitimate quarter.

3d. That the criminal shall not have been definitely tried where the offense was committed, or, if he should have been, that he should not have been acquitted.

4th. That the offense of which he may be accused have the character of a crime in the country where it shall have been committed and in the republic.

5th. That the crime, according to the laws of the latter, involves a punishment greater than “greater arrests” (imprisonment from one to eleven months).

No. 454. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 454.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 24, 1879. (Received January 13, 1880.) No. 1075.]

Sir: In my No. 966, of May 31 last, I referred to the failure of the Mexican Congress to approve the contracts made by the executive for railroads to connect with the American frontier; and with my No. 1014, of August 16 last, I sent as inclosures extracts from the reports of the congressional committee on the Sonora Railroad concession, showing the grounds of the opposition in Congress to that enterprise.

I have to report that at the last session of Congress, which terminated on the 15th instant, the same spirit of opposition to American railroad connections was manifested by that body, and neither the Rio Grande nor the Sonora projects were able to obtain a favorable consideration. An abstract of the Sonora charter was transmitted to the Department with my No. 874, of January 28 last.*

At the instance of the congressional committee and the executive, this charter was materially modified and again submitted to Congress at the last session; but even in its modified form its friends were not able to secure for it a fair hearing, much less a vote upon its passage. The clause (see my No. 874, inclosure 6, article 11) which made the company and all of its employés Mexicans, and prohibited them from alleging their foreign nationality in the amended charter, is sought to be made even more prohibitory, and a paragraph is added as follows: “The foreign diplomatic agents shall not be able to have any intervention in matters which relate to the company.”

Another amendment which has been made in the proposed new charter is an embodiment of the decree of February 1, 1856, prohibiting foreigners to acquire real estate within twenty leagues of the American frontier, against which discrimination you have heretofore instructed me to protest; and the company is limited in its ownership of real estate “to the road itself and its absolutely necessary dependencies, in the judgment of the department of public works, with whose express permission in each case the acquisition of said real estate shall be made.”

Even with these and other modifications made in the interest of Mexico, the charter could not be brought to a free discussion or vote. In my No. 874 I referred to the fact that the gentlemen seeking the charter, failing in obtaining the approval of Congress, were seeking to revive through the minister of public works an old charter granted to David Boyle Blair in 1875, which had lapsed. It is now understood that they will make use of the transfer of said charter, which was made June 19, 1877, and which they have hesitated to use, hoping for the confirmation of their new charter by Congress. I inclose herewith a translation of the decree of transfer of the Blair charter.

It will be seen that the power of the Executive to revive and transfer the Blair charter is assumed to exist in the second clause of section 3 of article 33 of said charter, which reads as follows: “In any of the cases here specified, the company shall lose the concessions granted in this law, of which the government will be able to dispose at its will.” For the better understanding of the question, I inclose a translation of the entire article referred to in the decree of transfer.

I understand that some of the best constitutional lawyers in Mexico have given an opinion that the Executive has full power to make the transfer. On the other hand, the opponents of the project contend that the clause quoted was intended merely to take away from Blair or his assigns any claim to the franchises, and to leave the Mexican Government free to confer them upon other parties; that it was never designed to confer the power upon the Executive alone to revive and transfer a forfeited charter, and that the term “government” refers to the lawmaking power, the legislature and executive departments combined.

The grantees have obtained from the minister of public works authority to proceed with their surveys and with the construction of the road from Guaymas to the American frontier, under the Blair charter, only reserving to the government the right to substitute for it the contract of charter now pending in Congress, if that body shall approve the same within one year. I inclose a translation of the agreement, made by the minister on the 12th instant, conferring this authority.

As it is expected that the enterprise will be undertaken by an American corporation, the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé Railroad Company, I have thought it proper to communicate the foregoing facts, with translations of the official papers, to the Department for its information,

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in 1075.—Translation.]

Transfer of the Blair charter.

department of public works, colonizaton, industry, and commerce of the mexican republic, section 3.

The President has been pleased to address me the following decree:

“Porfirio Diaz, Constitutional President of the United Mexican States, to the inhabtants thereof. Be it known:

“That in exercise of the faculty conceded to the Executive in paragraph 2, fraction III, article 33, of the law of June 17, 1875, I have thought proper to decree the following:

“Sole Article. The concession granted June 17, 1875, for the construction of a railroad, with its corresponding telegraph, in the State of Sonora, which concession was declared expired on the 12th instant, is transferred to Messrs. Sehastian Camacho (in representation of Mr. Robert R. Symon) and David Ferguson.

“In consequence, I order it to be printed, published, circulated, and duly complied with.

“Given in the National Palace of Mexico, June 19, 1877.

“PORFIRIO DIAZ.

“To Vicente Riva Palacio,
“Minister of Public Works, Colonization, Industry, and Commerce.”

And I communicate it to you for the necessary ends.

Liberty in the constitution.

Mexico, June 19, 1877.
RIVA PALACIO.

[Inclosure 2 in 1075.—Translation.]

Article 33 of the Blair charter.

Art. 33. The concessions made in this law will cease to have effect on account of any of the following causes: 1st. For failing to comply with any of the obligations specified in the clauses of article 32.

2d. For not constructing the first 50 kilometers, the sections of 200 kilometers each two years, and for not concluding the principal line from Guaymas to the frontier of the north, within the periods fixed in articles 4 and 5.

3d. For disposing of or transferring this concession or the rights derived from it to a foreign government or state, or for admitting one or the other as a partner in the company. In any of the cases here specified the company shall lose the concessions granted in this law, of which the government will be able to dispose at its will; but the said company will retain the right to the houses it may have constructed, the part of railway and telegraph it may have established, the materials, engines, and tools employed in the construction, and the public lands corresponding to the number of kilometers of railway it may have constructed.

[Inclosure 3 in 1075.—Translation.]

Agreement of minister of public works.

(Seal.)

Mexican Republic, Department of Public Works, Colonization, Industry, and Commerce, Mexico, Section 3, No. 1550.

I have reported to the President of the Republic your communication in which you manifest that in accord with the desires of the federal executive and of the respective committee of the Chamber of Deputies of the Congress of the Union, you agree to the definitive amendments to be made in the concession of the Sonora “Railway, dated June 16, 1875, adjusting to them the new contract which is pending approval of Congress in the present session; and it being neither just nor convenient to the public interests nor to those of the Sonora Railway Company for the work for which everything is prepared, to be delayed for a longer time, and being entirely conformable to the-amendments made in the original concession which was transferred to you by decree of June 19, 1877, to which amendments you have agreed and they will form a part of the contract with the government, and which you will accept as a law, when approved by Congress, without invoking per contra the stipulations in the original concession which may be opposed to them, as you declare that they have been dictated with your approval by this department and with the concurrence of the said second committee of industry of the chamber of deputies, with the understanding that Congress shall give its approbation, you solicit:

That the said amendments be signed in duplicate, you retaining one copy;

That orders he issued to the engineer appointed by this department to present himself in the shortest possible time in Guaymas;

That the instructions communicated to the federal authorities and private individuals of Sonora to assist the company in the manner expressed by the concession upon the commencement of work, be repeated; and, lastly,

That the necessary orders be issued that the custom-house of Guaymas may permit the introduction free of duties of the material and effects destined for the Sonora Railway, in compliance with the relative articles of the law of the concession.

In reply, and by express direction of the supreme magistrate, I have to state to you that the petition in question being taken into consideration, the chief of the executive power has been pleased to accede to the said petition, signing in consequence apart of the amendments adjusted and issuing the orders asked, with the understanding that the company will await the approval of the said amendments, at least until the 15th of December of the next year, it being required to state in reply its agreement to this term.

Liberty in the constitution.

Mexico, December 12, 1879.
M. FERNANDEZ,
Chief Clerk.

To Messrs. David Ferguson and Robert R. Symon,
Grantees of the Sonora Railway, Present.

* See Foreign Relations, 1879, p. 774.

No. 455. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 455.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 24, 1879. (Received January 13, 1880.) No. 1076.]

Sir: The Department has doubtless been kept advised by Mr. Scott, the consul in Chihuahua, of the progress and results of the revolution in that State which occurred during the months of October and November. The revolutionary movement was inaugurated with the object of getting rid of the governor, General Frias, which was accomplished by armed force, after various encounters and military movements.

Upon the occupation of the State capital by the “pronunciados,” the legislature was convened, and Sr. Tenazas, a former adherent of President Lerdo, was elected provisional governor. The latter has been recognized by the federal government, and the new State officials are in full possession of power.

With these violent political movements in Mexico our government has no concern except so far as they affect American interests, and I regret to call attention to the fact that the American residents of Chihuahua have suffered the usual experience in such cases—forced loans,, violent seizure of property, and disregard of their rights. These are set forth fully in the letter which the consul has addressed to this legation, a copy of which I inclose herewith.

The consul’s complaints are of two kinds: 1st. The forced loans levied and collected upon the American citizens named; and, 2d, the rights and privileges of the consul and the consulate.

I have, in an informal way, presented the cases of the forced loans to the acting minister of foreign affairs, and spoken incidentally to the President on the subject.

The forced loans were levied by the “pronunciados” before the new governor was elected, and on the approach of General Trevino, the commander of the federal forces, the leader of the “pronunciados” retired from the city, but I have insisted with the minister that as the object of the revolution was to overthrow the Frias government and install a new one, that, as the money taken from the American residents by armed force was used to carry out that object, and that as the new government established by the “pronunciados” is now in complete possession or” the State and recognized by the federal executive, the money taken from the American citizens should be returned to them. The minister has promised to obtain full information on the subject, and has manifested an apparently good disposition to have the money refunded if a proper way can be found to do so. I am, therefore, not without hope that I may be able to secure its return.

I respectfully submit the second point presented in the consul’s communication to the Department as to the rights and privileges of the consul and consulate, asking special instructions if it is desired that I should make any representation to the Mexican Government on the subject.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in 1076.]

Mr. Scott to Mr. Foster.

United States Consulate,
Chihuahua, November 17, 1879.

Your note of October 3 came duly to hand. I did not answer it at once, because I knew my reply would in all probability miss you.

I have not yet given up hopes that you may visit us, but I write this hoping to intercept you at Durahgo, so you may be informed of how matters are progressing here. I will now state as briefly as I can what has occurred.

On the 31st ultimo the “pronunciados” against the State government entered the city, about 100 strong, taking the governor prisoner. Their first act was to set at liberty ail the criminals confined in the jail, which act was not calculated to inspire confidence. On the 4th instant the commandant levied a forced loan of $10,000, of which $1,000 was assigned to H. Muller, $500 to H. Nordwald, and $800 to F. Macmanus & Sons, of which you know I am a member. Mr. Muller was absent from the city, and only returned a few days since.

On the 7th four officers and six soldiers entered the house of H. Norwald and took the $500, against which he protested before both myself as consul and a notary public, witnesses. All the officials of the general government, the Gefe de Hacienda, director of the mint, Administrador del Timbre, the telegraph and post-office, deposited their books and valuables in this consulate, for what I presumed was protection and security.

On the 5th instant Messrs. F. Macmanus & Sons deposited all their cash and securities in this consulate, a due record of which was made in the books of this office.

On the morning of the 14th instant an officer brought an order, a copy of which I inclose. I explained to him that the firm was F. Macmanus & Sons, and not Macmaims Bros., as they had put in all their notices, and told him to bring an order addressed to the firm and I would then act upon it.

Before leaving the officer desired to know whether I would pay the money. I told him the money of the firm was deposited in the consulate, and I would shield my interests by the protection of my office, which guaranteed to me exemption from all forced loans, and I showed him the treaty on the subject.

Before he left he told me he would exact $1,800 and take it by force if I made any resistance or did not pay the money on his demand. He then left, and I retired to the street, locking the front door, attached to which was the coat of arms, fully determined to let them break the door open and take what they pleased.

At this juncture my friends advised me not to run useless risks, as it would do no good, &c.

Before long they came, four officers, a blacksmith with his tools to cut away the locks, and fifteen soldiers, all fully armed. These were drawn up in line, and about a stone’s throw from the house. I demanded his order, and he presented it, being the same as the other, with this exception, it was addressed to F. Macmanus &, Sons. I requested time to call on the commandant, which was reluctantly granted. The result was, of course, nothing gained.

On my return I saw resistance was more than, foolish, and concluded that I could not afford to pay $1,200 additional just to have them effect an entrance by force, so I unlocked the front door and they passed in through the zaguan (main door) and thence into the office of the consulate, where were assembled a notary, the German vice-consul, and witnesses. As they laid hands on the bags of money I protested, saying that this was the consulate of the United States, and that the money they were about to take had been deposited in the consulate for protection, all of which went into one ear and out of the other, and, as I wrote to the Department, “they have our money and we have our protest.” Their argument was about this: “As a consul we respect you; but you are also a merchant, and as a merchant you have no rights, and you must pay the money, or suffer the consequences.” They told Mr. Nordwald’s representative in answer to his question by what authority do you demand of me a loan of $500?” The reply was, “Our right is in our power,” and they have clearly proved it. I may be wrong, but it has occurred to me that they cannot touch the property of L. H. Scott as a merchant, illegally, without trespassing upon the privileges of L. H. Scott as consul, and upon this ground I propose to force the matter to a complete and perfect understanding as to the rights of an American consul in Mexico, and the power and willingness of our government to have those rights respected.

They say the young Messrs. Macmanus are Mexican citizens, and I cannot shield their property. What I claim is this, that when they force money from F. Macmanus & Sons, they force money from me, which they have no right to do under our treaty. Then, again, they force money from the estate of F. Macmanus which is certainly an American interest.

We would all be much gratified to have you pay us a visit, and I particularly would like your advice and counsel on this subject.

I am, &c.,

LOUIS H. SCOTT.

No. 456. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 456.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 26, 1879. (Received January 13, 1880.) No. 1077.]

Sir: In your dispatch No. 669, in which instructions were given me in reference to my recent visit, my personal views were solicited, derived from immediate observation, concerning the state of affairs on the Texas border, with special reference to the zona libre and its commercial effects on the United States.

In previous dispatches at various times during my residence here I have given the Department the history of the zona libre, and shown that it was forced on the country by the Mexican frontier towns; that both the ministers of foreign affairs and of finance have acknowledged that it was unconstitutional and unjust, in conceding to one portion of the nation franchises not allowed to the other inhabitants; and that it is recognized as a serious injury to the Mexican treasury. I do not deem it necessary to do more than refer to these dispatches.

This zone was established in the year 1858, when the American tariff was lower than that of Mexico, and much below what the American tariff was a few years later. Until the zone was created the Mexican population on the right bank of the Rio Grande found it greatly to their interest to make their purchases on the Texas side of the river, and take the chances of their clandestine introduction into Mexico; hence the towns on the American bank were enjoying more trade than those on the Mexican side. To overcome this inequality the governor of the State of Tamaulipas, without any constitutional authority to do so, established the free zone, which permitted the free introduction of foreign goods into all the towns on the right bank of the Rio Grande, and his act was, three years afterwards, approved by the Federal Congress.

During our civil war, when it became necessary to greatly raise our tariff, and for a number of years thereafter up to a recent period, this zone has been the seat of operations of bands of smugglers, whose occupation it was to introduce foreign goods clandestinely into the United States.

Owing to the derangement of business and the increase of the American tariff, occasioned by our civil war, almost the entire trade in manufactured goods and foreign products of the Rio Grande frontier was transferred to Europe, and these goods being admitted free into this zone, there was inducement for them to be smuggled across into Texas, to the serious injury of the United States revenues. Hence, for years past, this has been a source of grave complaint on the part, of our government, and during President Grant’s administration the attention of Congress was directed to the subject in his messages.

In the past two or three years the situation has materially changed. The decline in price of manufactured goods in the United States and our increased spirit of commercial enterprise enables the American merchants on the Texas side of the river to compete successfully in many classes of goods with the merchants in Mexico who import from Europe. The practical result is that, in cotton fabrics and many other articles, the Mexican frontier is supplied almost entirely from the United States, and the inducements for smuggling into Texas have greatly diminished. Our customs authorities along the Rio Grande, as well as the citizens in general, informed me on my recent visit to that region that the smug gling of foreign merchandise from the Mexican free zone had almost entirely ceased. On the other hand, my observation led me to the conclusion that this zone was made the base of operations for quite an extensive system of smuggling of American (as well as European) goods into the interior of Mexico. It is the practice of Mexicans to cross the river to the American towns and purchase our cotton and other goods, and introduce them without hinderance into the zona libre, whence they are clandestinely taken into the adjoining States of this republic; so that the measure which was originally intended to be a protection to Mexican interests and an obstruction to American commerce in its practical workings is just now proving to be the contrary. While I cannot regard the continuance of the zona libre as a friendly act toward the United States, my recent visit satisfied me that it was a much greater evil to Mexico itself than to our country. The existence of such a discriminating territory must always be a source of annoyance, and ought to be abolished if we are ever to have a legitimate and cordial commercial intercourse between the two countries, but at present it is the occasion of greater damage to the government and people who created it than to its neighbors.

The inhabitants of the free zone are most strenuous advocates of the measure, and the people of the adjoining regions in Mexico who do not enjoy the same privilege are earnest advocates of the extension to include them in its limits. In a protest adopted by the State legislature of Coahuila last month against the creation of a federal district for the Sierra Mojada mining region in that State, it is stated that when General Diaz was organizing his revolution in that State, in 1876, he promised its people that when he attained to power he would extend the zona libre to the whole territory of Coahuila, and in said protest he is arraigned for not fulfilling his promise.

This incident is cited to illustrate how desirous the inhabitants of the Mexican frontier are to continue and extend its franchises, and how embarrassing it would be for the present administration to restrict or abolish it, although it sees and acknowledges its unjust effects upon the rest of the country and its injury to the national treasury.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 457. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 457.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, December 27, 1879. (Received January 13, 1880.) No. 1078.]

Sir: I am gratified to be able to report that in my recent visit to the Mexican frontier States, I found a condition of peace and a better measure of order than is customary on the Rio Grande. I met General Treviño, commanding the Northern division of the Mexican army, in Durango, and General Can ales, commanding on the lower Rio Grande, at Matamoros, and had several private and lengthy interviews with them, as also with the governors of the frontier States of Coahuila, Nuevo Leon, and Tamaulipas, and from all of them I received the most hearty and cordial expressions of good will toward the United States, and of all earnest desire to preserve the peace and suppress outlawry on the border. I found also that there was an improved state of feeling between the populations on the opposing banks of the Rio Grande.

I have never doubted the good disposition of the administration of General Diaz in respect to the frontier relations. But, in the midst of the constant turmoil in which his government is involved, which requires his greatest attention to interior a flairs, the poverty of his treasury, which makes it difficult to maintain a large force at points so distant from the capital, and the slender tenure by which he exercises authority in the extreme States, there has been a great tendency to neglect frontier affairs and to leave their administration much to the local and State authorities. I have had occasion heretofore to express the opinion that the firm attitude of our government respecting the Rio Grande border in 1877 has had more to do with the comparative peace which that region has enjoyed, than any voluntary action of the Mexican Government, and my personal observation in that region has confirmed me in ibis opinion.

* * * * * * *

It became matter of the first importance for the administration of General Diaz to give the suppression of disorder and raiding on the border preferred attention; hence, the Federal forces there were increased, the commanders, governors, and local authorities received strict and urgent orders, and the present improved condition of affairs is the consequence.

I am satisfied that President Diaz sincerely desires that this satisfactory situation of our frontier relations shall continue, but it is by no means certain that it will even last until the end of his term in November next.

So long as a moderate degree of peace exists, the two divisions of the army now near the Rio Grande, with the aid of the local authorities, can preserve order and in great measure restrain raiding. But, only last month, General Treviño was called away to Chihuahua with a considerable portion of his most available force, the cavalry, to suppress a local revolution in that State, and his return is quite uncertain. The presidential campaign is about to commence, and in times past it has almost invariably been the signal for pronunciamiento and wide-spread revolution, and there are no indications that the coming campaign will be an exception. The country will disappoint the predictions of the most experienced observers, if it is not, during the coming year, involved in such disorder as will require the undivided energies of the government to suppress them, in which case very little attention will be given to frontier affairs.

Besides, the indications are that during the coming year the Mexican borders of Texas and New Mexico are likely to be the scenes of more serious Indian troubles than for some years past.

Upon the urgent demand of our government made through this legation, a somewhat vigorous campaign was undertaken last year against the Kickapoo, Lip an, and Mescalero Indians in the State of Coahuila, who had been accustomed to raiding with disastrous results into Texas. Quite a number of these Indians were captured and brought into the interior of Mexico, and the incursions across the Rio Grande were mostly stopped. But on my late visit I learned that most of the Indians taken into the interior of Mexico had returned to their old haunts, and unless great vigilance is exercised a renewal of their accustomed raids into Texas may be apprehended.

It appears to be a well authenticated fact, both from Mexican sources and the reports of our army officials in Texas and New Mexico, that a large number of Indians have escaped from our reservations and are now hiding in the mountains of Chihuahua. The Mexican Government can scarcely command sufficient force in that distant region to exterminate or expel them. It is almost certain that they will at all favorable opportunities make incursions into Texas and New Mexico with the usual results of murder and rapine.

The conclusions reached by me as to frontier affairs are that while we must recognize the good intentions of the Mexican authorities and give them due credit for the measure of peace and order now existing, we can have no guarantee that such a state of affairs will long continue.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 458. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 458.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, January 7, 1880. (Received January 26.) No. 1089.]

Sir: I inclose herewith the report of Consul Turner of the revolutionary movement in Lower California which has placed that territory in the hands of the “pronunciados.”

You will note in the report the usual experience in all these disorders, the levy of forced loans, and the violent methods of imprisonment and personal violence to exact them. As stated in my No. 1074, of the 23d ultimo, the repetition of such occurrences is to be expected, in view of the approaching presidential election and the unsettled political condition of the country. * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in 1089.]

Mr. Turner to Mr. Strother.

United States Consulate,
La Paz, December —, 1879.

Sir: When I wrote my last dispatch, November 15, I, with everybody else, supposed that our revolutionary troubles were over, but the facts go to show that nothing is more uncertain than affairs in Mexico.

The troops, over 100 in number, sallied in pursuit of the “pronunciados,” hut these, not more than 70 in number, and most of them rancheros, and poorly armed, led them into an ambuscade, and through the stupidity, treachery, or cowardice of their officers, defeated them, killing 20 or 30 and taking the rest, with very few exceptions, prisoners. The news of this reached La Paz on the night of the 19th ultimo, and early on the morning of the 20th, General Carbo and the governor commenced evacuating the place. Before 12 m. they had everything, including all the federal and most of the municipal officers, on board the gunboat Demócrata, and they left the town at the mercy of the “pronunciados,” and without any government whatever.

On the 22d, General Marquez came in and took peaceable possession of everything. On the 24th, Marquez levied a “préstamo” of $6,000 upon the merchants, and, they not paying promptly, put them, or their head clerks (in the absence of their principals), in prison, without food or water, until they came to terms.

On the 30th the Demócrata and Mexico came into Pichilingue and blockaded the port strictly, permitting nothing to enter. On the 4th instant the Demócrata left, we supposed, for Mazatlan. On the 8th the Mexico came up and anchored in front of the town, and the “pronunciados” fired upon her with muskets. The ship returned the fire with musketry and a few shells and canister-shot from her 4-inch rifles, by which some little damage was done to buildings, one man killed, and one woman wounded. The next morning some more firing, but no harm done, and the firing soon ceased and ail was quiet the rest of the day.

On the morning of the 10th, the Mexico returned to Pichilingue, and in the afternoon the Demócrata went into Pichilingue and anchored.

This afternoon another “préstamo” was called for, which some paid and some did not; those who did not being imprisoned.

This morning we hear that the regular steamer will probably not touch here, and having an opportunity to forward this to Mazatlan by private hands I avail myself of it.

Much suffering already exists here among the poor, as business of all kinds is suspended, and unless the government soon takes measures to relieve us, La Paz is going to be completely ruined.

I am, &c.,

DAVID TURNER.

No. 459. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 459.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, January 12, 1880. (Received January 24.) No. 1092.]

Sir: In my No. 979, of June 28, 1879, referring to your No. 636, asking for information in regard to the suit brought by P. B. Chishem to recover a forced loan, I reported all the facts then in my possession.

I am now able to send you herewith a translation of the full record of proceedings in the suit.* From this judicial record it will be seen that a forced loan was levied in March, 1879, by a colonel commanding a force of adherents of Vice-Govera or Serna, in the revolution which ousted Governor Mariscal from the State government of Sonora. As a part of this loan, the American citizen, Peter B. Chishem, paid under protest the sum of $150. After its payment Mr. Chishem brought suit in the federal district court for the recovery of the money, and, upon a full investigation of the facts, the district judge decided in favor of Mr. Chishem, and against the legality of the forced loan. The case was taken to the federal supreme court, and this decision was unanimously confirmed and returned to Guaymas for execution.

The consul writes me that the State treasurer has replied to the demand under the decision that the forced loan be returned to Mr. Chishem, that there is no money in the treasury for such purpose, and that payment cannot be made until the State legislature by special act provides for the same.

Under the rulings of the federal court in other cases the revenues of a State cannot be embargoed by the Federation. The case has accordingly been sent back to the supreme court for its further instructions to the district judge.

It thus appears that while the forced loan has been declared by the highest tribunals of the country to be illegal, there has as yet been found no means whereby the wrong may be remedied, and the money returned to Mr. Chishem. If American citizens resident in Mexico, who are so often the victims of such illegal exactions, are compelled to await the action of the State legislatures to secure a return of the property taken from them through illegal means by subordinate military authorities, it will in most cases amount to a virtual confiscation. Up to the present the Federal Congress has adopted no measures to repay the forced loans exacted by the authority of General Diaz in the revolution of 1871–’72, and that of 1876, which placed him in possession of the government, and if the national authorities are so reluctant or slow to make provision for these unconstitutional levies, it is not to be expected that the State legislatures will be more ready to respect the decisions of the courts.

If any further proceedings are had in the courts, or other steps taken for the recovery of Mr. Chishem’s money, I will advise you.

I am, &c.

JOHN W. FOSTER.

* Inclosure omitted owing to its length.

No. 460. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 460.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, January 14, 1880. (Received January 26.) No. 1093.]

Sir: In the month of November last, one Moses Thatcher, reported to be a high official in the Mormon Church of Utah, and two associates, arrived in this city with the avowed object of propagating their faith. Their presence here has given occasion to the report that their main object was to make some arrangement with the Mexican Government for the settlement in the northern states of Mexico of Mormons from Utah, in view of the threatening attitude of affairs in that Territory.

The organ of the executive department of the government, the Diario Oficial, of the 12th instant, referring to this report, states that the person named has not presented himself to any of the departments, which is understood to be a denial of the report, so far as the government has any knowledge.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

No. 461. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. No. 461.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, January 23, 1880. No. 713.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 1073, of the 18th ultimo, concerning the procedure of the Mexican judicial tribunals of the State of Coahuila in the trial, conviction, and execution of Zeferino Avalos for the murder of another Mexican committed in Texas, was duly received.

The Department agrees with you as to the value of the precedent thus established under the operation of the Mexican penal code.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 462. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 462.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, February 5, 1880. (Received February 24.) No. 1101.]

Sir: With my No. 969, of June 7, 1879, I sent you a copy of the contraband law passed by the Mexican Congress, imposing penalties of imprisonment for its violation. Since it went into operation three cases have occurred in the Pacific ports where American citizens have been imprisoned, and all of these cases have been the occasion of complaints to this legation.

The first of these was that of Captain Metzger, the master of the American steamer Newbern, of which the Department is already fully advised. The second case was that of Mr. Kemp, arrested at Manzanilla, for a clerical error in the consular invoice, which error was manifest upon the face of the document itself. Notwithstanding this fact, Mr. Kemp was arrested and imprisoned, and only after an expensive litigation was acquitted and discharged. I made this case the subject of a note to the acting minister of foreign affairs, in which I suggested the propriety of the Mexican Government examining the question with a view to directing the customs officials to exercise some reasonable discretion in such cases, when the errors are clearly clerical, and where no intent to commit a fraud exists. The minister in his reply limited himself to inclosing me the decision of the court acquitting Mr. Kemp.

Since writing my note regarding Mr. Kemp’s imprisonment, I received information of the arrest of Captain Jacobson, of the American schooner Dreadnaught, by direction of the custom-house authorities of Acapulco, his imprisonment, trial, and acquittal by the federal court, upon trivial and unfounded charges of violation of the contraband law. These three cases in the three leading ports of the Pacific seemed to establish the fact that the customs authorities were disposed to use the new contraband law to unnecessarily harass American citizens, as, in every instance, the federal courts decided that the law had not been violated and the arrest and imprisonment were not justified. Accordingly, in acknowledging the receipt of the minister’s note, I thought proper to again direct his attention to the subject of my previous note, and sought to impress upon him the desirability of having instructions issued to the customs officials to exercise some reasonable discretion in cases similar to those which had occurred. I said to him that it was a poor compensation for the wrong perpetrated upon the personal rights and reputation of American shipmasters and merchants to obtain a judicial decision in their favor after an expensive and annoying litigation, and that if the practice in force at the chief ports of the Pacific was to be persisted in, he might anticipate new reclamations on the part of the individuals aggrieved and remonstrance on the part of my government.

I inclose herewith copies of the correspondence relating to this subject. No answer has yet been received from the foreign office, but the minister has stated to me verbally that lie has directed the attention of the department of finance to the matter, and that he will in due time reply to my notes. I regard it as a question of importance for American shipping and commerce, and will endeavor before my departure for my new post to obtain some relief from future annoyances.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 1101.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Zárate.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, January 16, 1880.

Sir: I take the liberty of inclosing to your honor a copy of a communication received from the consul of the United States in Manzanillo giving an account of the imprisonment of an American citizen for error in an invoice of goods imported at said port. It would appear from the consul’s statement of facts that the error was upon its face a plain clerical one, and the conduct of the consignee in bringing the matter promptly to the attention of the collector of customs would indicate that there was no intention to commit a fraud on the revenue.

As the case has been submitted to the federal courts, I anticipate the answer which would be given, should I present a formal reclamation, that the executive cannot interfere with the judicial department of government; and such is not my purpose at this time. My object is rather to suggest the propriety of the proper department of your honor’s government examining this question of errors in invoices and ship’s manifests to ascertain if it would not be to the interest of the Mexican Government as well as of commerce to direct the custom-house officials to exercise some reasonable discretion in such cases as the one now under consideration, where the error appears to be manifestly a clerical one, easily corrected by the invoice itself, and where no intent to commit a fraud exists.

Clerical errors are likely to occur under the most exact business system, and if consignees or masters or other officers of vessels are to be arrested and thrown into common prisons of the ports with the lowest class of criminals, when the error is manifest and no fraud intended, a persistence in such a practice can not fail to have an injurious effect upon commerce and the fair name of the government. I recognize the necessity of great strictness on the part of the customs officials in enforcing the tariff regulations; but in such cases as the one referred to there would seem to be an unnecesssary harshness which can not fail to react to the injury of the treasury sought to be protected. I have not the slightest disposition to embarrass in any way the operations of the tariff laws, but in my great desire to encourage a growth of the trade between the United States and Mexico, I have ventured to make the foregoing suggestions, in the hope that they may meet with the favorable consideration of your honor’s government and relieve American merchants and vessels from the hardships to which they are being subjected.

With the, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 1101.]

Mr. Morrill to Mr. Strother.

Consulate of the United States,
Manzanillo, January 6, 1880.

Sir: I have to report that the United States schooner Nidras, from San Francisco, anchored at this port November 24, 1879, bringing among other freight 162 packages of goods for Frank B. Kemp, a native of Boston, United States.

Among the 162 packages were 100 cases of coal-oil, the gross weight of which was entered exact, but the net weight was by mistake entered 650 pounds instead of 6,500, as it ought to have been, in the consular invoice.

On arrival of the vessel Mr. Kemp having discovered the mistake, presented his invoice to the collector, calling his attention to the mistake, and asked what was best to do, declaring that it was a simple fault of the pen. The collector answered that he could discharge the goods, and they would arrange it satisfactorily, on which advice the goods were discharged. Finally the collector decided that it must go to the district judge of Colima, who put him (Mr. Kemp) in prison in the municipal building, and his goods remain in the custom-house at Manzanillo. Mr. Kemp got sick where he was confined, but, on application, he was transferred to this consulate, under a bond, subject to the final result.

I put in his defense the 3d instant, and expect a decision very shortly, He is charged with criminally introducing goods with intent to defraud the government under the new contraband law of last June.

All of which I respectfully submit for your superior intelligence.

I am, &c.,

AUGUST MORRILL,
United States Consul.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 1101.— Translation.]

Mr. Zárate to Mr. Foster.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, January 27, 1880.

Mr. Minister: With reference to my note of the 21st instant, and for the information of your excellency, I have the honor to inclose a copy of a communication which under date of yesterday was sent me by the department of finance, and of the decision pronounced by the district judge of Colima acquitting Mr. Frank B. Kemp in the suit prosecuted against him on suspicion of defrauding the public treasury.

I improve, &c.,

JULIO ZÁRATE.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 1101.]

Mr. Foster to Mr. Zárate.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, January 30, 1880.

Sir: I have to thank your honor for the information contained in your note of the 27th instant and its inclosures, of the release from imprisonment of the American citizen Frank B. Kemp. This action of the judicial authority, following upon that of the acquittal of Captain Metzger, of the American steamer Newbern, and the subsequent release from imprisonment of Captain Jacobson, of the American schooner Dreadnaught, goes to strengthen the suggestion made in my note of the 16th instant that instructions be issued to the customs authorities to exercise some reasonable discretion in the cases of manifest clerical errors, or immaterial defects in invoices and manifests. An examination of the decisions of the three tribunals in the cases cited, will show that in all these instances the customs authorities have acted without legal justification in causing the arrest and imprisonment of the American citizens named. It is a poor compensation for the outrage perpetrated upon their personal rights and their reputation to obtain a judicial decision in their favor after an expensive and annoying litigation, and if the practice in force at the chief ports of the Pacific is to be persisted in, your honor may anticipate not only new reclamations on the part of the individuals aggrieved but most earnest remonstrance on the part of my government.

It was with the object of avoiding such grave difficulties that I was led to make the suggestion contained in my note of the 16th, and I think an examination of the three decisions referred to will enable the department of finance to frame some appropriate instructions to the customs authorities with that end in view.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 1101.]

Mr. Sutter to Mr. Strother.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Acapulco, January 17, 1880. No. 15.]

Sir: On the arrival at this port of the American schooner Dreadnaught, of San Francisco, on the 27th of December ultimo, the master of said vessel at the time she was boarded by the custom-house officials, delivered to the “comandante de celadores” a list of stores and other articles, written in the English language, as well as a list of his personal effects. When the master, J. H. Jacobson, came on shore I asked him if he had been very particular in manifesting to the custom-house everything he had on board, to which he replied in the affirmative. However, when he, on further inquiries on my part, told me he had some dry goods, flour, &c., on board, in excess of the ship’s stores proper, I, anticipating trouble with the custom-house, at 9 a.m. of the day of his arrival, sent a telegram to the minister of finance, in behalf of Captain Jacobson, requesting him to grant to the captain the privilege of disposing of his goods here, at Acapulco, on payment of single duties. This privilege had been granted last year to two German vessels, Polynesia and Rosa and Isabel.

At about 5 p.m. of the same day, I was requested to call at the custom-house on urgent business. At the same hour I received a telegram from the minister of finance with instructions for Captain Jacobson to forward to him a petition made out in due form. This telegram I presented to the collector, who, as well as the “visitador” showed themselves rather indignant because I had addressed their superior, as they said, without giving any notice to them of the existence of such goods on board of the schooner Dreadnaught. I simply referred them to the list of “stores and other articles” the captain had delivered in the morning to the proper official, in compliance with the laws of the country, assuring them that no disrespectful action on my part toward them had been contemplated. They then only discovered that the list in question presented by the captain had not been translated as yet, when I offered my services for the purpose, and was then requested to see that the captain make out in the Spanish language, two distinct lists, one containing the shipments proper, and the other showing all the articles the captain might dispose of. This was done in good faith the same evening, and on the morning of the 28th, I presented them myself to the collector, who appeared to be satisfied, and showed me a telegram he addressed to the minister of finance informing him of the receipt of the said two lists, and asking him for further orders.

On the 29th Captain Jacobson forwarded to the minister of finance his petition made out in due form, stating that having found a return cargo of cedar lumber at Manzanilla, he had now no necessity to proceed to Amapala, Honduras, a free port, for such a cargo, and was anxious to dispose of these few goods here, provided he was permitted to do so on payment of single duties, cost price of goods approximating $1,000.

On the same day the vessel commenced unloading the manifested cargo for the house of A. Demproolff, and I supposed that nothing else would be done in the matter until the minister of finance might communicate his decision of the case to the customhouse and to the captain, when, to my great surprise, I was informed, on the morning of the 31st, that the schooner had been seized the night previous, and that the captain was brought on shore as a prisoner.

Shortly after 8 a.m. the captain of the port called at my office, bringing Captain Jacobson with him, and informing me that he had received orders for seizing the vessel and arresting her master from the district court, and that out of respect to the ladies on board, Mrs. Jacobson and Miss Johnson, he would not send any soldiers on board, but would simply order her sails to be landed. I thanked the captain of the port for his kindness, and accompanied him and Captain Jacobson to the court, where Captain Jacobson, myself acting as interpreter, was notified that he had been arrested, and his vessel seized on suspicion of having smuggled, the said charge being preferred against him by the custom-house. I then offered bail for the captain, which was accepted, and the captain was then notified he might remain at the consulate, instead of being confined in jail, until he should be sent for again. On our return to the consulate the captain entered his protest against any actions of the authorities of the port of Acapulco which might prove detrimental and injurious to his person, to his vessel, and to his other interests. Copy of this protest was at once served upon the district court.

After a great deal of trouble and worry, the district court of Acapulco gave the following decision, on the 14th instant, declaring that the charge of smuggling brought against Captain Jacobson was unfounded, inasmuch as he had manifested his goods not only to the custom-house, but even to the minister of finance; that, however, he must pay a fine of $1,000 imposed upon vessels in transit, by sections 7, 8, 9, and 10 of circular of the minister of finance of September 8, 1877, and section 2 of circular of April 11, 1878, for not bringing the proper documents covering goods in transit; that the goods be returned by steamer to San Francisco, and that the captain be set free and again placed in possession of his vessel.

The collector and accountant of the custom-house accepted this verdict, whilst Captain Jacobson, through me, appealed to the circuit court, protesting against the penalty of $1,000 imposed on him.

Captain Jacobson made a petition to the circuit court, and by next Monday’s mail the same, as well as all the required documentary evidence, will go forward to Mexico to the address of Messrs. A. Gutheil & Co., who have been requested by Mr. A. Demproolff to take the proper steps near the circuit court for obtaining the remission of the penalty of $1,000, and for working against the intrigues of the “visitador,” who, I am told, thinks vessel and goods should have been confiscated.

I would respectfully beg that yourself and Mr. Foster, if acquainted with the (promotor fiscal) District Attorney Licenciado Montiel y Duarte, approach this gentleman unofficially, recommending him to consider the case favorably, or that you kindly consult with Mr. Sammer, of Messrs. Gutheil & Co., what had best be done in the matter.

In the mean time Captain Jacobson has presented to the custom-house a petition stating that, on account of the prolonged stay at this port, and by reason of the heavy expenses he has incurred, he is in need of money, the more so should the sentence of the court be confirmed compelling him to pay the fine, and asking that his goods be admitted on payment of single duties, instead of being returned to San Francisco. The collector advised him to make this application, and promises to recommend it favorably to the minister of finance. Should it be granted, it would be a great step in the right direction.

On Monday we shall ask the court to let the vessel depart under bond to be given by merchants residing here, and have reasons to believe that I shall succeed, and save her any longer delay at this port.

I shall continue to inform you of the proceedings in the case, and once more bespeak your good offices in behalf of the captain and vessel.

Your obedient servant,

JOHN A. SUTTER, Jr.

No. 463. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. No. 463.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, February 20, 1880. No. 725.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 1076, of the 24th of December last, has been received. . It relates to a forced loan recently exacted from Messrs. Macmanus & Sons at Chihuahua, of which firm Mr. Scott, the consul, is a member. The exaction is believed to have been contrary to public law and in this case, as the officer pursuant to whose orders it was carried into effect was in the service of the Mexican Government for the time being, it is expected that that government will duly reimburse the victims.

This may be particularly claimed on behalf of the consul, who is especially exempted from such charges by the twenty-ninth article of the treaty of 1831. It is true that it does not appear that Mr. Scott was required to pay anything except as a partner in the firm adverted to, and that it may not have been easy at the time to ascertain the extent of his interest in that firm, even if there has been a disposition to limit the exaction accordingly.

It appears that the consular office was made a place of deposit, not only for the available funds of Macmanus & Sons, but of other American citizens engaged in business in Chihuahua. When payment was first demanded of Mr. Scott he refused it, and closed the doors of his office against the officer who made the demand. The latter soon afterwards reappeared with an additional force, when Mr. Scott concluded that further resistance was useless, and opened his doors accordingly, when the officer obtained the sum required.

Even supposing that the consul had been engaged in no other business than that of an official character, there is nothing in the treaty which guarantees to his place of business freedom from search. There is a distinct guarantee of the archives and papers of the consulate, but it is not alleged that these were disturbed.

Pursuant to the thirty-first article of the treaty, the parties agreed to enter into a special convention for defining the powers and immunities of consular officers.

Several attempts have been made for this purpose, but all have hitherto proved abortive. If any such convention should go into effect it might be expected, like others, to contain an article specially exempting the offices of consuls from being entered by the authorities of the country. At present no such exemption can be claimed by us as a matter of right in Mexico, especially in cases where a consular officer is a member of a mercantile firm and his place of business is the same as that of the firm.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 464. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. No. 464.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1880. No. 727.]

Sir: The copies herewith inclosed of a letter addressed to me by the Secretary of War, under date of the 25th ultimo, and of a note of this date, written by m e to the Mexican minister at this capital, Señor de Zamacona, will acquaint you with the decision of this government to consider the instructions contained in the order of June 1, 1877, from the War Department, contemplating and providing for a direction to General E. O. C. Ord, that under certain circumstances therein set forth he might pursue raiders across the border into the Republic of Mexico for the purpose of punishing them and recapturing stolen property, as no longer operative.

This signal proof of the President’s conviction that the Mexican Government is in a position to insure the full protection of life and property on the borders, lately the scene of marauding incursions, is but another of the many recent evidences of the good-will existing between the two republics.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 727.]

Mr. Ramsey to Mr. Evarts.

War Department,
Washington City, February 25, 1880. (Received February 26.)

Sir: I have the honor to inclose for your information copy of my letter of the 24th instant to the General of the Army, informing him that he is to consider the instructions of the order of June 1, 1877, issued to him by this Department, which contemplate and provide for a direction to General Ord, that under certain circumstances therein set forth he may pursue raiders across the border for the purpose of punishing them,, as well as recapturing stolen property, as no longer in force.

Very respectfully, &c.,

ALEX. RAMSEY,
Secretary of War.

[Inclosure in inclosure in No. 727.]

War Department,
Washington City, February 24, 1880.

General: General E. O. C. Ord, commanding the Department of Texas, having; stated in his annual report that the condition of affairs which rendered necessary the order of June 1, 1877, to cross the border between the United States and Mexico, in his opinion, no longer exists, as the Mexican Government has shown its ability and determination to put a stop to the invasions of the United States which gave rise to it, and such recommendation of General Ord having been considered by the President in connection with other information in possession of the government to the same effect, the President desires to recognize in this well-proved ability of the Mexican Government to restrain effectively violations of our territory a proper occasion to accommodate your instructions to the present condition of things on this border.

You are therefore to consider the instructions of the order of June 1, 1877, issued to you by this Department, which contemplate and provide for a direction to General Ord, that under certain circumstances therein set forth he may pursue raiders across the border for the purpose of punishing them as well as recapturing stolen property, as no longer in force.

You will therefore instruct General Ord to, this effect, and desire him to communicate this information to the Mexican military authorities along the border, enjoining also upon General Ord the utmost vigilance on his side of the line, and a prompt report of any change of action or disposition on the part of the Mexican military force that may endanger the permanence and security of the present peaceful situation on the border.

Very respectfully, &c.,

ALEX. RAMSEY,
Secretary of War.

The General of the Army.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 727.]

Mr. Evarts to Mr. Zamacona.

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1880.

Sir: It affords me pleasure to herewith communicate to you for the information of your government, a copy of a letter addressed on the 24th instant by the Secretary of War to the General of the Army, informing him that he is to consider the instructions contained in the order of June 1, 1877, from the War Department, contemplating and providing for a direction to General E. O. C. Ord, that, under certain circumstances therein set forth, he might pursue raiders across the border into the Republic of Mexico for the purpose of punishing them, and recapturing stolen property, as no longer operative, and directing him to so advise General Ord.

It has afforded much satisfaction to the President to find in the actual situation upon the borders, in the undisturbed security against violence that has for some time been maintained there, in the spirit and conduct of the military efforts made by Mexico to observe its international obligations in preventing invasions of our territory, and in the judgment of our own military authorities that the order of June 1, 1877, need no longer be kept in operation, good grounds for the action indicated in his last message to Congress, and now taken.

I sincerely hope that no future occurrences upon the border may disturb the present cordial relations now established between the two countries.

Be pleased to accept, &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 465. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. No. 465.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1880. No. 728.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 1101 of the 5th ultimo, in relation to the imprisonment of citizens of the United States by Mexican custom-house authorities under the “contraband laws” of the republic, for slight clerical errors in invoices.

The Department is pleased to note the emphatic position taken by you upon this subject, and it is hoped that you will continue to energetically press upon the Mexican Government the justice and importance of a more liberal construction by its officials of the law in question or a modification of its obnoxious features. A too rigid application of the law cannot but injuriously affect the commercial interests of both countries, and if persisted in, after friendly remonstrance, could not fail to produce a feeling of irritation at a time when the best endeavors of the two governments are and should be directed to developing the largest measure of international good-will and removing every cause of difference.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 466. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 466.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, March 1, 1880. (Received March 22.) No. 1108.]

Sir: During the suspension of diplomatic relations between Mexico and Belgium, it has been the practice of this legation and the consulate in Mexico, when proper occasion required, to extend their good offices to Belgian residents in this country.

These relations having been recently restored, the Belgian minister plenipotentiary near this government has sent me a note, of which I inclose a translation, expressing to our government the gratitude of His Majesty’s government for these services.

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in No. 1108.—Translation.]

Baron Greindl to Mr. Foster.

Belgian Legation,
Mexico, February 29, 1880.

Mr. Minister: In reply to a letter by which I reported to Brussels that I had entered upon my duties, the minister of foreign affairs has instructed me to express officially, through your excellency, to the Government of the United States the gratitude of the King’s government for the protection extended to the Belgian subjects during the interruption of diplomatic relations between Belgium and Mexico.

In acquitting myself of this agreeable duty, I avail myself, &c.

GREINDL.

No. 467. Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts. No. 467.
Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, March 15, 1880. (Received March 29.) No. 1.]

Sir: I have to report that Mr. Foster, late minister near the Government of Mexico, took his departure from this city on the 13th instant to assume the duties of his mission to Russia.

Before his departure, Mr. Foster was the recipient of attentions of the most marked and flattering character from Mexicans and foreigners. A banquet was given him by the President in the national palace, when the President proposed a toast in honor of Mr. Foster, which was replied to in appropriate terms by that gentleman. The American residents of this city complimented him with a ball on the 2d instant, upon which occasion they presented him with a testimonial, of which I inclose herewith copies, accompanied by other memorials of esteem. The British residents, in recognition of official and social services rendered in the absence of a diplomatic representative of their own government, also presented Mr. Foster with a testimonial similar to the one above mentioned, of which copies are likewise inclosed, with other appropriate memorials.

I am, &c.,

EDWARD M. NEILL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 1.]

[From the Two Republics.]

Presentation of memorials to the Hon. John W. Foster and Mrs. Foster.

The undersigned American citizens, resident in the city of Mexico, in view of the approaching departure of the Hon, John W. Foster from a post which for seven years he has filled with honor to his country, credit to himself, and beneficently for the interests of his countrymen, beg leave to offer this testimonial as a spontaneous expression of the very high appreciation which his social qualities and efficient public services have secured for him from all who have enjoyed the privilege of his personal friendship, or who have had just occasion to claim his official aid, counsel, or protection, and while most heartily approving the well-merited recognition which the Government of the United States has accorded to his fidelity and ability in promoting him to a higher diplomatic position, their congratulations are mingled with regrets deepened by a sense of personal loss, in parting with a gentleman whose house has been so long the center of social hospitality, and with a national representative whose name has always been a synonym of personal honor and irreproachable official integrity.

City of Mexico, March 2, 1880.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 1.]

Mexico, Sunday, March 14, 1880.

[From the Two Republics.]

The presentation to the Hon. John W. Foster by the British residents.

Mr. Thomas Horncastle, in the name of the British residents, said:

“Mr. Foster, the few British residents in this city are desirous to present you with a memorial, in proof of the high esteem and respect they entertain for yourself and Mrs. Foster.

“We have chosen this picture, the work of a Mexican gentleman, as a specimen of native art, and to remind you whilst in other lands of a country wherein you have been so deservedly respected for the strict integrity and intelligence which have so marked your character in its public capacity, as well as for the kindly friendship and genial hospitality which have graced your private social life.

“This gift which we present to Mrs. Foster is an emblem of those brilliant qualities which have so endeared her to all who have enjoyed the pleasure of her society or the honor of her acquaintance. These sentiments are contained in the written testimonial attested by our signatures as a record for the future, which Mr. Wastall will now read.

“In conclusion, whilst wishing you happiness and prosperity in the future, we trust that during the brilliant career which in time to come will no doubt attend you, you will sometimes remember your English friends in Mexico.”

Mr. James Wastall read the following:

“To the Hon. John W. Foster and Mrs. Foster:

“We, the undersigned British residents in the city of Mexico, imbued with a warm appreciation of the genial and hospitable spirit which has animated your home amongst us, beg to express our fervent hopes that happiness equal with the honor of the past may attend your future career; and we ask you to accept, in remembrance of the country that gave us greeting, a work of native skill and character, and further pray that the good fellowship of our respective nations, speaking the same language, may be as lasting as the gem respectfully offered in token of our admiration and esteem.

“Mexico, March, 1880.”

No. 468. Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts. No. 468.
Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, April 2, 1880. (Received April 19.) No. 5.]

Sir: On the 16th ultimo information reached this legation to the effect that three Americans had been murdered at or near Anganqueo, a mining town in the State of Michoacan, and within a few minutes thereafter a telegram was placed in my hands which confirmed the above report.

Without waiting for further information than that contained in the said telegram, which was sent by a prudent and reliable person, I addressed a note, of which I inclose a copy, to the secretary of foreign affairs, transcribing the telegram, and stating that I felt assured the Mexican Government would act in the premises with due energy. The day following I received a note from the department of foreign affairs, of which a translation is herewith transmitted, inclosing copies of telegrams exchanged between the federal authorities in this city and the federal and local authorities in the State of Michoacan in relation to the occurrence at Anganqueo, the secretary stating that the government expected further details. Subsequently I have received a communication from Messrs. Stephens and Fagan, the only survivors of the Americans engaged in mining at Anganqueo, and a statement of the whole occurrence by Mr. Arthur Kitchener, the director of the Trojes Mining Company for which the Americans were boring a tunnel. I inclose copies of these communications. Mr. Kitchener’s statement is accompanied by legal documents proving the fact of the death of John Connolly, Henry Toumans, and George Arnold, all three, it is asserted, being natives of the State of New York.

As will be seen by the documents furnished by the department of foreign affairs, the government acted with all possible promptness, although, so far as I am informed, the only arrests made up to the present time are the two referred to by Mr. Kitchener.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

EDWARD M. NEILL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 5.]

Mr. Neill to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, March 16, 1880.

Sir: It is my painful duty to inform your excellency that a telegram has been received in this city announcing the murder at or near the Trojes Mines, Anganqueo, Michoacan, of three American citizens. The telegram referred to is as follows:

“Three of our Americans killed. Great disturbance. Troops on the road to our assistance. Communicate to consul. Particulars to-morrow.”

I make this communication to your excellency, fully assured that such prompt and energetic measures will be taken by your government as the circumstances of the case may require.

I embrace, &c.,

EDWARD M. NEILL.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 5.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Neill.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, March 17, 1880.

Sir: I had the honor to receive your honor’s note of yesterday, in which you are pleased to transcribe a telegram from Anganqueo, State of Michoacan, in which is announced the murder of three American citizens, and you ask that the government dictate such prompt and energetic measures as the circumstances of the case require.

Even before receiving your honor’s note, immediately upon receipt of intelligence of that unfortunate event, the President had earnestly recommended, through this department of government, the governor of that State to take, with the greatest activity, all the measures within his power to discover the culprits, for the purpose of inflicting upon them prompt and exemplary punishment, as your honor may see by the inclosed copy, numbered 1.

According to Nos. 2 and 3, which I also inclose, it appears that the tumult was caused by several Americans having killed a Mexican operative. The goverement expects soon to receive an exact statement of the occurrence at Anganqueo.

Upon replying with the foregoing to your honor’s note, I improve, &c.

M. RUELAS.

(Copy, No. 1.)

The governor of the State of Michoacan, in a telegram of yesterday, says:

“The prefect of Zitácuaro says to me: ‘Yesterday there was a tumult between the operatives and the Americans of the mining district of Anganqueo. Of the former two were killed and one wounded; and of the latter, three were killed; a house was hurt.’ The prefect is already en route to that point with a force. I take measures. I will communicate details when they are received.

“In the same manner I replied to said governor the following: ‘Your telegram of yesterday, relating to a tumult, which occurred on the 13th in Zitacuaro, between operatives and Americans of the mining district of Anganqueo, has been received. By direction of the President, I recommend you to be pleased to dictate with the greatest activity the measures which you may deem necessary in order to discover the persons responsible for such a serious crime, consigning them to the proper authorities, with a special recommendation to hasten the proceedings so as to secure prompt and exemplary punishment.’ And I have the honor to transcribe it to you for your information.”

Liberty in the Constitution.

Mexico, March 16, 1880.
BERRIÓZABAL.

To the Secretary of Foreign Affairs.

(Copy, No. 2.)

Mexican Republic, Department of War and Marine, Section 1.

General Abraham Plata telegraphs me the following from Morella:

“To-day, the colonel of the second corps of auxiliaries communicated to me from Maravatio the following: ‘Captain Ocanas reports from Zitácuaro a mutiny in Anganqueo. There were five persons killed, I have ordered forces to that point. I go with 50 cavalry.’

“I asked information and the major of the same corps replied to me with the following: ‘The colonel has marched with 55 men. The detachment from Zitácuaro has marched. A. servant of the house of Murga, who left Anganqueo this morning, reports that the miners mutinied against the company on account of the killing of an operative, and burnt a house, and that four foreigners were killed. Nothing unusual on this line.’”

And I transcribe it to you for your information.

Liberty in the Constitution.

Mexico, March 16, 1880.
MONTESINOS.

To the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Present.

(Copy, No. 3.)

Mexican Republic, Department of War and Marine, Section 1.

General Abraham Plata reports to this department to-day, by telegraph, the following: “In a telegram, which I received last night, the colonel of the second corps of auxiliaries reports to me the following from Anganqueo: ‘Order restored; tumult between operatives and American company, the result being three Americans and five operatives killed. I will give you a detailed report by mail. I await your orders.”

“I directed said officer to remain at that point until further orders.”

And I inclose it to you for your information.

Liberty in the Constitution.

Mexico, March 16, 1880.
By order of the minister.
MONTESINOS.

To the Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Present.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 5.]

Messrs. Stephens and Fagan to Mr. Neill.

Trojes, March 16, 1880.

Sir: We are the two men mentioned by Mr. Kitchener as being the only ones of our party of five who escaped from the Mexicans who attacked us on Sunday last. He has read his letter over to us, and we wish to state that his description of the disturbance, as far as evidence will allow at present, is correct.

As citizens of America we appeal to you as the representative of our country, and we feel confident that you will do all in your power to obtain compensation to us for our losses, and protection for our lives; also protection for the company, which, through their officers here, have made such heroic efforts to deliver us, and to whom we owe our safety at this moment.

As soon as possible we shall inform you as to the extent of our losses, which we cannot clearly estimate at present, as the authorities have yet in their keeping the goods saved from the wreck.

We are, &c.,

CLINTON STEPHENS.

ANSEL FAGAN.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 5.]

Mr. Kitchner to Mr. Robert Geddes.

The Trojes Mining and Smelting Company,
Anganqueo, March 16, 1880.

Dear Sir: I have to inform you of a very painful occurrence which happened to three of the Americans who were engaged in mining operations for the Trojes Mining and Smelting Company, which I represent, and I must request you to place the following information before the proper American officials in Mexico, to enable them to take any steps that their government may think advisable for obtaining compensation for the loss of life and property.

First of May, 1879, Messrs. Sullivan and Fagan signed in the city of New York the inclosed contract with the Trojes Mining and Smelting Company. In the month of November they commenced work on a large scale under the immediate direction of Mr. Clinton Stephens. He was accompanied by Ansel Fagan, one of the parties to the contract, Mr. Arnold, son of a gentleman who was directly interested in the undertaking, Mr. Connolly, managing engineer under Mr. Stephens, and Mr. Henry Youmans, machinist, all of them American born citizens. Since their arrival the work has been in constant progress, native labor being largely employed by them, but until the late disturbance we saw no serious signs of any outbreak amongst them. It is true that several times the lives of all us Protestants have been threatened, and some little time before the Americans arrived printed notices had been posted on the walls of the houses stating that the foreigners in the company’s employ would all be killed. Later on it seems that Mr. Connolly, one of the deceased, had received notices that he would be one of the sufferers, but like the rest of us took little notice of their repeated threats; indeed, we were all under the impression that he was one of the most popular foreigners amongst us, being a good Roman Catholic, strict in his attendance at chapel, and a great friend with the priest of the village.

Our company had their smelting works and chief offices, &c., situated at Trojes, a distance of about 5 miles from the village of Anganqueo. The American contractors hired the use of a house situated near the mouth of the San Hilario tunnel, on the road to Trojes, and about three-fourths of a mile from the village of Anganqueo.

On the evening of Saturday, the 13th, I left Anganqueo to spend the Sunday at Trojes, as was my custom. The following day being Sunday and a general holiday, my manager, Mr. Tregoning, an Englishman, and Mr. Fagan, one of the American contractors, came over to spend the day at Trojes, with the intention of returning to Anganqueo that same evening. This was quite a rare occurrence, that both my manager and myself should be absent from Anganqueo at the same time. About 6.20 p.m. Don Emilio, Mexican, brother-in-law of my manager, appeared at Trojes, having ridden in great haste. He informed us that he had met Mr. Clinton Stephens walking in the midst of an excited crowd towards the Casa Municipal. He accompanied him to the office and there stated to the authorities that a man had been killed by the Americans in self-defense, and that a large crowd was attacking the house, begging them to take soldiers and use their influence to stop further outrage. The crowd which accompanied Mr. Stephens being still much excited, the authorities took Mr. Stephens into the Casa Municipal for protection. In about fifteen minutes after their arrival the troops, numbering eight men, started for the scene of disturbance. Mr. Stephens remained under the charge of the authorities whilst Don Emilio started off for the scene of disturbance, arriving there about the same time as the soldiers. He described to us that there was an excited crowd of fully a thousand men surrounding the building which Connolly, Arnold, and Youmans had shut themselves into; he heard many shots fired, and attempts were being made to fire on the building lighted fagots to burn the house down. The soldiers on arrival did not in any way better matters, but seemed to Don Emilio to mix with the crowd and rather increase the excitement. We have several witnesses who saw the soldiers later on fire on the Americans. Don Emilio tried to pass the crowd on the road to Trojes, but was finally turned back; he managed, however, in the excitement, to make his way by a small bridle track past the crowd, and as mentioned brought the first notice of the disturbance to us at Trojes. No other notice from the authorities or otherwise reached Trojes either then or later in the evening.

In a few minutes I and three men were in the saddle and galloped as fast as the horses could go to the scene of disturbance. Mr. Hillegust remained in charge of the smelter and arranged to collect further forces to follow us as soon as possible. On our arrival we found the contractor’s house still burning, and the dead bodies of Conolly, Arnold, and Youmans distributed about and so mutilated they were scarcely to be recognized. There were several small crowds of excited people about, but no attack was made on us, nor were there any signs of any soldiers or authorities to protect the bodies or property. As there was still doubt as to Mr. Stephens’s safety, and also, as I fully expected an attack might be made on the company’s house in Anganqueo, we followed on into the town, which was crowded with excited people, mostly collected around the Casa Municipal, in which Mr. Stephens was lodged. Being only a small party, we thought it better to remain in charge of the house until a superior force arrived. In the haste of our departure from Trojes I was quite unaware that Mr. Fagan intended coming to Anganqueo. I learned, however, after arriving that he had started a few minutes later than we; his horse, however, would not keep up, and he had been left behind by himself. Knowing, however, that a superior force would follow as speedily as possible, and that Mr. Fagan would naturally turn back to meet them, we remained in the house and received a communication from the authorities to say that Mr. Stephens was still unhurt, but that a large mob was still surrounding the building.

In about an hour and a half, an extra force in charge of our conductor, Herr Rieckmann, arrived, bringing with them Mr. Fagan, whom they had met waiting for them on the road, not, however, before three shots had been fired at him from the close neighborhood of the burning building. We now had a force of some 12 or 13 men, and the authorities sent word to say they would he glad if we would take charge of Mr. Stephens, as the crowd was still very excited, and liable to break into the Casa Municipal. This I only too gladly agreed to do, if they retained all the responsibility for his life, and in a short time he was handed over to our care. I then requested the authorities to remove the dead bodies, which was effected before morning.

Mr. Stephens then gave me the following account of what he had seen of the disturbance. He, Mr. Stephens, was in the engine-house, about 200 yards from their dwelling-house, when he heard five shots fired in that direction. He at once proceeded down to the house to make inquiries. Before turning the corner, however, he perceived an excited Mexican throwing stones at the house; he then heard another shot, and upon turning the corner he found a man wounded in the street. He next proceeded into the house and found there Connolly, Arnold, and Youmans. Mr. Connolly then gave to Mr. Stephens the following account of the disturbance: That the man wounded outside had in the morning disputed about the payment of an extra real (12½ cents) in his wages; that becoming troublesome, he, Connolly, had ejected him from the house. In the afternoon the same man returned and found Connolly sitting outside the house, and instantly commenced throwing stones at him, breaking the bench he was sitting on. Connolly retired into the house to avoid him; the man, however, commenced to stone the door, and Connolly was obliged to come out to put the man away. The man then attacked Connolly with a sword and drove him back into the house. Connolly then armed himself with a Colt revolver, and fired five shots without effect. This must have been intentional, as the distance was so close he would hardly fail in his aim. The man still persevering in his attack, Connolly, who in the mean time had armed himself with a breech-loading shot-gun, found himself obliged in self-protection to fire on him; the charge took effect in the legs, showing clearly even then that Connolly was trying to spare life.

Mr. Stephens, on hearing this account, told Connolly to accompany him at once to deliver himself up to the authorities. Mr. Stephens started on the road, and at once an excited crowd collected, as Connolly still remained behind in the house. Mr. Stephens returned for him, and they started together in the direction of the village, telling the crowd as they went that they were on their way to deliver themselves up to the authorities. For several hundred yards no violence was offered them, though the crowd increased in numbers and continued to insult them. Mr. Stephens then saw a man called Pedro Mondragon, gefe de Mangano, one of the authorities in the district, and who had previously expressed considerable friendship for Connolly, coming forward to meet them, and at once told Connolly to ask his friend to proceed with him to the authorities. Pedro Mondragon, however, drew his sword and rushed forward to strike Connolly, who avoided the blow by springing to one side, drew his pistol and shouted to the man to wait. Still, however, the man came on with his sword, and Connolly, wishing to prevent bloodshed, and seeing an opening in the crowd, turned to escape towards the house, when Pedro Mondragon gave him a blow with his sword. Mr. Stephens saw Connolly followed by Mondragon, and the crowd reached the house and closed the doors.

Mr. Stephens being unable to return to the house on account of the crowd, and wishful to seek assistance, proceeded on his way to the Casa Municipal, about three-fourths of a mile distant, followed the whole way by an excited crowd insulting him, whilst one man on horseback threw his lasso at him, luckily without success. He then met Don Emilio and proceeded to the authorities and gave himself into their charge as before mentioned.

On the same night (Sunday) the authorities took up the bodies to the Casa Municipal and also some of the goods saved from the burning building. Ail that evening-there was an excited crowd around the house containing the bodies, but only one shot was fired; in the morning Achilos Arinas, gefe de Policia de Ocampo, and Leon Torres arrived with an armed force of some 40 well-armed men, to our assistance. Being anxious to take Messrs. Stephens and Fagan to a place of safety, we notified the authorities of our intention to proceed to Trojes, after Mr. Stephens had given his declaration before the authorities. We started with the guard. On the way, part of our guard seized Pedro Mondragon, and took him to prison.

Owing to the probable excitement which might be caused by a foreign burial under such painful circumstances, we determined to bring the bodies to Trojes, for burial in the company’s vault. For this purpose I proceeded back to Anganqueo to take the bodies, but was detained several hours, through their having to await the arrival of officials from Zitácuaro, the capital of the district. They arrived late with a force of about 90 men and we started with the bodies on mules about half past six in the morning, arriving at Trojes about nine o’clock. When I read, over the bodies, the English burial service, several natives informed me that they saw the soldiers fire on the Americans. The inclosed letter from the doctor will show you the frightful death our friends were subjected to. Several of those present described the fearful madness of the people in mutilating the bodies, before and after death. One boy, by order of his father, lassoed poor Connolly when he was in a dying condition and dragged him about. By the first report we heard that six Mexicans were killed and many more wounded, but subsequently we heard that only two are dead and four wounded dangerously. As the Mexican bodies were at once removed, we had no means of judging the number. It is an important fact to note, that upon the authorities wishing to send a telegram for assistance Flaviano Arguillo, telegrafisto, refused to forward the message because it was Sunday and not office hours. The authorities did not enforce it.

The only men implicated in this affair that are yet taken are Pedro Mondragon and the boy who lassoed poor Connolly.

During the trouble, Mr. Hillegust in the company’s name applied to the inhabitants of Ocampo village, near Trojes. These responded to his call most promptly, and more-men than were required instantly offered their services. We wish especially that Achilos Arinas and Leon Torres might be officially thanked for the prompt manner in which they brought their forces to their assistance. We trust that when the excitement is somewhat less to give you more full details, and also to send you the certificates of death. I thought it advisable to at once stop all workings at the mines so long as this excitement lasts.

I trust you will represent these sad details to the representative of the American Government, as Messrs. Stephens and Fagan, as well as the company, are heavy losers-by the late disturbance, and we have every confidence that the American Government will do all that is fitting to obtain compensation for the loss of life and property and for the protection of all foreigners in the district. The goods saved from the burning house are still in the hands of the authorities, so that we are unable as yet to form an estimate of the losses.

Your obedient servant,

ARTHUR B. KITCHENER,
Director of Trojes Mining Company.

No. 469. Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts. No. 469.
Mr. Weill to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, April 12, 1880. (Received May 3.) No. 7.]

Sir: Referring to department’s No. 727, I have to state that I informed the Mexican minister of foreign affairs of the repeal of the order issued to General Ord by the War Department under date of June 1, 1877, and in reply I received from Mr. Ruelas the note of which I herewith inclose a copy.

I am, &c.,

EDWARD M. NEILL.

[Inclosure in No. 7.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Neill.

Department of Foreign Affairs, Mexico, March 20, 1880.

Sir: Your note dated the 17th instant, inclosing copy of a communication from the Department of War of the United States to the General in Chief of the Army, announcing the revocation of the order of the 1st of June, which authorizes the passage of American troops into Mexican Territory under circumstances which it describes, has been received.

The President has been informed of that measure, which was dictated by the Government of the United States in justice to Mexico, and sees in it a proof of the desire that the relations between the two republics may be sincere and cordial.

As the Government of Mexico participates in the same sentiments, I have the honor to state it to you, upon replying to your said note, to whom it is pleasant for me to-reiterate upon this occasion the assurances of my attentive consideration.

M. RUELAS.

No. 470. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan. No. 470.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State,
Washington, April 20, 1880. No. 8.]

Sir: Mr. Neill’s No. 5, of the 2d instant, has been received, and the graphic accounts it conveys of the tragic death of three American citizens at Anganqueo in the State of Michoacan, through the violence of a mob, have awakened the liveliest sympathy for the unfortunate victims of such lawless brutality. The prompt steps taken by Mr. Neill to bring the matter to the urgent notice of the Mexican Government deserve commendation.

So far as the occurrence at Anganqueo is now understood, from the telegrams of the Mexican authorities and the letter of Mr. Kitchener, it presents every evidence of being one of those wanton excesses of mob violence for which every government whose citizens have suffered thereby may well expect condign punishment to be visited by the justice of the community in which it has occurred. Without considering any question of private indemnity in advance of more complete information, I have now to direct you to express to the Mexican Government the confident expectation here entertained that nothing will be omitted towards bringing the offenders to the strictest justice according to law.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 471. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 471.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, May 4, 1880. (Received May 20.) No. 11.]

Sir: Your Department dispatch No. 8, April 20, 1880, has been received. I have, with great pleasure, communicated the same to Mr. Neill, in order that he may see that his action in the case of the three Americans murdered by a mob in the State of Michoacan is commended by you.

In obedience to your instructions, I have, in a note of this date to the minister of foreign affairs, requested him to inform me what steps, if any, had been taken to bring the perpetrators of this brutal murder to justice. A copy of my note I inclose.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure in No. 11.]

Mr. Morgan to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, May 4, 1880.

Sir: I have been instructed by the Department of State to express to the Mexican Government the confident expectation on the part of the American Government that the perpetrators of the murder of three American citizens at Anganqueo, in the State of Michoacan, by a mob, on or about the 16th of March, 1880, would be brought to the strictest justice according to law, and this, without considering any question of private indemnity due to the families of the murdered men.

I beg to call your excellency’s attention to your note to Mr. Neill, secretary of legation, of the 17th of March, 1880, in reply to his note addressed to your excellency of the 16th of March, in which he brings to your knowledge the facts and circumstances as he had learned them, of the murder of the American citizens herein referred to, in which you say that previous to the receipt of his note, the President, who had heard of the circumstance, had already earnestly recommended the governor of the State of Michoacan “to take with the greatest activity all the measures within his power to discover the culprits for the purpose of inflicting upon them prompt and exemplary punishment.”

I now respectfully ask your excellency to inform me, in order that I may communicate the facts to my government, whether the necessary steps have been taken by the government of the State of Michoacan to bring to justice the violators of the public peace who in open day (and who must therefore be well known), from the evidence which is in the possession of this legation, as well as from the evidence which must be in the possession of the Mexican Government, brutally murdered three peaceable American citizens.

Your excellency will please accept the renewed assurances of my very distinguished consideration.

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 472. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 472.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, May 18, 1880. No. 18.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 11, relating to the murder of three American citizens (John Conolly, Henry Youmans, and George Arnold) in Anganqueo on the 14th March last, I now have the honor to inclose translation of the reply which the minister of foreign affairs has made to my note of the 4th instant, as well as translation of report from the minister of justice to the minister of foreign affairs.

You will observe that except the bare statement of the minister of justice to the minister of foreign affairs that a judge had been ordered to investigate the melancholy occurrences of the 14th March, and that proceedings to that end were being conducted, there is no statement of who has been arrested, or what prospects there are of the guilty parties being brought to trial and judgment.

A sharp illness prevented me replying at once to the minister’s note and its inclosure. It was, however, so unsatisfactory upon every point of the inquiry which I propounded to him, that I this day addressed him another note, a copy of which I herewith inclose, and which I hope may produce a more satisfactory result. At all events, I forward the correspondence, up to date, in order that you may see precisely how the matter stands, and that you may give me such further instructions as, in your opinion, the case may require.

At the same time I inclose you copy of a letter addressed by me to Mr. Arthur B. Kitchener, under date of the 5th instant, with the view of having at hand all the information procurable with reference to the murder, as well as what steps had been, or were being, taken by the Mexican Government to ascertain who the murderers were, and to cause them to be punished.

A copy of Mr. Kitchener’s reply I inclose.

I am. &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 18.—Confidential.]

Mr. Morgan to Mr. Kitchener.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, May 5, 1880.

Sir: I beg you will inform me what, if anything, has been done by the Mexican authorities to bring to justice the perpetrators of the murder of the three American citizens by a mob at or near Anganqueo in the State of Michoacan.

I wish to ascertain particularly— 1st. The names of any of the parties arrested to answer for the crime.

2d. Whether either of the parties arrested have been released on bail; and, if so, the names and the character of the bailors, as well as the amount of bail.

3d. Whether either of the parties arrested, whether released on bail or not, have been tried, and, if tried, the result of the trial. If tried and convicted, the sentence of the court.

4th. Whether, if the parties arrested have not been tried, there has been one session or more of the court having jurisdiction of the matter, since their arrest; and any reasons, if any, which may have been given for their not having been brought to trial.

5th. If all the parties to the matter or either of them were well known in the neighborhood where the murder was committed; whether they could all have been arrested, and what efforts were made by the proper authorities to cause their arrest.

Generally, all such information upon the subject as may be within your personal knowledge, or which you may have obtained from reliable persons, in all cases giving the names and residences of the latter; and I particularly request you to forward me, if possible, the printed notices which had been printed and posted on the walls of the houses a short time previous to the arrival of the murdered Americans, to the effect that all foreigners in the employ of the Trojes Mining and Smelting Company would all be killed, as also the warning which was given to Mr. Conolly after his arrival at the company’s works. Also the names of the witnesses who saw the soldiers fire on the Americans, and the names of the soldiers, if they can possibly be obtained. Also the value of the property belonging to the Americans which was destroyed, and, if possible, the names of the parties who mutilated the bodies, and in what manner they were mutilated.

Very respectfully, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 18.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Morgan.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, May 8, 1880.

Sir: I have had the honor to receive your excellency’s note of the 4th instant, in which, with reference to that which this department addressed to Mr. Neill on the 17th of March of the present year, relative to the unfortunate events which took place in the district of Anganqueo the 14th of the same month, your excellency is pleased to ask to be informed, in order that you may transmit the information to your government, if the governor of Michoacan has taken the necessary steps to bring to justice the authors of the tumult which resulted in the death of three peaceable American citizens, in order to inflict upon the culprits condign punishment.

In due reply, I remit to your excellency copy of the dispatch in which the department of justice transcribes to this department, under date of the 3d instant, that which it received from the governor of the said State of Michoacan, giving advice of the measures which he has dictated in the matter.

By this document your excellency will see that that functionary has acted with all the alacrity and energy which the case demands, and that the judicial authorities have even taken extraordinary measures for the more prompt conclusions of the cause, the result of which the governor promises to communicate in due time, the words contained in my note to Mr. Neill, which your excellency is pleased to quote, being in consequence complied with.

With sentiments of the highest consideration, I have the honor to repeat myself your excellency’s obedient servant,

M. RUELAS.

[Translation.]

Department of Justice and Public Instruction.— Section 1.

The governor of the State of Michoacan, under date of the 27th of last month, says to me:

“Your note of the 20th instant has been received by this government, in which is transcribed to me by your department the communication from that of foreign affairs urging through this government the judicial authorities of the State to the investigation of the events which took place in Anganqueo the 14th of last March.

“In due reply I have the honor to say to you that so soon as this government had information of those occurrences I dictated the necessary measures for the restoration of order, for the apprehension of the delinquents, and for the prompt investigation of the facts, to this end urging the superior tribunal of justice to take the necessary steps.

“The judicial authorities have seconded the desires of this government, as the day following the event the judge of letters of Zitácuaro went to Anganqueo, since when he has remained in that place, giving his first attention to the termination of the cause. Not content with this the same tribunal appointed one of its magistrates to visit the place, and among other things, to remove every obstacle to a speedy conclusion of the cause that might present itself.

“At the proper time your department will be informed of the results. The note to which this is a reply will be transcribed to the supreme tribunal.”

And I transmit it to you as the result of your communication relative to the subject.

Liberty and the constitution.

Mexico, May 3, 1880.
MARISCAL.

The Secretary of Foreign Affairs, Present.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 18.]

Mr. Kitchener to Mr. Morgan.

Angangueo, May 12, 1880.

Dear Sir: I have to acknowledge receipt of your esteemed favor (confidential) of 5th instant, and now proceed to answer to the best of my ability the questions you put to me.

Questions 1 and 2. 1st. “The names, if any, of the parties arrested to answer for the crime.” 2d. “Whether either of the parties arrested have been released on bail; and, if so, their names and the character of the bailors, as well as the amount of the bail.”

José Maria Mora, “Jefe de la Tropa de la Seguridad pública,” and holding the rank of lieutenant of the forces of the State of Michoacan. was sent by the governor of that State, about December, 1879, for the purpose of maintaining order in the district of Anganqueo, and has been in charge of the Slate troops in that town up to the date of the late disturbance. On March 14, when Mr. Stephens gave himself up to the authorities of Angangueo, and reported to them the danger in which he had left his companions (see my letter to the legation, written on March 15 or 16), Don Justo Lopez, president of the Ayuntamiento of Anganqueo. gave orders to the above-mentioned officer to proceed with the troops under his command to the scene of the disturbance and put an end to the attack against the Americans. Shortly after the arrival of the troops the officer gave orders to his men to fire upon the Americans, and they were seen by numbers of the inhabitants of Anganqueo to join with the mob in the attack on the house.

The above-mentioned officer and soldiers under his charge confessed to having done this, alleging in excuse that they feared the vengeance of the mob had they acted otherwise. A number of the towns-people were eye-witnesses of this fact. Amongst others I may mention the following: Don Guillermo Zerecero, “2° Diputado de Mineria,” an owner of mines and smelting works in the town; Don Justo Lopez, president of the Ayuntamiento of Angangueo; Don Ruperto Menchaca, butcher, well known to the company; and Antonio Alamio, storekeeper, besides many miners and work people of the district. For above a week after the disturbance the above-mentioned Mora and soldiers were still at liberty, but were then taken into custody on evidence given against them by Don Justo Lopez. Nevertheless, some eight days afterwards the officer was released on bail given by Pablo Momoy, butcher, of Anganqueo, and Cristóbal Menchaca, working miner in the Trojes company’s employ. Neither of these men have any property whatever, and they were only required to give their word for the appearance of the prisoner when wanted. (We understand that when a bailor is a man of property there is a heavy cumulative fine for the nonappearance of a prisoner on bail, but when his bailor is a man of no property, no punishment is enforced.)

A short time after Mora was again arrested by order of a commissioner sent by the State government to inquire into the matter. However, a few days after the departure of the commissioner, he was again liberated on the same bail as before, and is still at large. The soldiers under his command are still in prison. Their names are Jesús Camargo, Guadalupe Hernandez, Ignacio Villaseñor, Juan Alvarez, Juan Martinez, Teofilo Nava, Pioquinto García, Miguel Martinez, and José Maria Martinez.

Pedro Mondragon, “Jefe de Manzana de la Municipalidad de Anganqueo,” who, as you will have seen by my former letter to the legation, was, according to Mr. Stephens’ evidence, the first man to strike John Conolly, and he it was who gave the first example of violence, and to whom may, in consequence, be attributed in great measure the whole catastrophe. The next day he was arrested, and later on was brought to Trojes to have his evidence confronted with that of Mr. Stephens. Don José Maria Bravo, “Juez de Letras del Distrito,” conducted the inquiry in my presence and that of various officers of the company, and we can all vouch for the loose and ridiculous nature of the proceedings. All spoke at once, the prisoner contradicted himself several times, and no notice was taken of this by the judge. Mondragon confessed to having rushed forward at Conolly with a drawn sword with the intention of disarming him, alleging, however, at the same time, that up to the moment of his attack Conolly had no arm in his hand, though he had a pistol in his belt. After remaining a few days in prison Mondragon was set at liberty on bail given by Jesús Aranda, storekeeper. This person is said to have in his possession a capital of $500, but it is doubtful whether he is the real owner. However, no other security than his word was given. I may here add, to show the partiality with which the first examination of Mr. Stephens was conducted, that after his having stated that Mondragon was the most active exciter of the disturbance, and the evidence taken down in writing by the authorities, the name of Mondragon did not appear in the written statement until formal notice was taken of the omission by myself and other persons present.

Aurelio Correct, a boy thirteen or fourteen years of age, who, by his father’s order, lassoed Conolly while in a dying state, mounted on horseback and dragged the body about for some time. He has confessed the deed, which was also Witnessed by many persons. He was taken up a few days after the disturbance, but was set at liberty on the nominal bail of — Alamio, shopkeeper.

Ignacio Correct, father of the above, is still in prison.

Andrés García, owner of the house in which the Americans were living, was arrested for having some of their property in his possession. He was set free on the nominal bond of Ramon Tellez, a common workman, of no property or position.

Trangailino and Agustin García, sons of the last mentioned, were arrested for having taken part in the disturbance, but were set at liberty on the nominal bail of José Maria Torres, a workman, of no property or position.

Jesús Combranwas arrested for having a watch belonging to one of the Americans in his possession. He is still in prison.

Eulogio Martinez, some kind of municipal officer, holding some position in the jail, was seen to join in the attack, and is still in prison.

Cayetano Medina and Demetrio Urbina, two of those who were wounded by the Americans, are still in prison.

Oirilo Aguilar, Francisco Colin, Espiridion Bolanos and Simon and Ignacio Mejia, common workmen of Anganqueo, have been arrested as accomplices in the crime, and are still in custody.

Question 3. “Whether either of the parties arrested, whether released on bail or not, have been tried, and, if tried, the result of the trial. If tried and convicted, the sentence of the court.”

Shortly after the disturbance, Don José Maria Bravo, Juez de Letras, of the Zitácuaro district, took up his quarters in Anganqueo, and has ever since been employed in taking the declarations from the prisoners and others. All evidence thus collected has been kept secret from us, and we can only state that none of those implicated have been sentenced.

Question 4. “Whether, if the parties arrested have not been tried, there has been one session or more of court having jurisdiction of the matter since their arrest, and any reasons, if any, which may have been given for their not having been brought to trial.”

We understand that as soon as the “Juez de Letras” has concluded his summary, all evidence will be placed before the “Tribunal Primero del Estado” in Morella (capital of the State of Michoacan), which will then pass sentence on the prisoners, if by that time all should not have escaped or broken bail. No reason has yet been given us for the evident delay in bringing the prisoners to trial.

Question 5. “If all the parties to the matter, or either of them, were well known in the neighborhood where the murder was committed, whether they could all have been arrested, and what efforts were made by the proper authorities to cause their arrest.”

With the exception of one or two strangers not yet arrested, all the parties in the murder are well known in the neighborhood where the crime was committed, the greater part of them having been in the company’s employ. So many persons took an active part in this affair that I imagine that, it would have been impossible for the authorities to arrest all the offenders, but there is no doubt that had they shown sufficient interest in the matter, many of the most guilty, who are now at large, might have been taken up.

Shortly after the catastrophe, the prefect of Zitácuaro urged upon the “Juez le Letras” more zeal in arresting the accused persons. The judge, however, refused at first to take any active steps in the matter, alleging that when things had settled down a little they would be able to arrest them all at once; but it is needless to remark that these wholesale arrests have never been attempted. Don Gmo. Terecero (referred to in p. 1) informed the judge that he knew some of the offenders who had some of the Americans’ property in their possession, asking assistance at the same time to take them up. This being refused, Terecero, on his own account, armed some of his servants, arrested the men, and handed them over to the authorities.

Eugenio Martinez, a miner, at that time in the company’s employment and well known as a desperate character, who was seen by many eye-witnesses collecting people for the attack, and who took a kind of command in the affair, received a wound in the head during the struggle, but, in spite of all, is still at large, though he has several times been seen about the streets since that time, amongst others, by my warehouseman, Mr. P. R. Beverly, but he has never been arrested. This same man, in company with others of the offenders, and armed with a double-barreled shot-gun, taken from Conolly during the attack, stopped Señor Terecero one afternoon as lie came out of his mine, and threatened to assassinate him if he took any more steps to bring the guilty parties to justice.

Question No. 6, asking information of various kinds.

Some time in June or July of last year, notices were posted upon the company’s house in Anganqueo and in various street corners, abusing the company and threatening to kill all foreigners in their employ.

Several people saw these notices and they were pointed out to me, but, not knowing Spanish very well, I only gathered their meaning through the reports of my employe’s. One of these, Máximo Marin, stated that he tore down one from the wall and handed it to the authorities. I am endeavoring to recover one of these placards, and if successful, will forward it to you. Nearly a year before this, similar notices were affixed to the walls threatening my predecessor, but nothing came of them, and in consequence I did not apprehend any danger, thinking it merely an idle threat of the rabble. Sometime about October of last year, Antonio Martinez, miner, acting as underground overseer for Mr. John Conolly (who was chief of the works on the San Hilario tunnel in the absence of Messrs. Sullivan and Fagan), also Marcos Sanchez, miner, working for the Trojes Company, informed Mr. P. R. Beverley, my storekeeper (a United States citizen) that the people intended to kill Conolly for having dismissed some of them from his employment. These people requested Beverley to inform Conolly that his life was in danger. Conolly received the notice that same evening, but, knowing that the company had been threatened in the same way, took no serious notice of the matter.

Generally speaking, I have to state my great dissatisfaction with the manner in which Señor Bravo has conducted the inquiry. So badly did I think of this matter that I took the precaution to write to the governor of the State, urging him to send a special commissioner to inquire into the whole affair, alleging my discontent with Bravo’s mode of proceeding. This request was nominally complied with by 1he appointment, as commissioner, of Señor Licdo Martinez, one of the ministers of the first tribunal. This gentleman spent some days in the district and departed, informing us that everything was being conducted according to law, but that for the present he could give us no definite information, as secrecy was requisite in this stage of the inquiry. Various of the principal inhabitants of Angangueo, amongst whom I may mention Señores Gmo Terecero, Justo Lopez, and Marcelino Mercado, local judge, besides numerous storekeepers, have several times expressed their dissatisfaction with the judge, Bravo, who, besides general incapability, partiality, and fear of the mob,, is given to drink.

Owing to the general fear of giving direct evidence, and also to the secrecy with which all declarations have been kept from us, I cannot give you such definite testimony vas I could wish, having no authority to take down declarations on my own account, but all the statements above given are recognized as true by all respectable inhabitants of Anganqueo, and by the officers in the employment of the company. Several of the men in my employ gave me, on the night of the occurrence, particulars of the murder and mutilation of the bodies, of which they had been eye-witnesses, but they, like the rest of the natives, on appearing before the judge, gave quite a different version of what they had seen.

It is difficult for me to give an exact estimate of the property of Mr. Stephens and his companions existent in the house on the day of the catastrophe, as I have no knowledge of the amount of the money, stores, and personal effects in their possession. Mr. Stephens, however, before his departure, made an inventory, which was handed to the authorities. I may, however, remark that the main loss, both to the Americans and to the Trojes company, has been derived from the compulsory cessation of the important work of driving the tunnel. Moreover, all stores not considered personal effects were mortgaged to us as security for the completion of the contract within a specified time, and for money advances made to them.

In conclusion, I wish to draw your attention to the small amount of security and legal guarantees given to foreigners in this district. Since the disturbance, we have had a force of federal troops stationed at Anganqueo, but, as yet, we have no security as to their permanent stay there. Only on Saturday, the 1st instant, orders were telegraphed for the troops to leave early the next morning, and it was only by prompt telegraphing to various federal and state authorities that we obtained the countermanding of the order. To show you the unsettled state of the district and the necessity there is for the troops to remain here, I may say that all the merchants and principal inhabitants of Anganqueo, including the local authorities, expressed their intention of remaining away from the place as soon as the troops should be withdrawn. Señor José Maria Palomino, a respectable shopkeeper of Anganqueo, has informed me that several groups of men collected on the Sunday morning, threatening that as soon as the troops were withdrawn they would make away with the remainder of the foreigners and rescue the prisoners.

It is again reported that the troops are about to be withdrawn, and we have no official assurance that they will be replaced by others. It is also notified to us that the judge, having finished the collection of evidence, will shortly proceed to Zitácuaro, taking with him the prisoners, who, it is generally believed, will be released shortly after their arrival there.

It must be evident to you that unless an example be made of those proved to be guilty of the murder of the American citizens in Anganqueo, no foreigners in the district will feel any security for their lives and property.

I shall be glad to place myself at your orders with regard to the collection of further information, or in any other way to help to secure the punishment of the offenders.

I remain, &c.,

ARTHUR B. KITCHENER.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 18.]

Mr. Morgan to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, May 18, 1880.

Sir: I have to acknowledge receipt of your excellency’s note of the 8th instant, in reply to mine of the 4th instant, transmitting copy of report made to you by the minister of justice and public instruction under date of the 3d of the present month, relating to your excellency the course which has been pursued by the authorities of Michoacan in their efforts to bring to justice the murderers of the three American citizens in that State on the 4th of March last.

I beg to refer your excellency to the fact that beyond the recital of the minister of justice that a judge was sent to the scene of the disaster immediately after it occurred; that since that time he has given his attention to the termination of the cause; that the tribunal appointed one of its magistrates to visit the place, and, among other things, to remove every obstacle to a speedy conclusion of the cause that might present itself, no information has been furnished upon which any judgment can be formed as to what steps have really been taken to bring the matter to an issue. I venture to suggest to your excellency that the meager details which you have seen fit to send me will not be considered by my government the reply which will think my note to you of the 4th instant was entitled to. It has not been informed whether any of the parties who perpetrated the deed have been arrested, or, if arrested, in what state of progress their trial is, or if any trial has been set on foot, what prospects there are of its coming to a termination. This information is important, and I submit to your excellency that it should, if possible, be furnished.

I beg to suggest to your excellency that the lives of the American citizens to whom this correspondence refers seem to have been taken under circumstances of exceptional hardship and lawlessness. They were in their own house, and the mob which fired upon them was, as this legation is informed, headed by an officer in command of State troops, who, instead of using his command for the purpose of preserving order, took an important part in the assault, and assisted in the killing which resulted therefrom.

These facts seem to be of general notoriety. The deed was perpetrated in open day, as far back as the 14th of March last, and was witnessed by an entire community. The perpetrators thereof are well-known prominent citizens and officials. It would therefore seem that their arrest would not be difficult, and that the testimony necessary to their conviction would be easy to obtain, and that a sufficient period had elapsed to bring them to judgment.

Under the circumstances, your excellency can understand the anxiety which my government feels in knowing what has been done by the Mexican Government to bring them to justice, and as your excellency’s note to which this is a reply does not give the information I requested, I hope your excellency will find it in your power to supply it.

I renew, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 473. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan. No. 473.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State,
Washington, June 12, 1880. No. 25.]

Sir: I transmit herewith, for your information in the premises, and for your guidance in any future action that may be indicated to you should any such appear to be necessary, a copy of a letter of the 10th ultimo, together with its various inclosures, from the governor of the State of Texas, asking the intervention of the general government in a matter of vital importance to the citizens of that State living on the eastern shore of the Rio Grande.

The inclosures, as you will see, consist of the statement of the county judge of El Paso County and petitions signed by prominent citizens of San Elizario and Socorro.

The ground of complaint, as alleged, is that the Mexicans engaged in agricultural pursuits on the Mexican shore of the river are in the habit of diverting all the water that comes down the river during the dry season into their ditches, thereby preventing our citizens from getting sufficient water to irrigate their crops.

This, if true, would be in direct opposition to the recognized rights of riparian owners, and, if persisted in, must result in disaster and ruin to our farming population on the line of the Rio Grande, and might eventually, if not amicably adjusted through the medium of diplomatic intervention, be productive of constant strife and breaches of the peace between the inhabitants of either shore.

I have addressed a note to the Mexican minister at this Capital, requesting him to bring the matter to the attention of his government with a view to obtaining, if possible, alleviation from these annoyances.

You will, therefore, investigate the matter as carefully and thoroughly as possible, and will report the result to the Department, when, should the facts be found to bear out the allegations set forth in the inclosed correspondence, further action will be taken in the premises.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in Mr. Evarts’s No. 25.]

Governor Roberts to Mr. Evarts.

Executive Office, State of Texas,
Austin, May 10, 1880.

Sir: I herewith most respectfully submit to you a letter from the county judge of El Paso County, in Texas, addressed to me, and letters of the citizens of said county, which caused said judge to write to me. They show a most deplorable state of things in that remote .portion of our territory. The Texas legislature has made no provision that would enable me to give present relief, to the suffering citizens, and for a future remedy for them I must request, so far as it may be proper, the aid of the United States, to secure them whatever rights they may have in a share of the waters of the Rio Grande. There is danger of trouble of a serious character in that section of our frontier if the Mexicans on the west side of the river are allowed to continue to take in their ditches all of the water that comes down the river during dry seasons, and thereby prevent our citizens from making crops.

I need hardly tell you that in all that portion of the Rio Grande country, agriculture, gardening, and fruit growing are mainly dependent upon irrigation, and that we often hear that it has not rained there a good shower for six, nine, and even twelve months at a time, and that the river at El Paso has been dry for many months. Just in proportion as New Mexico settles up and is devoted along the river to agriculture, the water of the river will more and more be consumed by spreading it over the land, and if what is left in the channel during dry seasons (that are frequent) should be allowed to be diverted to the Mexican side, that was first settled, those of our citizens residing on the east side of the river must abandon agriculture as a permanent occupation, in one of the most beautiful and fertile valleys of the continent for 60 or 80 miles below El Paso on the Rio Grande. I am informed that during last year they were reduced to the necessity of making crops in the bed of the river.

To excite a personal interest in that region of our State, I venture to mention a few facts. The Rio Grande just above El Paso bursts out of and through the mountains and runs through a broad basin valley for 60 or 80 miles and goes again into the mountains. The valley is shut up on the west by high mountains, and on the east by a high table-plain 4,000 feet above the gulf. This valley, being between 20° and 32° north latitude, and thus shut up as a basin, has the most uniform and mild climate that perhaps can be found in any place on this continent. And being dry generally during the year or most part of it, it is peculiarly adapted for a hospital for consumptives, and for persons afflicted with other kindred diseases. Of course, I mean by a hospital a place of resort and residence for the afflicted. It is adapted also, to the extent that it can be supplied with water, to the raising of the most luscious grapes and other fruits that are known.

The railroads are converging from different directions to meet in that valley, wherein there must arise, in a very few years, a great central city, accessible to all parts of the United States. Its want of great altitude, with its other peculiarities, will render it far more desirable as a healthful resort than those in the dry regions north of it. And, in a commercial point of view, it will be not only a great thoroughfare, but a place of exchange of commodities from the East, West, North, and South.

To return to the subject of the communication, I infer that the dam built across the Rio Grande is an ancient one, made, most probably, of loose rocks piled across the river, as is the case in other rivers that I know of, and although our people might easily remove the eastern end of it so as to let the water flow to them, still, as the population is much more numerous on the west side of the river, and far removed from any immediate governmental control, the probability, if not positive certainty is, that it would result in a hostility that would endanger the peace of that frontier. Therefore, if it can be adjusted between Mexico and the United States, it would be better, and hence I most respectfully submit it for your consideration, to take such action as the President may think proper.

With great respect, &c.,

O. M. ROBERTS,
Governor of Texas.

[Annex to Inclosure in No. 25.]

Ysleta, El Paso County, April 16, 1880.

Dear Sir: I have the honor herewith to transmit several petitions, numerously signed by citizens of this county, asking to be relieved from the burdens of taxation for the years 1879 and 1880, for reasons fully set forth in said petitions.

These petitions, with signatures thereto attached, were presented to me by the commissioner’s court, with the request to forward to your excellency, that such action may be taken thereon as in your wisdom you may deem just, legal, and proper in the premises, and they especially desire, if you have the power so to do, that you cause to be suspended the forced collection of taxes in the county of El Paso until the meeting of the next legislature, at which time they desire most earnestly that you cause such petitions to be laid before that honorable body, that such action may be taken as they may devise.

May I not, governor, in this connection call your attention to what I consider the main cause of all our grievances, namely, the great scarcity of water, from which necessarily results failure of crops. The noble stream which has heretofore contributed so much to our comforts and wants, enriching our planters, and fructifying our soil with but few intermissions for many years past, we are now reliably informed that even from its source in the Territory of Colorado, and through the Territory of New Mexico, has been so tampered with and manipulated, diverted from its natural channel, and much of its waters wasted and lost in deserts, which, if restored to its natural channels, might have been sufficient to have supplied all of our necessary wants, and have prevented the sufferings we are now forced to endure.

We are confident that few, if any, understand the rights of riparian proprietors better than yourself, who, we assume, will decide at once that those occupying a stream above have no right to waste to the detriment of those below, and we confidently hope you will call the attention of Congress and also of Governor Wallace of New Mexico, to these abuses, and demand that suitable laws be passed and enforced for the protection of our rights, and I will also state that we have it from good authority that many temporary dams have been constructed across the river, thereby impeding the natural flow of water, resulting in many instances in the waste aforesaid.

So much for the complaint of the people of our own county.

Your excellency is doubtless aware that the Mexican people many years ago constructed a permanent dam at a point known as Hart’s Mills, about 1½ miles above our town of El Paso, Tex., and have assumed and still claim the right to control said dam, and have constructed and had in use for many years a large acequia or canal, which at low water drains every drop flowing down the river to the Mexican side, thereby depriving our people, at a time when most, in need, of their just proportion of the water.

Owing to our great necessities in a contest for water it was feared that a collision would take place; this, however, we managed to avoid by compromise and patching tip a hollow truce, which cannot continue long, though everything appears now harmonious.

Our people are determined to contend for one-half of the water flowing down the Rio Bravo, to which they think they are entitled by treaty stipulations, to wit, the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, which says “the middle of the channel of the river from its mouth to the southern boundary-line of New Mexico, shall be the boundary between the two nations.”

The subject-matters which we have herein presented are considered of great importance, and having full confidence in your ability and zeal to serve the people of your State, we confidently hope that you will take such action in the premises as will put at an end the vexed questions which have so long perplexed us, especially on the frontier, and send to us such legal advice and instructions as your excellency and legal advisors may deem proper, so that, if possible, we may avoid future trouble so impending.

I have the honor to be, your most obedient servant, and with respect,

HENRY C. COOK,
County Judge.

His Excellency Gov. O. M. Roberts,
Austin, Tex.

The State of Texas,
County of El Paso:

To the honorable the county commissioners’ court of El Paso County:

In view of the many and most critical circumstances through which we have had to run for so long a time, and which we are yet compelled to endure; and, furthermore, considering that these calamities will not cease for time unknown, we, the undersigned, citizens of the United States and residents of the town of San Elizario, county of El Paso, and State of Texas, have deemed it expedient to appeal to your honorable body for consideration of the following facts: 1st. That we are, generally speaking, all engaged in agriculture, this being the only branch of industry on which we rely for our support and that of our families. That the last year more than at any subsequent period for a long time past the circumstances for our pursuits were entirely unfavorable. The wheat crops were thoroughly insufficient to meet our pressing wants. In addition to this the water ceased running in the river in the month of June of the same year, time in which we used to irrigate our corn plantations for the first time, and thus we were prevented from irrigating our corn, on which account the crop was entirely lost, and at this time of the current year we are completely deprived of even the most limited and scanty means of living.

2d. The adversities referred to in the preceding statement were not confined to the last year of 1879, but continue being more and more oppressive as time rolls on, and the presage is that the future will probably be worse, for the reasons that the people being extremely in want, and seeing the river dry, until some thirteen days past, when the water commenced to arrive, and now is stopped again, were some for the first reason unable, and others for the second, discouraged to plant any wheat. In consequence, not knowing when the water will run permanently in the river, and being on this account uncertain of the favorable result of whatever little wheat has been planted, we see that our wants will only increase instead of diminishing.

3d. Some among us who besides agriculture have the advantage of owning some head of cattle and oxen, have had to experience great losses in these interests also. The rains have been so scarce that pastures are not to be found for cattle, and this contrariety added to the want of water has caused the death of great numbers of animals; besides we have been compelled to drive our oxen (for we mostly all have oxen to our wagons) in their deplorable condition of meagerness, through long distances of from 90 to 300 miles, not ignorant of the death that awaited them, but moved by the necessity of securing at least a temporary supply of food for our families; and by so doing have either killed them or left them in an unserviceable condition.

4th. Little remains to be said as to our pecuniary situation, be it enough to state— 1st. That the possession of $25 by a man of the working class (and with but few exceptions we all belong to that class) is a topic of an animated discourse on the part of the owner, as we are all content in getting clothing and a little food in recompense of our hard labor.

2d. That those who, possessing any kind of property, either personal or real, might get some money by the selling of the same, cannot do so for the simple reason that there is nobody to buy for cash.

5th. In the midst of these distressing circumstances we have unanimously concluded to appeal to your honorable body, soliciting first your most earnest consideration of our petition, and second, requesting you to duly and fully represent it to the government of our State, soliciting from the same, at the same time, for and in the name of the suffering citizens residents of this town— 1st. An appropriation, either of money to buy provisions with, or of provisions which will be divided among the most oppressed element of our population;

2d. A dispensation of the taxes of the year 1879 (for those who have not yet paid them), and general dispensation of those corresponding to 1880.

We doubt not that our government, which on other occasions has shown its magnanimity and interest for the children of this county, will now manifest once more its paternal care by lightening the burden of misfortune under which we have so long and too patiently labored.

Hoping you will attend to our petition at your earliest opportunity, we have the honor of repeating ourselves, law-abiding citizens.

San Elizario, El Paso County, Texas, April 6, 1880.

The foregoing is signed by forty-five names and the following certificate is attached:

I do hereby certify that the above petition is duly signed and sent by the residents of San Elizario, citizens of the United States, and that all the statements therein are true and founded upon facts.

In testimony whereof I do here sign my name officially this the 6th day of April, A. D. 1880.
G. N. GARCIA,
Second Justice of the Peace, Precinct No.,4, and Mayor of Corporation.

We, the undersigned citizens of the town of Socorro, El Paso County, indorse the petition of the citizens of the town of San Elizario, hereto attached.

JUAN ARMENDARIZ.

MARIANO SIERRA.

ROBERTO LUJAN.

JULIAN ARIAZ.

And 209 other signatures.

We, the undersigned citizens of the town of Ysleta, El Paso County, indorse the petition of the citizens of the town of San Elizario, hereto attached.

JUAN T. OCHOA.
REYES TELLIES.
JUAN JOSÉ DUVAN.
VALIENTE TELLE S.
And 92 other signatures.

No. 474. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 474.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, June 15, 1880. (Received July 1.) No. 29.]

Sir: I have received this day your Department dispatch No. 17, conveying information that some sixteen of the persons who had been arrested by General Treviño, as cattle thieves, in the neighborhood of Piedras Negras, and sent to Mexico, had, shortly after the revocation of the order of the Secretary of War of 1st June, 1877, to General Ord, been released and sent, at the expense of the Mexican Government, to the scene of their former maraudings, and instructing me to make inquiry thereof.

I now inclose copy of my note to the minister of foreign affairs upon the subject. His answer I will transmit when received, and in the meanwhile I shall make such further investigation as will enable me to inform you of the true state of the case.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure in No. 29.]

Mr. Morgan to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, June 15, 1880.

Sir: My government is informed that seventeen Mexicans, who had been arrested by General Treviño for depredations committed upon the property of American citizens, upon American soil, and who had been sent by General Treviño to a prison in the interior of the country—city of Mexico—have been released and returned to the scene of their former illegal acts, at the expense of the Mexican Government.

I am instructed to ascertain whether these reputed facts exist, and I therefore address myself to your excellency.

I renew to your excellency the assurances of my very distinguished consideration.

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 475. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan. No. 475.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State,
Washington, June 26, 1880. No. 28.]

Sir: On the 15th instant my colleague, the honorable the Secretary of War, forwarded to this Department a copy of a telegram from Colonel Hatch, dated at Fort Craig, N. Mex., the 7th of the present month, detailing the movements of hostile Indians in New Mexico, and representing further that large numbers of these Indians have crossed into Mexican territory.

Upon the receipt of this intelligence and during my temporary absence from the city, the acting Secretary, Mr. Hay, caused to be forwarded to you on the 18th instant for your direction in the matter a telegram.

* * * * * * *

A copy of the letter from the Secretary of War, and its inclosures upon which the said telegram was based, is herewith transmitted for your further information, and for the files of your legation.

The Department has since received your telegram of the 21st instant in reply to the one above, stating that the minister of foreign affairs of Mexico, after consultation with the President, declines to allow American troops to pursue these Indians on Mexican soil.

While commending your zeal and energy in this matter, the President greatly regrets that the Mexican authorities should not have permitted the operations of our troops on her soil for the purpose of inflicting just punishment, if possible, upon a marauding band of Indians, whose depredations are a source of constant annoyance to the peace of both countries.

In this unexpected obstacle to our operations against these hostile Indians you will say to the Mexican Government that this accordance of asylum to our enemies, flying over the border under our pursuit, involves, in the apprehension of this government, an urgent obligation on the part of the Mexican Government to disarm these Indians, and a responsibility for any future inroads upon our territory they may make.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in Mr. Evarts’s No. 28.]

Mr. Ramsey to Mr. Evarts.

War Department,
Washington, June 15, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copy of telegram from Colonel Hatch, dated the 7th instant, in regard to the movements of hostile Indians in New Mexico. He states that a large number crossed into Mexico.

The same is also furnished the Secretary of the Interior.

Very respectfully, &c.,

ALEX. RAMSEY,
Secretary of War.

[Inclosure 1 in Mr. Ramsey’s letter to Mr. Evarts.]

Santa Fé, N. Mex., June 7, 1880.

To Assistant Adjutant-General,
Fort Leavenworth, Kansas:

The following just received to be repeated to you: “Fort Craig, N. Mex., June 7, 1880.

“Dispatches of 6th received. Last dispatch sent you on 5th, after the blow struck on the 24th by the scouts, who were in advance of the troops. The hostiles went west into the Black Range; Morrow was ordered to follow them with four companies. Your telegram that troops were coming forward called me to Craig. One large body of Indians, one hundred strong, broke south, crossing the road near Cummings. Morrow’s advance followed these Indians to Mexico; small party of twenty-five went by way of Goodsite Mountains to Mexico. There are parties yet in the mountains; Morrow struck one about Cook’s Canon, killed two, wounded three, capturing their stock on the 5th. Are now looking for small raiding parties. Shall drive these Indians into Mexico. From present indications they are going there as we press them, which is to be regretted, without some arrangement can be made to follow them up. Have notified the Mexican authorities. Cusack reports the hostiles have left the east side of Rio Grande. Two companies Fourth Cavalry, two of infantry, at Belen yesterday. No rations at Bayard to send troops. Will delay active operations some days south. It is important that the fifty Indian scouts asked for are granted. As soon as the troops to arrive are in the field and we are again on the trail, the Indians will break up into small parties and must be hunted down; this will also enable us to move up with respectable force to the south and west of the Navajoes, should they become troublesome. No doubt some young men are out with the Apaches that are living at Alamo City below Wingate, who trade with the Apaches and encourage their raids. The Navajoes will not go as a tribe on the war-path. It is best to show them that we are ready. If the Tenth Cavalry oomes to this district, can hold all east of the Rio Grande. We cannot only settle Victoria’s band, but throw such a force to the south and west of the Navajoes they will not dare to risk war, rich as they are in stock.

“HATCH,
“Colonel Ninth Cavalry, Commanding.”

The department commander’s dispatch and yours of this date, relative to scouts, &c., had not reached General Hatch when the above was telegraphed.

LOUD,
Acting Assistant Adjutant-General.

[1st indorsement.]

Headquarters Department of the Missouri,
Fort Leaveworth, Kans., June 8, 1880.

Official copy respectfully forwarded to the assistant adjutant-general, headquarters Military Division of the Missouri, for the information of the Lieutenant-General.

JNO. POPE,
Brevet Major-General, Commanding.

[2d indorsement.]

Headquarters Military Division Missouri,
Chicago, June 10, 1880.

Respectfully forwarded to the Adjutant-General of the Army.

In the absence of the Lieutenant-General commanding.

M. V. SHERIDAN,
Lieutenant-Colonel, and Military Secretary.

No. 476. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 476.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, June 29, 1880. (Received July 15.) No. 32.]

Sir: Your cipher telegram which appears to have been deposited in the Matamoros office on the 18th was received by me on the 19th instant.

I immediately sought and obtained an interview with the minister for foreign relations, to whom I communicated its contents, and gave him a copy thereof.

* * * * * * *

In view of the importance of the subject, on the 21st instant I addressed a formal note to Mr. Ruelas, repeating the request of the President which I had made of him verbally, on the 19th instant, a copy of which I inclose. To this note I received an answer on the 23d, a translation of which I inclose. And I closed the correspondence by a note to Mr. Ruelas on the 26th instant.

You will observe that the minister for foreign affairs places President Diaz’s refusal upon the ground that the constitution of Mexico (Art. XVI, paragraph III) vests in Congress alone the authority to grant permission to foreign troops to cross into Mexico.

You will also observe that the minister for foreign affairs says that the Mexican Congress some time ago conferred upon the President the authority to enter into a convention with the United States by which the troops of each nation should be allowed to pass into the territory of the other in pursuit of hostile Indians; that this authority still subsists, and that he is willing now to enter upon such a convention.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 32.]

Mr. Morgan to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, June 21, 1880.

Sir: I beg to present to your excellency in a more formal manner than I did in our interview on Saturday last (19th instant) the request made by the President of the United States upon the President of Mexico for permission on the part of the Mexican Government for the passage of United States troops into the State of Chihuahua in pursuit of Indians hostile to the United States, who are now, as my government is informed, in the mountains of that State. These Indians have for a long time been at war with the United States; they have committed many depredations upon the citizens thereof; they have stolen property, burned down houses, murdered men and women and children. Pressed on every side by the troops of the United States, to avoid capture and the punishment due to their crimes, they have sought refuge upon Mexican soil, under the belief that pursuit of them must cease upon the north bank of the Rio Bravo. In the mountains to which they have retreated, and in the immunity from pursuit which Mexican soil seems to give them, they will be able to collect their scattered forces, reorganize, and, when again prepared to attack, cross the narrow boundary which separates the two countries, and pouncing upon the peaceable inhabitants of the frontier when opportunity offers carry war and flame and murder among them, retreating again to the friendly mountains which now protect them from pursuit to recommence, when unopposed by a competent force, their murderous practices at their leisure.

The hands of these people are lifted against all men. They will destroy in Mexico as they have destroyed in the United. States. It is as much the interest of Mexico that they should be captured as it is in the interest of the United States. They are now within reach of our troops. They may easily be captured. This opportunity lost, another may not occur. The frontier between the two countries is so extended that it is difficult to guard it from end to end. These savages may invade the United States territory at any point and at any time.

I call your excellency’s attention to a note addressed by yourself to my predecessor, Mr. Foster, on July 8, 1879, inclosing to him a report made by parties appointed by the Government of Mexico to investigate the question of depredation as regards the Apache Indians, in which the Government of the United States is blamed for carelessness alleged to exist on their part with respect to the stipulations of 1831, which oblige both states to prevent the Indians from attacking the citizens of their respective territories.

The United States, desiring in all cases to comply with her treaty stipulations, being determined to protect her citizens exposed on an extended frontier, finds that the depredators upon the people’s property and the murderers of her citizens have been able to escape into Mexican territory.

Mexico need apprehend no unpleasant complications from the temporary presence of United States troops upon her soil. They will go there, if at all, simply in the pursuit of robbers and murderers, and these captured they will immediately retire. In the discharge of their duty they will interfere with the rights of no Mexican. Peace on the frontier is the object of both governments. No longer step can be made in that direction than by showing to those who attempt to disturb it on either side of the frontier that they can find no refuge upon the opposite territory.

In the interview which I had with your excellency on Saturday last I understood you to say that the President had been authorized by Congress to enter into a convention with the United States upon the subject of either government being allowed to pursue the depredators upon the property and destroyers of the lives of their respective people into the territory of the other. The principle seems to be, therefore, admitted that the right to do so should exist, and I also understood your excellency to gay that the President was willing to enter upon negotiations tending to that end. Let us act now and negotiate hereafter. The danger is imminent and pressing. The exigency of the case requires action, and prompt action, else it will be worthless, and I trust that the Mexican Government will see in this request of the President of the United States the offer of a friendly service to a friendly power, as well as an act of self-preservation; that permission may be granted to United States troops to cross into Mexican territory, and that largely aided by the valor and skill of the Mexican troops, they may he able to capture their common enemy, rid Mexican soil from their unwarranted presence, and the Mexican people from the danger of murder and robbery which their presence now insures to them.

I have, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 32.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Morgan.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, June 23, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to reply to your excellency’s note dated yesterday, in which, in a more formal manner than in our conference of the 19th, you are pleased to present the request of the President of the United States to the President of this Republic to permit the passage of American troops into the territory of Chihuahua in pursuit of Indians hostile to those States, which Indians are in the mountains of the State of Chihuahua.

The President has heard with special interest the arguments addressed in your excellency’s note in presenting the request to which I refer, and it has been with positive regret that he has been obliged to decide that it can not be acceded to, directing me to state to your excellency in this note the powerful reasons which have determined his refusal. These are substantially the same that I gave to your excellency in the conference on the 19th instant.

According to the constitution of the United Mexican States, it is not within the faculties of the executive power to permit the entrance of foreign troops into the territory of the federation. The Senate can authorize the executive to permit the passage of such troops. In May, 1878, the Chamber of Senators authorized the executive to permit the passage of United States Federal troops into the national territory, when they should be in close pursuit of parties of savage Indians. This authorization was subjected by the Senate to the conditions contained in the five clauses of the respective resolution, of which a copy was promptly furnished to your legation.

In the memoranda of the conferences held with reference to this subject in the same year (1878), and in the communications exchanged between the the department of foreign affairs and the minister of the United States, it appears that the Mexican Government constantly exhibited the best disposition for the conclusion of an arrangement for the reciprocal passage of troops upon the basis agreed to by the Chamber of Senators. Consequently, the Mexican Government is not responsible if, notwithstanding its good disposition, it was not possible at that time to conclude a convention satistory and advantageous to both republics.

At present the executive is invested with the same faculties granted him in the resolution of the. Senate of the 29th of May, 1878, and is animated by the same good disposition to enter into negotiation with your excellency’s government for the reciprocal passage of troops in pursuit of hostile Indians, as I stated in our conference of the 19th of this month. But the executive cannot overstep the authorization granted to him, as is now desired, by permitting the entrance of United States troops into Mexican territory without a previous convention, which would give this privilege to both governments. The executive would violate said conditions and overstep his constitutional faculties if in the present case and in the manner solicited he should accede to that request.

The foregoing is sufficient to convince your excellency that it is not for want of will, but for the want of legal authority, that the president of the republic is under the painful necessity of not acceding to the request of his excellency the President of the United States.

I cannot close this note without referring to an interesting point alluded to by your excellency in the note to which I am now replying.

Your excellency is pleased to call the attention of this department to the note which it addressed to your legation the 8th of July, 1879, “inclosing a report made by parties appointed by the Government of Mexico to investigate the question of depredation as regards the Apache Indians, in which the Government of the United States is blamed for carelessness alleged to exist on their part with respect to the stipulations of 1831, which oblige both States to prevent the Indians from attacking the citizens of their respective territories.” As is to be noted, the Mexican Government confined itself on that occasion to demanding compliance with the stipulations of Article XXXIII of the treaty of the 5th of April, 1831. This article in is relative part says: “It is likewise agreed that the two contracting parties shall, by all the means in their power, maintain peace and harmony among the several Indian nations who inhabit the lands adjacent to the lines and rivers which form the boundaries of the two countries; and the better to attain this object, both parties bind themselves expressly to restrain by force all hostilities and incursions on the part of the Indian nations living within their respective boundaries; so that the United States of America will not suffer their Indians to attack the citizens of the United Mexican States, nor the Indians inhabiting their territory; nor will the United Mexican States permit the Indians residing within their territories to commit hostilities against the citizens of the United States of America, nor against the Indians residing within the limits of the United States, in any manner whatever,”

The Mexican Government has endeavored on its part to comply with this obligation, and still Continues its endeavors in the same direction, but it has to limit itself to the stipulations of the article quoted, and it does not find in it authorization for permitting the passage of United States troops into Mexican territory, nor for the passage of Mexican troops to the territory of the United States. Its action for the present must be confined to the measures it may dictate on this side of the frontier.

In the case which has given rise to the request of his excellency the President of the United States, telegraphic orders have been issued through the War Department to the end that the federal forces nearest to the section invaded by the Indians may undertake the pursuit of the Indians within the limits of the republic, placing themselves in accord, if this should be possible, with the forces of the United States, in order to make their mutual co-operation more efficacious.

Upon stating the same to your excellency, by direction of the President, it is pleasant for me to reiterate to you the protestations of my very distinguished consideration.

M. RUELAS.

No. 477. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 477.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, June 29, 1880. (Received July 15.) No. 38.]

Sir: The election for presidential electors took place on Sunday last, the 27th instant. It passed off quietly, in this city at least. The result has not been announced. It will not probably be known for several weeks.

The electoral colleges meet on Sunday, the 11th proximo. The candidates before them are General Manuel Gonzalez, Justo Benitez Ignacio Mejia, Trinidad García de la Cadena, I. L. Vallarta, and M. M. de Zamacona. It is believed that neither of the candidates will receive an absolute majority of the colleges. In that event the election will devolve upon the chamber of deputies. What the result will be in that body is pure speculation.

General Gonzalez is reported to be supported by President Diaz, and it is supposed that he will have influence enough in the chamber, when it convenes in September next, to elect his candidate.

On the other hand, it is stated that the President will not have sufficient influence to accomplish this purpose; in which event all the other candidates have agreed to unite their respective friends against Gonzalez upon the person among them who has the largest vote, and thus defeat him; in which case, General Mejia probably has the best prospects of success. But this is all mere speculation. Neither, I think, does any man know enough of the future to be able to say whether the result of the election, either by the electoral colleges or by the deputies, will be accepted by the disappointed candidates. Certain it is, I have been informed, upon what I consider reliable authority, that the governors of several of the States have lately purchased a large quantity of arms, which would seem to indicate an appeal from the ballot to force. I shall, henceforth, endeavor to keep you informed as to the prospects.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 478. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 478.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 13, 1880. (Received July 29.) No. 51.]

Sir: Your Department dispatch No. 28 was received this morning.

In my note of the 26th June to the minister for foreign relations, I limited myself to warning the Mexican Government that the United States would not be responsible for any depredations which the Indians who had fled from the pursuit of General Hatch might commit upon Mexicans.

I now inclose copy of note addressed by me to the minister for foreign relations, from which you will see that I have, in obedience to your instructions, notified the Mexican Government that they will be held accountable for any damage which these Indians may do to Americans, should they cross into our territory.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure in No. 51.]

Mr. Morgan to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 13, 1880.

Sir: Referring to my notes of the 21st and 26th of June last, I am now instructed by my government to say to your excellency that the accordance of asylum to the enemies of the United States flying over the border when under pursuit involves in its apprehension an urgent obligation on the part of the Mexican Government to disarm the Indians referred to in my notes of the above dates, and a responsibility on the part of the Mexican Government for any future inroads upon United States territory they may make.

I improve this opportunity to renew to your excellency the assurances of my very distinguished consideration.

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 479. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 479.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 16, 1880. (Received July 29.) No. 57.]

Sir: I informed you in my dispatch No. 46 that General Gonzalez had been sent in command of a considerable force for the purpose of putting down a demonstration hostile to the government, which had been made in the States of Zacatecas and Jalisco.

On the 13th instant, the general being at Guanajuato, a popular demonstration was organized in his favor, and about six o’clock in the afternoon a large crowd congregated in front of the house of Mr. Robles Pezuela, where he was stopping.

While the general was on the balcony of the house, a detachment of State troops debouched from a cross street and immediately fired. One man in the crowd was killed, and a young girl who was standing by General Gonzalez’s side was seriously wounded. The general was not hurt.

Immediately the governor of the State disavowed to General Gonzalez the act of his troops.

General Gonzalez’s adversaries pretend that the attempt made upon his life was the result of harsh measures which he had adopted toward the people.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 480. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 480.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 17, 1880. (Received August 6.) No. 58.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 29 and its inclosures, I now transmit translation of the note addressed to me by the chief clerk of the ministry of foreign affairs (Mr. Ruelas being ill), from which it would appear that the marauders mentioned in your Department dispatch No. 17, of May 31, 1880, viz, Arreola and his band have been consigned to the judge of the district of Coahuila to be tried according to law.

I inclose copy of a letter addressed by me to the United States vice-consul at Piedras Negras, requesting him to inform me whether either of the offenders alluded to in your dispatch are in the neighborhood of their former depredations.

* * * * * * *

I am, sir, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 58.—Translation.]

Mr. Zárate to Mr. Morgan.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, July 15, 1880.

Mr. Minister: Referring to your excellency’s note, dated the 15th of June last, in which you say that the Government of the United States has been informed that several Mexicans who had committed depredations in American Territory, whom General Treviño had sent to a prison in the interior in the country, have been set at liberty and returned to the scene of their former crimes at the expense of the Mexican Government, and ask that an investigation of the facts be made, I have the honor to state to your excellency that the department of war has reported that Arreola and his band, who are the persons referred to, have been consigned to the district judge of Coahuila, as the competent authority to try them for the crimes of which they are accused.

Upon stating the foregoing in reply to your excellency’s said note, it is pleasant for me to repeat to you the assurances of my high and distinguished consideration.

On account of the illness of the secretary,

JULIO ZÁRATE.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 58.]

Mr. Morgan to Mr. Schuchardt.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 17, 1880.

Sir: I have to request that you will inform me whether Arreola, or any of his band who were arrested by General Treviño and sent by him to Mexico, and who are said to have been sent by the general government to the State of Coahuila for trial, have been lately seen in the neighborhood of their former depredations, and, if so, whether they have been committing other outrages upon American citizens or their property.

Very respectfully, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 481. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 481.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 24, 1880. (Received August 5.) No. 63.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 51, and its inclosure, I now inclose translation of a note this day received by me from the minister of foreign affairs (which is an answer to my note contained in the dispatch above mentioned), from which you will observe that the Mexican Government protests that the refusal of the President to consent to the crossing of American troops into Mexico, in pursuit of the Indians who, fleeing before General Hatch, had come upon Mexican soil, cannot be considered as an asylum granted to the enemies of the United States by Mexico.

The minister also reiterates the desire on the part of the Mexican Government to enter into negotiations with the Government of the United States to the end that the troops of each nation may be authorized to cross into the territory of the other in pursuit of hostile Indians, who may have fled there when pursued by troops.

In the name of the President, he denies that Mexico can be held responsible for any damages which the Indians, who are the subject of this correspondence, may inflict upon citizens of the United States.

You will also observe that the minister assures me that the Mexican Government is doing, and will continue to do, everything in its power to capture the Indians in question.

I also inclose a copy of my note to the minister in answer to the one which is the subject of this dispatch, of this date.

I am, sir, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 63—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Morgan.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, July 23, 1880.

Sir: In due time your excellency’s note, dated the 13th instant, was received in this department, in which you make reference to your previous notes of the 21st and 26th-of June last, relative to the permission asked of the Government of Mexico for the passage of United States troops into Mexican territory in pursuit of Indians, and your excellency says that you have received instructions from your government to say that according asylum to the enemies of the United States flying over the border when under pursuit involves, in its apprehension, an urgent obligation on the part of the Mexican Government to disarm the Indians referred to in your excellency’s said notes, and the responsibility also on the part of the Mexican Government for any future inroads upon United States territory they may make.

In due reply I have the honor to say to your excellency that the simple refusal of the Government of Mexico to grant a permission which the constitution prohibits can in no manner be interpreted as an accordance of asylum. The Indians who, eluding the vigilance of the American authorities in charge of the reservations on which they are confined, turn the arms which they have received on said reservations against pacific inhabitants, and, after committing their depredations in American territory, invade that of Mexico, not in search of an asylum, which they know by recent experience they will not find, but to continue in it their atrocious crimes, are not only the enemies of the United States, but of all humanity.

The reasons which the government has for refusing the permission in question are stated in my note of the 23d of June last. They are based on unavoidable constitutional duty, and in complying with it no offense is offered to the United States, nor is any international obligation broken. Far from this, and desiring to put an end to the depredations of the savages, the Mexican Government has several times proposed, and I repeated the proposition in my said note, to enter into negotiations for the reciprocal passage of troops on bases possible to make. If the Government of the United States has not cared to accept them, it is not the fault of that of Mexico.

The recent campaign made against the Indians by General Treviño, in which he succeeded in drawing them from Mexican territory, and that which Colonel Valle is now commencing in Chihuahua, are the best proofs that the government can give that it complies with its duties. Recently the most imperative orders have been issued by the department of war, to the end that the Indians referred to by your excellency in your said notes may be pursued, and you can assure your government that the pursuit will be energetic within the limits of the republic. In virtue of the foregoing, I have received instructions from the President to say to your excellency that the Government of Mexico does not accept the responsibility which that of the United States desires to impose.

M. RUELAS.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 63.]

Mr. Morgan to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 24, 1880.

Sir: I am in receipt of your excellency’s note of the 23d instant, in which, replying to my note of the 13th instant, you inform me that in the opinion of the Mexican authorities Mexico cannot be considered as having granted asylum to the Indians who fled into her territory from the United States, from the fact of the refusal of the President to consent to their being followed across the boundary by the troops of the United States. Also that the Mexican Government is willing, as it has heretofore expressed its willingness, to enter into a convention with the United States Government, to the end that the troops of each nation may be authorized to cross into the territory of the other, in pursuit of hostile Indians. A copy of your note I have forwarded to the honorable the Secretary of State of the United States.

I take this occasion to express to your excellency my gratification at seeing that your health is sufficiently restored to permit of your being again able to assume the duties of your office, and I beg to renew to your excellency the expressions of my distinguished consideration.

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 482. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 482.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 24, 1880. (Received August 6.) No. 65.]

Sir: In my dispatch No. 57, I informed you of an attempt which had been made by a detachment of State troops at Guanajuato upon the life of General Gonzalez. It appears that a similar attack was made upon him on the 19th instant at Leon, which resulted in the serious wounding of Alonzo Lopez.

General Gonzalez appears to have received a majority of the votes cast by the electoral college.

On the 26th of June last, General Jésus Ramirez and Colonel Izunza attacked Mazatlan and obtained possession of the city. General Carlo, in command of government troops, took refuge on one of the gunboats in the harbor, and immediately commenced to bombard the town, but ceased upon the representations of the foreign consuls. Some seventeen of the government troops were killed; the number lost by the insurgents is not given.

The government has succeeded in recapturing the place, and has reopened the port, which it had closed.

It is reported that Colonel Rayes, who went to the relief of Cañedo, at Culiacan, which was threatened by Marquez de Leon, is in a critical position, being surrounded by a large force of insurgents. It is also said that the troops that occupied the city of Oajaca were ordered to Tehuantepec and Juchitan, which are in revolution, and that they have been driven back upon Yantepec. Numerous bands are said to have taken the field in the neighborhood of Tetila. Negrete is in the neighborhood of Orizaba, at the head of three hundred men. These occurrences would seem to indicate a disturbed condition of the country, but the members of the government with whom I have had occasion to converse lately do not seem to apprehend any serious trouble.

Rumors are abundant that General Gonzalez will not be declared President; that a sufficient number of electoral votes cast in his favor will be excluded, on the ground that the electors who cast them obtained a majority through fraud 5 that the election will then devolve upon Congress, in which event he will not be elected. But these are mere rumors.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 483. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 483.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, July 27, 1880. (Received August 12.) No. 66.]

Sir: The Diario Oficial of the 19th instant contains a decree from the President by which, acting under the authority vested in him by the act of Congress of the 25th May last, he has approved a contract made between the secretary of public works and the governor of the State of Guerrero for the construction of a railroad and telegraph line from the port of Acapulco to the city of Mexico. A copy of the paper containing the contract I inclose.

The governor is authorized, for his own account as well as for the account of the company or companies which shall be organized to that effect, to construct and operate a railroad and telegraph line, during a period of ninety-nine years, from Acapulco to the city of Mexico. The line of the road is to be that which surveys may determine as most convenient; the surveys to be commenced immediately.

During twenty years the company will be authorized to import into the country, free of duty (federal or local), all the wire, telegraph apparatus, coal, carriages, nails, sleepers, locomotives, platforms, rails, and other materials which the minister of public works, in limited, quantities, may consider necessary for the construction, repairs to, and the operating, of the railroad and telegraph line. The domicile of the company is to be at the city of Mexico.

In the board of directors the government is to be represented by two-sixths or three-tenths of the number thereof.

The company is to be always a Mexican company, even though the members thereof should be foreigners, and are to be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the tribunals of the republic, and any conveyance of its rights or hypothecation of its property, either as regards the road or the telegraph line, to any foreign government, is declared null and of no effect. Neither can the company admit any foreign government as a member thereof, under penalty of forfeiture of their charter.

The subsidy granted by the government is $8,000 per kilometer, to be paid out of the general treasury upon the completion of one or more kilometers of road, subject to any more favorable mode of payment which may be ordered by Congress and accepted by the company.

The prompt payment of the subvention would not seem to be well secured, the condition of the treasury considered.

A large portion of the line would pass through a populous and cultivated region, but towards the west terminus of the road the country is mountainous and difficult to operate.

The present concessionaries, I am reliably informed, may have to look elsewhere for the means to construct the road.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 484. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 484.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, August 10, 1880. (Received August 26.) No. 77.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 62, I now inclose you translation of a note received by me this day from Mr. Ruelas, minister for foreign affairs, from which it would appear that eighteen of the rioters who assisted in murdering the three American citizens in the State of Michoacan on the 14th of March last, among whom are Cayetano Medina and Trinidad Mejia, who appear to have been the ringleaders therein, are in prison at Zitáeuaro, and that the strictest orders have been given that they shall be kept in safe custody; that the case is following the usual legal course, and is awaiting the result of the efforts which have been made on the part of the government to arrest others of these who appear to have been implicated in the murder, and that the superior tribunal of the State has issued orders to the judge of Zitácuaro not to wait for the execution of the orders of arrest above mentioned, but to proceed to a conclusion of the case.

Since my last upon this subject, I have seen a gentleman who lives in the immediate vicinity of the murder, who stated to me in substance what Mr. Ruelas does, in so far as the confinement of the eighteen prisoners is concerned.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure in No. 77.—Translation.]

Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Morgan.

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Mexico, August 9, 1880.

Mr. Minister: With reference to my note of the 5th of June last, relative to the tumult which took place in Anganqueo, State of Michoacan, the 14th of March last, I have the honor to say to your excellency that from the report rendered by the governor it appears that it has been possible to apprehend eighteen individuals of those complicated in the tumult, among them Cayetano Medina and Trinidad Mejia, who appear to have been its originators; all of them are prisoners in the Zitácuaro jail, the strictest orders for their secure custody having been issued; that the case is faking its legal course pending the result of some requisitions which have been made for the apprehension of other persons who appear to be complicated, and that the superior tribunal of the State had issued its orders to the judge of Zitácuaro to hasten the conclusion of the case, without awaiting the result of the said requisitions.

Your excellency will please accept the assurances which I again reiterate of my most distinguished consideration.

M. RUELAS.

No. 485. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Morgan. No. 485.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State,
Washington, September 15, 1880. No. 64.]

Sir: In a letter from the War Department, dated the 11th instant, covering a copy of a dispatch from Headquarters Division of the Missouri, dated the 10th, communicating one from General Pope, of the day previous, it is reported that Indians from Victorio’s band had, within the past few days, attacked the troops of this government at several places with some loss, and then crossed into Mexico.

In view of the foregoing facts, and also of the safe place of refuge so near at hand, to which they can escape when closely pursued by our troops, after inflicting such injury as above, a cipher telegram, dated the 14th instant, was forwarded to you on that day informing you that Victoria, after renewed attacks on our troops, had escaped pursuit over the border, and instructing you to press upon Mexico the necessity of either allowing our troops to follow him across the border or else of her assuming the responsibility of all acts arising from non-compliance with such request.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER.
Acting Secretary.

No. 486. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 486.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, September 16, 1880. No. 101.]

Sir: Copies of the President’s message to the two houses of Congress to-day have just been sent to me. I have no time to have it translated in time for the mail, which is about to close. I therefore inclose a copy in the original, and will forward a translation of the same by the next steamer.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure in No. 101—Translation.]

Address delivered by the President at the opening of Congress, on the 16th of September, 1880.

Citizen Deputies; Citizen Senators: The Tenth Congress of the Union, upon solemnly inaugurating to-day the first period of its legislative labors, greatly elevates the prestige of our popular institutions, and contributes to give them credit.

The legal and peaceful renovation of the public powers is always an event of great political importance, but upon few occasions has it had a significance so clear and opportune as to-day. For this reason, my satisfaction is all the greater at seeing you assembled for the commencement of the important labors confided to you by the constitution and the votes of the people.

Our relations with the friendly powers continue with the same reciprocal and benevolent cordiality, and are carefully maintained by the worthy representatives of those powers and by the agents of Mexico abroad.

The Government of the United States of America appointed a new minister plenipotentiary, who, having been received in the month of April, of the present year, is now in the exercise of the functions of his high investiture.

The representative of Guatemala, being accredited to the Government of Mexico as minister of the republic of Salvador and Honduras, has been received in this character, which will contribute to strengthening the ties which unite us to the states of Central America.

The Argentine Confederation appointed a consul in Mexico, and the Executive hastened to issue to him the corresponding exequatur, being desirous of manifesting his great esteem for a people who for us have the many claims to fraternity.

The Government of His Majesty the King of Spain, through its legation in this capital, has invited that of Mexico to take part in an international conference for adopting measures to prevent conflicts of jurisdiction in cases of maritime disasters, in cases where collisions occur or ships are boarded. This invitation has been accepted, with the promise to appoint, at the proper time, a representative to attend the conference.

The negotiations for the re-establishment of relations between Mexico and France have resulted to the satisfaction of both countries. The executive will very soon report the details of 1hese negotiations to the senate.

With respect to the interior, the general elections have been held without any serious disturbance of public order. Their result, as well as that of some slight disturbances to which they gave rise, were opportunely reported to the permanent committee (of Congress), and the Executive expects from the patriotism and zeal of the present Congress that it will decide the questions that have arisen in a manner worthy of the character and respectability of our institutions.

Two cases which have recently occurred in the territory of the neighboring state of Mexico, the one a highway robbery and the other a murder, have aroused great alarm in society, which energetically demands the repression of these crimes by such prompt and efficacious means as will speedily free it from such dangers.

The Executive cannot do less than support these just demands, and he permits himself to recommend to Congress to decree the authority and regulations which it may deem necessary for the object of making effective the suspension of guarantees for certain delinquents of the common order which was approved by the permanent committee of the last Congress.

In his last message to the representatives of the nation, the Executive stated his determination to establish a penitentiary, within or without the federal district, to insure the safe custody of criminals, and thus fulfilling a precept of the constitution and the prescriptions of the penal code in force. He has now the satisfaction to announce that he has found an appropriate building, the old convent of Tepotzotlan, which was once ceded to the government of the state of Mexico for the purpose of converting it into a penitentiary, on condition that if it should not do so, as it has not done, it should return it to the government of the union. The return of the building has been secured through the proper department and the plans and estimates for the transformation are being made.

The Executive also announced in his message that, looking to public security in the federal district, the organization of the mounted police was being proceeded with. This body being organized, it has been rendering its services for several months, with the best results.

It is impossible not to recognize the importance to foreign commerce (in shortening international communication) of the contracts made with steamship lines. With this idea, the Executive has not omitted any efforts, upon the exiration of such contracts, to prorogue them under the conditions most favorable to the public and the interests of the government, Thus he has done with the contract with Messrs. Alexandre & Sons. The basis for an arrangement with the Morgan American Company for the establishment of a rapid and direct line of steamers between Vera Cruz and Morgan City, touching at Galveston, has been agreed on.

Measures have been taken for the prorogation of the contract with the owners of the steamer Front era, which will give the advantage of rendering its service in combination with the Alexandria line, which from this month should double the number of its trips between the various ports of the Gulf and New York. The obstacles which presented themselves to realization of the project of the Monte Piedad issuing certificates of deposit, payable to the bearer, having been removed, the first series of those bills was put in circulation, with the best results, on the 30th of last June, the establishment being open to deposits and discount in conformity with the rules adopted.

The superior council of health is carefully engaged in the study of different measures for improving the hygienic conditions of the capital of the republic. It has presented various projects, which are at present being examined by the proper department or the city council.

The Executive announces to the chambers with the greatest satisfaction that the sepulchral monument destined to contain the remains of the benemérito of the country, the citizen Benito Juarez, has been completed, and there are only wanting a little polishing and a few ornaments to this work which for a long time has been demanded by the memory of one of our most illustrious patriarchs.

In the department of justice and public instructions, some works of great importance have been completed. The Executive being authorized by the decree of the 1st of June of the present year to prepare a code of penal procedure and to reform that in force of civil procedure, as well as to promulgate both during the recess which expires to-day, and to give a new provisional organization to the courts and tribunals of the federal district and Lower California, the proper department at once devoted itself assiduously, aided by experience and competent jurists, to the tasks made necessary by works of such vast importance. Notwithstanding the short available time, and thanks to industry with which the said department has proceeded in the work confided to it by Congress, and making use of work of committees appointed in previous epochs by the Executive, and even of those of the committee of justice of the Chamber of Deputies, as regards civil procedure, I have the satisfaction to state that the two codes to which I have alluded, and the organic law for the tribunals of the federal district and Lower California, had been promulgated. In compliance with the provisions of the said decree, the secretary of justice will report to you very soon the result of his labors towards those important sections of the republic which are entirely subject to federal legislation, with codes of procedure which are deserved by the enlightenment of the inhabitants and in keeping with the merit which distinguished the civil and penal codes which have served as a basis.

With the code of civil procedure will be sent a statement of the reasons which have been borne in mind upon making each of the modifications now made; and that of penal procedure will be accompanied by a brief explanation of the principal changes introduced by it in the legislation and practices now in force, especially regarding the popular institution, the jury.

Some truly lamentable abuses have given rise to complaints against this institution; but with the precautions which will now surround it, it is hoped that it will, by degrees, approach what a jury should be in a democratic country—a guarantee of impartial justice to all, and a continuous school for the people, whom it obliges to interest themselves in looking to public security.

The more careful organization which it has now been possible to give to it, after consulting with the superior tribunal of the district and functionaries of well known experience, and the regulation of the debates before the jury, are, among other modifications, real guarantees that in the future the par excellence popular tribunal can act with fewer inconveniences than have been experienced up to the present.

Besides the codes referred to, which will go in force the first of next November, a commercial code, already printed and revised, which under the supervision of the secretary of justice has just been formed from material collected by a special committee and which has been on hand for some years, will be sent to the chambers.

The members of the committee have been able to complete the work recently, after long conferences which commenced since the present Secretary took charge of the department. The importance of this project, which not only interests the Federal district and Lower California, but the entire republic, as containing general bases of mercantile legislation, which are subjects for federal legislation in conformity with our constitution, obliges me to recommend you to revise it, in order that it may go into effect in the shortest possible time, shaping the commercial transactions of the nation, and more especially those of the district and the aforementioned territory.

Notwithstanding the extra duties of the department of justice, those relating to public instruction have not been neglected. Thus it is that, besides providing for the continual necessities of the national schools, a normal class has been opened in the preparatory school building, principally destined to the instruction of assistants of both sexes in the primary schools. In this manner an imperious necessity is provided for, and preparations are continued for the establishment of a normal school for professors, there having been up to the present no other normal class than that in the secondary school for girls.

In the asylum for the deaf and dumb has been created a fund of the small savings that remain from the pensions assigned by law to the inmates for the purpose of supplying them with pecuniary aid when they leave the establishment.

The work of repairing and reforming the school-buildings has been continued, and m useful acquisitions have been made for them, as, for example, a considerable number of books of interest to artists, with engravings of merit, which have been .given to the national school of fine arts.

To advance the discipline and morals of the pupils, all the schools are required to send to the proper department their interior regulation, for the purpose of uniforming them as regards correctional measures, the want of which uniformity has been felt with great frequency.

Public improvements, which exercise such a decisive influence upon the welfare and progress of nations, have continued, as hitherto, to receive the attention of the Executive, and have made notable advances, as Congress, in its wisdom, will appreciate.

The telegraphic net-work has continued to be extended over the vast surface of our territory, the following lines having recently been completed: from Tepic to Rosario, and from Mazatlan to Culiacan, with a branch from Elota to Cosalà. The line from Guaymas to Hermosillo has also been constructed; that following along the Rio Grande has been prolonged to Bagdad, and that going towards the Huasteca has reached the town of Alaquines.

Some of the obstacles to the continuation of the line from Monterey to Nuevo Laredo having been removed, the work will very soon be resumed and that important line completed. In the State of Chiapas work on that going in the direction of Guatemala has been resumed. Work has been commenced on that from Matehuala to Linares and on that from Morelia to Zamora, and so soon as the material which has been ordered from abroad arrives the construction of other lines no less important will be commenced.

In order that Congress may have an idea of the advance made in prolonging the federal telegraph lines, it is sufficient to state that their entire length is 10,500 kilometers, and adding to this number that of the lines belonging to the States and private companies there is a total of 15,000 kilometers.

The estimate in force assigns $620,000 for roads and bridges and drainage of the valley of Mexico and works in the ports; that sum has been distributed to the best possible advantage in the various works to which it was destined. As regards roads, besides those repaired in the last fiscal year, work has been recommenced on that from Merida to Progreso, on that from Campeche to Mérida, on that from Jalapa to Perote, on that from Matehuala to Linares, and on that from Guadalajara to San Bias. Now, there is an engineer in the State of Chiapas studying a way of communication between said State and Tabasco, and a committee of two engineers is studying the line of the road which Congress decreed should be opened between this capital and Acapulco, under the conditions established by the decree of December 12 of last year.

Four iron bridges have been constructed, one on the road to Guadalupe Hidalgo, another in Ixtacalco across the National Canal, the third across the Remedios River, and the fourth across Rio Hondo on the Taluca road. This last was brought from the United States, where three others are being constructed for the Cuitzeo road.

The drainage commission has completed another bridge of stone across the Consulado River.

One of the most important works in the ports is the construction of the foundation for the light house at Tampico, the work being well advanced, and the iron tower manufactured in the United States having arrived in that port, that important work will soon be completed. Work on the Chijol and Escobal Canal is continued at that port.

Before the end of the present year the light-house at Frontera will also be finished, and very soon the construction will commence of the light-house tower in the port of Manzanillo, as the respective plan and estimates have already been approved.

In the enumeration of public improvements should be mentioned the fact that the public monuments which commemorate noble deeds will be definitely concluded during the course of the present year. One has been erected at Chapultepec in memory of the students of the military college who in 1847 defended the castle and forest against the invaders of the country. The other is the monument recently erected in the place of the constitution, and which has been dedicated to the memory of Enrico Martinez, the directing engineer of the work of Nochistongo. This monument will be completed with a bronze statue which is to crown it, the molding of which is now assured.

With reference to the progress of railroads, it is pleasant for me to state that in the State of Morelos work is continued with great activity in the direction of Cuautla, the road to Ozumba, 70 kilometers being already constructed and in operation. In the State of Hidalgo 15 kilometers have been terminated; on the road from Mérida to Peto, 8; on that from Vera Cruz to Alvarado, 6; and on that from Puebla to Izúcar de Matamoras, 13.

The railroad company of the district has increased the number of kilometers in operation to 88. The railroad from Celaya to Leon has become the property of the Central Railway Company, with an extension of 60 kilometers recently completed and received. On the San Martin Texmelucan Railway, which is being constructed on account of the government, an extension of 25 kilometers is prepared for the superstructure, and rails for that distance have been ordered.

The Toluca Railway Company, not having complied with the obligations imposed on it by the law of the 22d of December, 1877, the executive declared the concession to be expired, the work being in consequence suspended on the lines under construction in June last, when the declaration was made.

In Tehuantepec five kilometers are ready to receive the rails, which have not been laid for want of the accessories, as in consequence of the recent hurricane, it appears that two vessels on their way to the isthmus loaded with material for the railroad were lost. Five more kilometers will soon be completed, and the work of reconnaissance and survey is well advanced. According to the reports received by the government, so soon as the rainy season is over work on that road will receive a notable impulse.

The distance which separates the port of Guaymas from the capital of the republic and the difficulty of communication prevent the executive from giving recent reports regarding work on the Sonora Railway; but by the last received the government learned that the want of laborers prevents the proper impulse being given to that work. Nevertheless, a wagon road had been opened from Guaymas to Cabo Blanco, and the earthworks were well advanced.

Work on the Central Railway is prosecuted with activity. Nineteen and a half kilometers of earthworks have been constructed, and a cargo of rails having arrived a good portion of the new line can be finished.

The executive, conforming to the just desires of the States to obtain the beneficent results of ways of communication, and being authorized by the various decrees of Congress, has granted various railway concessions to the States of Tamaulipas, Guerrero, Chihuahua, Michoacan, Sinaloa, Oaxaca, Puebla, Vera Cruz, Tlaxcala, Hidalgo, and Yucatan.

The executive was also authorized to reform the contracts made with foreign companies for the construction of international and interoceanic railways and to make new contracts, subjecting them to the law giving the authorization.

In the exercise of those rights, the executive has made contracts with several companies. To one has been given the line starting from this capital and passing by the cities of Queretaro, Leon, Zacatecas, and Chihuahua, and terminating on the frontier of the north, and besides, another line which will go to the Pacific, passing by Guadalajara. To another company has been granted a concession for a line to the Pacific, passing by Toluca, Morelia, and Zamora, it being stipulated that from a convenient point on this line another will branch to the frontier of the north, touching the cities of San Luis, Saltillo, and Monterey. Lastly, the contract executed with the Sonora company for the conclusion of the line which it has been constructing from Guaymas to the frontier of the north has been modified.

In conformity with the law which has served as a basis for these concessions, the executive will report to Congress the use made by him of the facilities granted to him.

The Mexican Cable Company, of New York, reports having made a contract for the manufacture and laying of the cable, with a company in London, which engages to send it out by the middle of December, and lay it during the month of January, 1881, from a point in the State of Texas to Vera Cruz, with a connection at the mouth of the Pánuco.

The department will immediately send Congress a general statement of the receipts and expenditures of the federal treasury for the fiscal year 1879–’80, which shows that gradually the beneficent effects of the laws and administrative dispositions dictated for the improvement of the condition of the treasury are making themselves felt; the increase over the $17,811, 124 of the previous year being $3,378,905, has made it possible not only to pay with punctuality the ordinary expenses of the administration, but also great part of the deficit caused the previous year by a considerable decrease in the receipts.

The executive this time, as on former occasions, giving his first attention to the payment of the debt to the Government of the United States, is now prepared to pay the fifth installment of the debt, which is due in January next, and will place the amount before the time in that country in order to fulfill this national obligation. The payment of the Mexican creditors of the United States is being made with all regularity by the treasury of Mexico, in conformity with the stipulations of the convention of the 4th of July, 1868.

The three revenue cutters which the executive caused to be constructed in the United States for the service of the custom-houses of Tampico, Campeche, and Progreso have just arrived at Vera Cruz, and will commence to render service immediately, thus facilitating the suppression of contraband in the interest of commerce and of the treasury. For the same purpose two new custom-houses have been established in Sonora, and those at Altar and Magdalena have been removed to the vicinity of the boundary line with the United States, thus preparing to give special care to commercial development encouraged by the completion of the railway lines to Tucson and the well-grounded hope of the conclusion and connection with them of the railroad from Guaymas to Hermosillo.

With the efficacy and care demanded by a work of such importance, has the executive endeavored to fulfill the obligation imposed by the law of estimates of consolidating into a single body the laws in force regarding the stamp tax and maritime customhouses, and he has the satisfaction to state that the stamp law has been published and the consolidation of the custom-house law is being industriously proceeded with and is very well advanced, it being hoped that even before the expiration of the time fixed by law for carrying out the work it will be published, when commerce will commence to feel the beneficent results of the precision and clearness of the law of the important subject of commerce.

The executive being desirous to procure a proper solution of the difficult question of the public debt in order to give a solid basis to the national credit, by liquidating the many values of which the debt is composed, and making the regular payments, has submitted the question to the study of a special committee, and he hopes that after examining the project which it shall formulate, he can again present this important question for the country to the enlightened consideration of Congress before the termination of its present period of sessions.

In order to properly facilitate the works of the military section of the geographical exploring commission, it was directed that it should be joined by officers of the staff, and in its greater part it is composed of persons from this body, who are rendering their service in the State of Puebla, and they will contribute with their labor to accumulate valuable data which at a later period will serve in the study of our budding national history and in the formation of geological maps.

In the military college the corps of professors of the marine section has been filled, and there the students who devote their time to this study can follow their career upon a good basis of instruction.

One of the most notable events for the future welfare of Vera Cruz has been the demolition of the wall and forts surrounding that place on the land side. The government, in view of the uselessness of those old works, which do not satisfy the military requirements of the present day, ordered their demolition in part, there remaining nothing standing at present but the walks and bulwarks which defend the port.

Work on the national powder factory in Santa Fé is continued with activity, and can very soon be put in movement, thus economizing much of the money which at present it is necessary and indispensable to spend in the manufacture of powder and munitions of war.

Instruction in target shooting having been neglected up to the present, a provisional school for that purpose has been organized, which has given the most satisfactory results. The executive in order that our soldiers may know and appreciate the advantages of the present system of breech-loading arms, and that their effect may be in keeping with the advancement and precepts of modern tactics, recently put in practice, has ordered the construction of a national building for a shooting gallery. This improvement will in a short time assist in the reduction of the army which the government has projected, and for its complete reorganization the respective departments will ask the Congress of the union for the indispensable faculties.

Two nautical schools have been created, one in Campeche and one in Mazatlan, both for commercial pilots. These schools are provided with a director and two professors, who have been selected by competitive examination and they will enter upon their duties next October.

In the artillery service it has been endeavored to give an impulse to everything having relation to military establishments of construction.

A hydraulic press of great power has been purchased in the United States, and is now being put up for the manufacture of steel and bronze cannon.

Both the national arms factory and the ordnance department have been supplied with machinery and apparatus, for increasing their production and hastening the completion of their different works.

For the purpose of facilitating communication between the war department and the corps of the garrison and the other military offices and buildings, direct telephone lines have been established to each one of those establishments, the central register being in the department itself.

A practical medical military school has been established in the hospital of instruction, and, professors having been appointed, there are now remaining only a few small necessities to be attended to in conformity with the regulations which have just been issued.

The executive appointed a special committee to study reforms of the general ordnance of the army. This committee, fulfilling the trust placed in it, has terminated its interesting work, which will be submitted to the deliberation of Congress.

As. a rule, peace has been preserved throughout the republic. The events which took place in Lower California, Sonora, and Sinaloa have not been of serious consequences. The revolutionists, having been pursued and defeated with promptness, have lost all their munitions of war, and it will be impossible for them to reorganize to commence the revolution anew.

Much less importance should be given to other movements which have taken place in different parts of the country. These movements having a local character, they have been opportunely and energetically repressed by the respective authorities. It can be stated that there does not exist at present a single group of rebels.

During June and July last a considerable number of savage Indians from the United States invaded the national territory. In consequence, orders were given to Colonel Valle to open, in conjunction with the American forces, a formal campaign against the Indians, with the understanding that neither the Mexicans nor the American forces should cross their respective lines in making the pursuit. He was also authorized to organize the auxiliary forces strictly necessary. The Indians being besieged by our forces, they were compelled to abandon the country, crossing the Rio Grande to Ojo Caliente and entering the American territory.

The executive has resolved to establish military colonies at the watering places frequented by the Indians, and in this manner he hopes those invasions which have caused so many calamities on the frontier will be prevented.

Affairs of the gravest importance and most serious consequences in matters of politics and administration will engage the attention of both chambers from the very commencement of their regular session.

The executive, confiding, as he has always done, in the enlightenment and zeal of the representatives of the people and the States, trusts that they will determine those questions with a view to the well-being of the republic.

No. 487. Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts. No. 487.
Mr. Morgan to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, September 21, 1880. (Received October 7.) No. 102.]

Sir: Your cipher telegram, which appears to have been received at Matamoros on the 15th instant, reached here late on the night of the 17th. I prepared a note to the minister for foreign relations, in which I requested the consent of the Mexican Government to the fitting out of troops by the United States to pursue Victorio across the border, which on the following morning I carried to the foreign office.

Mr. Fernandez, who has recently been appointed chief clerk, received me. I asked to see Mr. Ruelas; Mr. Fernandez said that he was ill, and in reply to my question whether he (Mr. Fernandez) was authorized to represent him, he replied that he was. I then referred him to the notes which I had addressed to Mr. Ruelas on the 21st and 26th of June and 13th of July last, in which I had warned him that Victorio and his band, having found asylum in Mexico, and the Government of Mexico having refused its consent to the crossing the Rio Grande by our troops in pursuit of them, would soon recuperate their forces, and, recrossing the Rio Bravo, renew their depredations upon our citizens and upon their property; and I said to him that the apprehensions which I had expressed in those notes had been realized, as I had been informed through the telegrams which I had only a short time before received from you, whereupon I handed him the note which I had prepared thereon, a copy of which I inclose, and which he read in my presence. He said, after reading it that, Mr. Ruelas being ill he would show it to him and would send me an answer thereto in a few days. I replied that the matter I had called upon was of serious importance to both governments, and that if the foreign secretary was unable to see me, and he, Mr. Fernandez, was not authorized to act in his stead, I must request an interview with the President. He asked me when I wished the interview to take place; I replied, at once. He went out, and returning in a few moments, informed me that the President would see me on the Monday following (20th instant). I then took my leave, informing him that I should communicate the President’s reply to you by telegraph, which I did.

* * * * * * *

You will observe that in my note to Mr. Ruelas I limited myself to asking the consent of the Mexican Government to the fitting out of troops, in order that Victorio might be pursued upon Mexican territory. I did not wish the President or his ministers to feel that they were acting under any threat of future responsibility.

In my interview with Mr. Fernandez, however, I called his attention to the fact that my government was in earnest about the matter, and that something must really be done to protect the people of the United States against the constant depredations which were committed upon them by parties residing on this side of the boundary line between the two countries, and by public enemies of our country who found asylum upon Mexican soil.

* * * * * * *

On Monday, at eleven o’clock, I repaired to the palace, where I was at once received by the President, to whom I explained the matter in hand. He replied to me that he had been authorized some time ago by Congress to enter into a convention with the United States by which the troops of each nation would be allowed to cross into the territory of the other when in pursuit of their enemy; that Mexico had on several occasions suggested that such a convention should be agreed to, but that the United States had not expressed any willingness to act thereon. I replied to him that the question of a convention was not the one which I had come to discuss, although I might mention that similar propositions had been made by the representative of the United States to the Mexican Government and by the United States Government to the representative of the Mexican Government at Washington without avail; that my instructions were to obtain from the Mexican Government its consent to the crossing of American troops into Mexican territory in pursuit of their enemy, who was causing damage to Mexican citizens as they had caused damage to ours. I called his attention to the fact, of which he must be cognizant, that a large body of troops were kept on the north side of the Rio Grande to preserve the peace on that frontier as well as to protect Mexican soil from invasion by evil disposed men from the United States, and that recently several of this class, suspected of being engaged in enterprises which might result to her detriment, had been/arrested; that these acts showed the strongest desire on the part of the United States to preserve the friendly relations now existing between the two governments; and that it occurred to me we were asking very little when we requested from Mexico the courtesy of allowing our troops to cross into her territory in pursuit of the savages who had been murdering our people and who “had found safety from the pursuit of our troops upon her soil. The President replied that he regretted the circumstance greatly, but that the constitution prohibited the entry of any foreign troops upon Mexican territory without the assent previously obtained of the Senate. He said also that he could apply to the Senate to give its consent, but that it was to be regretted that the forms of legislation should be gone through with to meet an isolated case, when provision might be made for this and for all similar occasions which might occur hereafter by a convention, which he requested me to state to you he was prepared to enter into; at the same time he said that his cabinet was then assembled, and that he would see whether Mr. Mariscal, minister of justice, with the assistance of the minister for foreign affairs, could suggest some mode which would be satisfactory to his advisers and himself, by which the consent of the government asked for could be given without violating the constitution, and that Mr. Mariscal, in an unofficial character, would communicate the result to me. I asked him when I might expect an answer. He replied, “to-morrow” (to-day). I have waited for Mr. Mariscal until the mail is about to close, but he has not presented himself, and I therefore report to you in what direction I have moved, and what my efforts have been to carry out the instructions contained in your telgram.

I may here state that on the evening of the day of my receipt of your dispatch I had a visit from Mr. Mariscal, in which he mentioned to me (by authority) the desire of the President that a convention between the two countries should be agreed to, by which troops belonging to either should be allowed to cross the Rio Grande. I then mentioned to him the telegram which I had that day received (of which he said he was ignorant), and I used all the arguments I was master of to convince him of the propriety of the Presidents acceding to your request. He assured me that he would see the President before I did on Monday, and I think I am justified in saying that it was because Mr. Mariscal had approached him upon the subject that he suggested him as the medium of any future discussion between us, added to the fact that Mr. Ruelas, the minister for foreign affairs, is in such a state of health that he can only attend to the routine business of his department.

I am, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

[Inclosure in No. 102.]

Mr. Morgan to Mr. Ruelas.

Legation of the United States,
Mexico, September 18, 1880.

Sir: Victorio and his hand haying invaded the territory of the United States, after renewed atrocities upon the citizens thereof, has again escaped pursuit and has sought refuge in Mexico. I am instructed by my government to press upon the government of your excellency the necessity of allowing the fitting out of United States troops to pursue these savages across the border.

I improve, &c.,

P. H. MORGAN.

No. 488. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Morgan. No. 488.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State,
Washington, October 9, 1880. No. 71.]

Sir: On the 17th of July last, by instruction No. 130, Mr. William Schuchardt, the United States vice-consul at Piedras Negras, was directed to furnish the department with a detailed and circumstantial report in relation to the impressment of American citizens for service in the Mexican army. Mr. Schuchardt’s reply to that instruction is his dispatch No. 254, of the 15th of August last, in which is detailed the facts and circumstances attending the impressment in the thirty-first battalion of the Mexican army of the following-named persons, viz: Felipe Burnato, Santos Hernandez, Miguel Guerrero, Manuel Guerrero, and George Cinio. For your complete information, a copy of Mr. Sehuchardt’s dispatch and of its accompaniments is herewith inclosed.

From the circumstances presented in that dispatch, being the detailed proceedings on the part of the local authorities of Piedras Negras and Las Vacas, their actions appear to the Department to be not only in contravention of public law and national comity, but also a clear and plain violation and disregard of the stipulations of the fourteenth article of the treaty of 1831 between the United States and Mexico, this article being included in the portion of the treaty of 1831 revived by the seventeenth article of the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.

It seems almost needless to add that there is scarcely any act of which a nation should be less tolerant than that of a neighboring power forcibly impressing its citizens into their military service, perhaps to be obliged, at some future time, to fight against their own flag.

In view of the foregoing circumstances, if in all respects they be well founded, you are hereby instructed to demand of the Mexican Government the instant release of these men, and their being sent unmolested to their homes in Texas, or allowed to proceed, likewise without molestation, to any point in Mexico where they may have business or may desire to go, and you will also ask for reasonable pecuniary indemnity for the detention, annoyance, and inconvenience to which they may have been thus unwarrantably subjected. You will likewise urge upon the Mexican Government the apparent necessity of the adoption, in the interest of international peace, friendship, and good neighborhood, of such measures, and the immediate issuance of such orders to its civil and military officers on the frontier, as will prevent occurrences of a like nature in the future.

If the fact of Mr. Burnato’s not being a citizen of the United States should be brought up by the Mexican Government, you will suggest that for fourteen years he has been a permanent resident of this country, of which he had declared his intention to become a citizen, and has thus been under the protection of this government, its laws and treaties, and it would seem very ungracious for the Mexican Government to insist under these circumstances on making any unfavorable distinction in his case.

* * * * * * *

You will give the subject your early and earnest attention, and report the result of your proceedings to the Department for its information.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

[Inclosure in Mr. Hunter’s No. 71.]

Mr. Schuchardt to Mr. Hunter.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Piedras Negras, Mexico, August 15, 1880. (Received August 25.) No. 254.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your instruction numbered 130, dated July 17, 1880, in which you inform me that the Department will expect a detailed and circumstantial report relative to the impressment of American citizens for service in the Mexican army. I respectfully herewith submit the following report for the information of the Department. Felipe Burnato, on or about the 1st day of November, 1879, was apprehended at Piedras Negras by custom-house guards for smuggling 18 bottles of beer from Eagle Pass, Texas, to Piedras Negras, Mexico. For this violation of the revenue laws Burnato was sentenced by Mr. E. Baz, the administrador (collector) of the custom-house of Piedras Negras, to five years’ service as a soldier in the thirty-first battalion of the regular Mexican army.

Santos Hernandez and Miguel and Manuel Guerrero, together with their mother, Josefa Hernandez de Guerrero, left San Antonio, Texas, where they had lived nearly their whole life, with the intention to visit some relatives in Mexico. On reaching the border they became short of means, and in order to provide themselves with the necessaries to proceed on their journey they worked for some time at or near San Felipe, Texas, opposite of a village called Las Vacas on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande. When they had earned by their work sufficient money they resumed their journey, crossing the Rio Grande at San Felipe. On their arrival at Las Vacas they were apprehended by some of the “colones militares,” a Mexican irregular troop, and after being despoiled of their horses, arms, and all they had, were escorted by their captors to Piedras Negras, delivered at the quarters of the thirty-first battalian, and without being told of the cause of their arrest were made soldiers. They never had a hearing or trial before any judge or any other official. Josefa Hernandez, the mother of Miguel and Manuel Guerrero, who implored my protection, made the statement before me. Their arrest was made some time in February or March. They were not allowed to see me. George Cinio, colored, formerly a soldier of the United States Army, was arrested by order of the alcalde of Piedras Negras, sent to the quarters of the thirty-first battalion, there made a soldier. He applied to me in writing, stating that he was entirely ignorant of the cause of his arrest, never having had a trial, or even a hearing, before the alcalde, or any judge, or other official. To this statement of Cinio the alcalde agrees, excusing his action by saying that there were many complaints made about Cinio’s conduct, and that by the disposition of the gefe politico, the alcalde’s superior, Cinio was left where he was until otherwise disposed of; that he, however, would release him if I would be responsible for his conduct. This I declined to do, but stated to the alcalde that I would inform my government of the facts.

* * * * * * *

I have the honor to transmit herewith the following inclosures relating to the citizenship of three of the above mentioned persons: No. 1. Statement of Faustina García; No. 2. Statement of Jesús Samora; and No. 3. Statement of J. W. Bonnet. Referring to Miguel Guerrero, I have no document which proves his American citizenship, but being a step-brother of Manuel Guerrero, I am satisfied that he is an American citizen. George Cinio being born in the United States, and having served in the Army of the United States, is an American citizen.

I am, &c.,

WM. SCHUCHARDT,
United States Vice-Consul.

In district court.

The State of Texas,
County of Maverick:

Personally appeared Felipe Burnato, who declares upon oath that he is a natural-born citizen of the Republic of Mexico; that he was born in Monclova; that he is 31 years of age; that he emigrated to the United States of America, and arrived at the port of Eagle Pass. State of Texas, on or about the month of September, 1866; that it is his bona-fide intention to become a citizen of the United States of America, and renounce forever all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or sovereignty whatsoever, and particularly any and all allegiance to the Government of the Republic of Mexico; and that he will bear true allegiance to the United States and support the Constitution of the same.

FELIPE his + mark. BURNATO.

Sworn to and subscribed before me, Albert Tuerpe, this 1st day of November, A. D. 1872.

ALBERT TUERPE,
Clerk District Court, Maverick County, Texas.

State of Texas,
County of Maverick:

I hereby certify the above to be a true copy of the original from the records of the district court of said county.

Witness my hand and official seal at office in Eagle Pass, this 5th day of May, A. D. 1880.
[l. s.] JOS. HOFSTETTER,
Clerk District Court, Maverick County, Texas.

The United States,
The State of Texas, County of Maverick, ss:

Personally appeared before me, the undersigned authority, Faustina García, who, after being duly sworn, deposes and says: My name is Faustina García; I reside in the town of Eagle Pass, county of Maverick, State of Texas; I am the wife of Felipe Burnato; I was lawfully married to him about twelve years ago in the city of Monclova, State of Coahuila, Republic of Mexico, on or about November 1, 1872; Felipe Burnato, my husband, declared his intention to become a citizen of the United States of America, and renounced forever all allegiance and fidelity to any foreign prince, potentate, state, or sovereignty whatsoever, and particularly any and all allegiance to the Government of the Republic of Mexico, and that he will bear true allegiance to the United States and support the Constitution of the same. And that on or about the 1st day of November, A. D. 1879, Felipe Burnato, my husband, was detained in custody by the custom-house authorities of Piedras Negras, State of Coahuila, Republic of Mexico, in violation of revenue laws of the Republic of Mexico, and about the same time the collector of customs at Piedras Negras did order and express a sentence of five years’ confinement upon Felipe Burnato to the military prison at Piedras Negras, State of Coahuila, Republic of Mexico, without any judicial proceedings, as required by the constitution and laws of the Republic of Mexico; and the said Felipe Burnato is now required, against his own will, to enlist in the service of the army of the Republic of Mexico, whose allegiance he had renounced forever; and I, as the wife of the said Felipe Burnato, by virtue of his declaration to become a citizen of the United States of America, make known to the consul of the United States at Piedras Negras, Mexico, that the said Felipe Burnato is now illegally deprived from his liberty.

FAUSTINA her X mark. GARCÍA.

Sworn and subscribed to before me this 5th day of May, A. D. 1880.
[l. s.] F. C. DELL,
United States Commissioner Western District of Texas.

The State of Texas,
County of Bexar:

Personally appeared before, me the undersigned, Jesús Samora, who, after being sworn, says that he is the identical person who stood as god-father for the boy child Manuel Guerrero, whose father was Manuel Guerrero and mother Josefa Fernandez, and same boy child mentioned in certificate signed J. C. Neraz, and said Manuel Guerrero in the certificate is the identical person now a soldier in the Mexican army; and said Manuel Guerrero was born in Bexar County, State of Texas, United States of America; and said Manuel Guerrero is now, and always has been, a citizen of the State of Texas and of the United States of America, and never a citizen of the Republic of Mexico, and has always lived in Bexar County, Texas, United States of America, and never claimed to be a citizen of the Republic of Mexico.

JESÚS his X mark. SAMORA.

Subscribed (by making a mark within his name for signature, declaring his inability to write) and sworn to before me this 20th day of April, A. D. 1880. To certify which, I hereunto sign my name and affix the seal of the county court of Bexar County, at office in San Antonio, Texas, the day and year lastly herein above written.

[l. s.] SAM. S. SMITH,
Clerk of Court, Bexar Co., Texas,
By THAD. W. SMITH,
Deputy.

The State of Texas:
County of Maverick:

This day personally appeared before the undersigned authority, J. W. Bonnet, to me well known, who, after being by me duly sworn, deposes on his oath, and says that he has been personally acquainted with Santos Hernandez since the year A. D. 1861, and that at that time the said Santos Hernandez was a soldier in the Army of the United States Government and doing duty as a soldier, and that he verily believes that the said Santos Hernandez is a bona-fide resident of the United States of America.

J. W. BONNET.

Sworn to and subscribed before me, at office in Eagle Pass, this 25th day of May, A. D. 1880.

LACY McKENZIE,
Justice of the Peace for Precinct No. One, Maverick County, Texas.

Mr. Schuchardt:

Sanito Troquillo was also in my brother’s company, and knows Santos Hernandez to have been a soldier in Captain Bonnet’s company of the First United States Texas Volunteers. He was here yesterday. I spoke to him about Santos Hernandez. He was willing to make oath, but has gone to the Pendense and will not return for perhaps a week. I hope the inclosed will be sufficient to cause the release of the party incarcerated.

Respectfully,

J. A. BONNET.

No. 489. Mr. Hay to Mr. Morgan. No. 489.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Morgan.

Department of State.
Washington, October 20, 1880. No. 74.]

Sir: Tour dispatch No. 114 of the 30th ultimo has just been received. It conveys the sad intelligence of the death on the 22d ultimo of Señor Ruelas, so long at the head of the ministry of foreign affairs.

The instructions sent to you lately on learning of the protracted and serious illness of Señor Ruelas will have shown the interest here felt in the personal welfare of one who, by his position and attainments, was brought into so many and cordial relations with this government.

The feelings of sympathy then expressed now deepen into sorrow for his death.

If you have not already done so, you will take an early occasion to manifest in fitting terms to the Mexican Government the regret with which we receive the tidings of the decease of this valued officer and distinguished statesman, to whose able hands had been so happily confided the maintenance and development on the part of Mexico of the friendly relations between the two republics.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

Correspondence with the Mexican Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the Mexican Legation in Washington.

[490] . Mr. Hunter to Señor de Zamacona.

Department of State, Washington, November 7, 1879.

[491] . Mr. Evarts to Señor de Zamacona.

Department of State, Washington, March 1, 1880.

[492] . Señor de Zamacona to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States, Washington, March 10, 1880.

[493] . Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro.

Department of State, Washington, June 15, 1880.

[494] . Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States, New York, June 16, 1880. (Received June 18.)

[495] . Mr. Hay to Señor Navarro.

Department of State, Washington, June 23, 1880.

[496] . Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico, New York, June 25, 1880. (Received June 26.)

[497] . Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro.

Department of State, Washington, July 27, 1880.

[498] . Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States, New York, July 28, 1880.

[499] . Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States, New York, August 28, 1880.

[500] . Señor Navarro to Mr. Hay.

Legation of Mexico in the United States, New York, September 3, 1880.

[501] . Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro.

Department of State, Washington, September 11, 1880.

[502] . Mr. Hunter to Señor Navarro.

Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1880.

[503] . Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States, New York, October 18, 1880.

No. 490. Mr. Hunter to Señor de Zamacona. No. 490.
Mr. Hunter to Señor de Zamacona.

Department of State,
Washington, November 7, 1879.

Sir: Referring to correspondence which I have lately had the honor to exchange with you concerning the movements of Indians on the Mexican border, and the military and other measures taken to repress their marauding excursions, I now beg to communicate to you that this Department learns, through that of War, that on the 30th of September last the colonel commanding the cavalry forces of the United States in the district of New Mexico reported that he was then in pursuit of Indians who were thoroughly armed and furnished with ammunition; that their numbers were largely made up of Indians from Mexico; that the testimony of credible witnesses reported these Indians as having been seen purchasing ammunition in several of the frontier towns of Chihuahua; that the losses of his command up to that date, so far as heard from, in this raid alone, were fourteen soldiers and scouts killed; that besides these, twenty-five men, women, and children were reported killed, and that there were not then, nor had he ever known of there having been at any time, any Mexican troops operating against Indians on the New Mexican frontier. Colonel Hatch adds that the reports of field duty of companies of the posts near the Mexican frontier in his district is sufficient evidence that every exertion is made by our forces to protect the citizens of Mexico from any raid from the Territory of New Mexico, and that the Indians driven over this boundary are, in nearly every case, those who live in Mexico and depredate on United States territory.

In communicating this report to you, I have merely to observe that the death-roll of Colonel Hatch’s small command bears eloquent testimony to the activity as well as the danger of his operations against the marauding Indians.

Accept, sir, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

No. 491. Mr. Evarts to Señor de Zamacona. No. 491.
Mr. Evarts to Señor de Zamacona.

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1880.

Sir: It affords me pleasure to herewith communicate to you for the information of your government a copy of a letter addressed on the 24th ultimo by the Secretary of War to the General of the Army, informing him that he is to consider the instructions contained in the order of June 1, 1877, from the War Department, contemplating and providing for a direction to General E. O. C. Ord, that, under certain circumstance therein set forth, he might pursue raiders across the border into the Republic of Mexico for the purpose of punishing them and recapturing stolen property, as no longer operative, and directing him to so advise General Ord.

It has afforded much satisfaction to the President to find in the actual situation upon the borders, in the undisturbed security against violence that has for some time been maintained there, in the spirit and conduct of the military efforts made by Mexico to observe its international obligations in preventing invasions of our territory, and in the judgment of our own military authorities, that the order of June 1, 1877, need no longer be kept in operation, good grounds for the action indicated in his last message to Congress, and now taken.

I sincerely hope that no future occurrences upon the border may disturb the present cordial relations now established between the two countries.

Be pleased to accept, &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure.]

Mr. Ramsey to Mr. Sherman.

War Department,
Washington, February 24, 1880.

General: General E. O. C. Ord, commanding the Department of Texas, having stated in his annual report that the condition of affairs which rendered necessary the order of June 1, 1877, to cross the border between the United States and Mexico, in his opinion, no longer exists, as the Mexican Government has shown its ability and determination to put a stop to the invasions of the. United States which gave rise to it; and such recommendation of General Ord having been considered by the President, in connection with other information in possession of the government to the same effect, the President desires to recognize in this well proved ability of the Mexican Government to restrain effectively violations of our territory a proper occasion to accommodate your instructions to the present condition of things on this border.

You are, therefore, to consider the instructions of the order of June 1, 1877, issued to you by this department, which contemplate and provide for a direction to General Ord, that, under certain circumstances therein set forth, he may pursue raiders across the border, for the purpose of punishing them, as well as recapturing stolen property, as no longer in force.

You will, therefore, instruct General Ord to this effect, and desire him to communicate this information to the Mexican military authorities along the border, enjoining also upon General Ord the utmost vigilance on his side of the line, and a prompt report of any change of action or disposition on the part of the Mexican military force that may endanger the permanence and security of the present peaceful situation on the border.

Very respectfully,

ALEX. RAMSEY.
Secretary of War.

No. 492. Señor de Zamacona to Mr. Evarts. No. 492.
Señor de Zamacona to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States,
Washington, March 10, 1880.

Mr. Secretary: I have until now been prevented from answering the note which your Department was pleased to address me on the 1st instant, both by my absence from this capital in the early part of the month and by illness since my return.

I am very much gratified to see by that note and by the inclosure which accompanied it that the President has seen fit to declare no longer in force the instructions given to General Ord in June, 1877, authorizing him, in certain cases, to pursue Indians and thieves beyond the frontier.

The opinion formed by my government in relation to that authorization and its endeavors to secure its revocation will enable your Department to realize with what satisfaction the note to which I am now replying, and which I have already transmitted to our department of foreign relations, will be received in Mexico. That note dispels the only shadow that darkened the northern horizon of our republic, and it will raise to its full height the feeling of mutual confidence which has for some time past been developing between the people of Mexico and those of the United States, and which is so much needed, in order that business transactions of importance and enterprizes of common utility may be fostered between the two nations.

The reasons which, as your Department informs me, have induced the President to revoke General Ord’s instructions concerning the pursuit of thieves and savages across the frontier cannot fail to be flattering to my government, inasmuch as they show that the government of this republic has appreciated the earnest and efficient zeal with which the Mexican troops and the inhabitants of our frontier States have been fighting against brigandage and barbarism on the confines of the two countries; and that it has appreciated also the spirit of cordiality and harmony by which our national administration is actuated in its relations with the United States. The reciprocity in this feeling, of which this legation has just received conclusive evidence, is an earnest of abundant fruit for the interests which connect in common both our republics.

I must express the most profound conviction that the measure of which I have been informed by your Department will have a very beneficial influence, even upon the situation of the frontier districts, since national sensitiveness will no longer be an obstacle to perfect harmony or to the united action of the civil authorities and the military officers on both sides of the line.

Be pleased, Mr. Secretary, to convey to the President, together with my most sincere respects, the expression of the gratification that has been afforded me by his opinion touching the conduct of the Mexican Government on the frontier, which opinion has found so kindly an interpreter in you.

I have, &c.,

M. DE ZAMACONA.

No. 493. Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro. No. 493.
Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro.

Department of State,
Washington, June 15, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to solicit your most earnest attention to a matter of vital importance to the citizens of the State of Texas engaged in agricultural pursuits on the eastern shore of the Rio Grande.

A statement of the facts as alleged is given in inclosed copies of correspondence, consisting of a letter addressed to the Secretary of State by the governor of Texas, and the inclosures therein contained being the statement of the county judge of El Paso County, and petitions signed by several hundred citizens of San Elizario and Socorro.*

The trouble complained of appears to be the result of the action of the Mexican population on the western shore of the river in diverting, into ditches dug for that purpose, the small quantity of water that finds its way down during the dry season, thereby totally depriving the agriculturists on the eastern or Texan shore of the means of irrigating their crops, and thus cutting off their sole means of livelihood. As this is not only in direct opposition to the recognized rights of riparian proprietors, but is also contrary to that good feeling and harmony which ought to exist between colaborers in peaceful pursuits, and might, moreover, if permitted to continue, result in bitter feeling and possible breaches of the peace, I most earnestly request, in these high interests, that you will have the goodness to bring the matter to the attention of your government with a view to procuring a cessation of the annoyance complained of.

I shall be happy to co-operate with yon in any way tending to produce the desired result, and have, to that end, already instructed the minister of the United States at Mexico to put himself in communication with your government on the subject, and should the facts prove upon investigation to be as stated, to endeavor to have the injustice complained of put an end to.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

* Vide ante, p. 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 473].

No. 494. Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts. No. 494.
Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States,
New York, June 16, 1880. (Received June 18.)

Mr. Secretary: I have had the honor to receive the note of your Department, dated yesterday, in which you were pleased to inclose a letter addressed to you by the governor of the State of Texas, an opinion of the judge of El Paso County, and various petitions signed by several hundreds of citizens, the whole relative to a complaint that the Mexicans on the west side of the Rio Grande are digging ditches with a view, to taking the water from said river, leaving so small a quantity for the use of the dwellers on this side that there is reason to fear that it will be exhausted when the dry season comes, and that the interests of American agriculturists in that region will suffer in consequence thereof.

The Department of State is pleased to request me to bring this matter to the notice of my government, and expresses its desire to co-operate in bringing about a suitable remedy of the evil in question.

In reply I have the honor to state that, as soon as I received the communication to which I refer, I transmitted it, with all its inclosures, to the Government of Mexico, which, being actuated as it is by the same sentiments that actuate the American Government in behalf of the harmony and friendly relations which should exist between the two republics, will certainly not fail to give this matter its most serious consideration.

I avail myself, &c.,

JUAN N. NAVARRO.

No. 495. Mr. Hay to Señor Navarro. No. 495.
Mr. Hay to Señor Navarro.

Department of State,
Washington, June 23, 1880.

Sir: Referring to the rumors which for some brief time past have appeared in the public prints, but which have fortunately not had official echo through your government, concerning the supposed formation of raiding parties near the Mexican frontier for the alleged purpose of making an incursion into the State of Sonora in connection with certain disaffected movements supposed to exist there, I take pleasure in communicating to you, for the information of the government you represent, the following text of a telegraphic instruction which has been sent by the Secretary of War through the General of the Army to Major General McDowell, commanding the Division of the Pacific:

By direction of the President the commanding general Military Division of the Pacific is authorized to prevent any invasion of the territory of Mexico by armed forces in violation of the neutrality laws.

Accept, sir, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 496. Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts. No. 496.
Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico,
New York, June 25, 1880. (Received June 26.)

Mr. Secretary: I have had the honor to receive the note of your Department of the 22d instant, in which you were pleased to inform me that, owing to the rumors which have recently circulated with regard to a proposed filibustering expedition for the invasion of the State of Sonora, the Secretary of War, through the General-in-Chief of the Army, had sent an order, by telegraph, to the commander of the Department of the Pacific, instructing him to prevent any armed invasion of the territory of Mexico. This measure of the President of the United States, of which I shall inform the Government of Mexico without delay, will be received by it as a new proof of the good understanding which happily exists between the two republics, and as an earnest of the amicable sentiments which actuated this government in behalf of the preservation of peace and harmony in its relations with the Mexican Republic, in ordering, as it has done, that the neutrality laws should be obeyed.

In thanking the Department of State, in my own name, for the information contained in the note to which I am now replying, I take pleasure in reiterating to you, Mr. Secretary, the assurances of my very high consideration.

JUAN N. NAVARRO.

No. 497. Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro. No. 497.
Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro.

Department of State,
Washington, July 27, 1880.

Sir: Referring to the Department’s note to you of the 23d ultimo, regarding certain unofficial rumors of intended invasion of Mexican territory by raiding parties, and wherein were quoted the telegraphic instructions to the United States military authorities to prevent any violation of the neutrality laws by armed forces, I have now the honor to communicate to you, for the information of the government you represent, that I am advised, by a letter from the War Department of the 8th instant, that the forces which General Marquez had collected had been disbanded in consequence of the action of our military authorities.

Should your government receive any information of any movement of General Marquez towards a renewal of his projected invasion, it will be the desire of this government promptly to take measures to frustrate it.

Accept, &c., &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 498. Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts. No. 498.
Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States,
New York, July 28, 1880.

Sir: I have had the honor to receive the note of your Department, bearing date of yesterday, in which you were pleased to state, for the information of my government, that the War Department had apprised you that the forces under the command of Marquez de Leon had been disbanded in consequence of the attitude of the military authorities of this country. You were likewise pleased to inform me that the Government of the United States desires to co-operate in frustrating the efforts made in this country to disturb the peace of Mexico.

In reply, I have the honor to inform your Department that I shall take pleasure in transmitting to my government the note to which I have just referred, feeling certain that it will be received as a valuable evidence of the friendly sentiments which, happily, unite the two republics.

I gladly renew to you, Mr. Secretary, the assurances of my very high consideration.

JUAN N. NAYARRO.

No. 499. Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts. No. 499.
Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States,
New York, August 28, 1880.

Mr. Secretary: The governor of the State of Chihuahua has written, under date of the 9th of June last, to the office of the secretary of foreign affairs in Mexico, giving information that a certain Robert Martin, a bandit by profession, who for some time past has been marauding on both frontiers, has succeeded in forming a gang of Texans and Mexicans, who at present have taken refuge in the Sierra del Hacha, in American territory, from whence they separate to commit their depredations, stealing large numbers of cattle which pass on that side of the frontier. This legation had some suspicions, since the month of May, 1879, from a report received from the administrator of the frontier custom-house at Janos, of the existence of the bandit to whom I at present refer, well enough known in this section as a fugitive from the Franklin jail, where he was registered under the name of “Bob. Robert Martin.”

The municipal president of Ascension for the guidance of the political chief of the district of Galiana addressed himself finally to the governor of the State of Chihuahua, giving him an account of the theft of cattle committed by the above-mentioned gang, and expressing fear of the repetition of these acts of outlawry. It happened in a few days that they committed another theft of cattle, belonging to the same municipal president and Mr. Cura Baca. The fact was attested by a person who had set out from San Simon, and who knows the brands, and saw the animals in the possession of the American, Robert Martin. The residents of Ascension remember, upon that occasion, that in that place a so-called outlaw was arrested and conveyed to the capital of the State, from whence he fled shortly afterwards.

I do not think it essential to include in this letter further information concerning the existence of the gang of thieves under Robert Martin, since they have public notoriety on both frontiers, and this information will suffice, according to my judgment, to make the Department see the necessity of bringing before the authorities of that part of the frontier the persecutions of a gang of outlaws who have caused so much trouble, succeeding up to this time in eluding the vigilance of the authorities of both republics.

In fulfilling the instructions which I have received from my government, to bring these things fully before the Department of State, I take pleasure in reiterating to you, Mr. Secretary, &c.

JUAN N. NAVARRO.

No. 500. Señor Navarro to Mr. Hay. No. 500.
Señor Navarro to Mr. Hay.

Legation of Mexico in the United States,
New York, September 3, 1880.

Mr. Assistant Secretary: I have had the honor to receive your polite note, in which you do me the favor to inform me that eight individuals, who are suspected of belonging to a party of revolutionists against the Government of Mexico, have been arrested by the forces of the United States and placed under the custody of Captain Rafferty.

This legation has received dispatches from the Mexican consul at Tucson, giving notice that a special messenger had come from the State of Sonora to demand the extradition of the above-mentioned persons, but that the government of the Territory of Arizona does not believe that to be a matter within its jurisdiction, granting that the capture of those criminals may have been executed by Federal authorities.

Upon this occasion, I have the honor to beg your Department to procure the corresponding orders, in order that the extradition demanded may be confirmed in accordance with Article III of the treaty of the 11th of December, of 1861, which cites, among crimes for which the seizures shall be restored, that of taking goods or money, of whatever value, by means of violence or intimidation.

Your Department should ascertain whether the seizures of which we speak may not have some political motive, which might serve them as a pretext to enter the town of Magdalena, exacting of the inhabitants a large sum of money under penalty of hanging those who offer resistance.

My government will accept as a new proof of the sentiments which animate the Government of the United States for the peace and tranquillity of Mexico the action of the American authorities in the capture of those criminals, in order that they may be delivered to the commissioner, who requests their extradition in the name of the government of the State of Sonora, in accordance with Article II of the treaty to which I have referred.

I have, &c.,

JUAN N. NAVARRO.

No. 501. Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro. No. 501.
Mr. Evarts to Señor Navarro.

Department of State,
Washington, September 11, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 28th ultimo, representing that certain bandits, headed by one Robert Martin, have a haunt in the Sierra de la Hacha, in American territory, on the Texas frontier, whence they make raids into Mexico for the purpose of stealing cattle and bringing them on this side of the line.

In reply, I have to express my regret that Mexican citizens in that quarter should suffer from such depredations, and to state whatever measures may be in the power of this government towards preventing them shall at once be taken.

Accept, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 502. Mr. Hunter to Señor Navarro. No. 502.
Mr. Hunter to Señor Navarro.

Department of State,
Washington, September 22, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 3d instant, requesting the extradition of the eight Mexican revolutionists who were in the custody of Captain Rafferty, of the Sixth Regiment of United States Cavalry, now stationed in the Territory of Arizona.

In reply, I have to state that that officer appears to have received the prisoners from the United States marshal there, who probably holds them on a charge of violating the neutrality law of the United States, in making a hostile incursion into Mexico.

Under these circumstances the answer of the Territorial authorities to the Mexican agent who, it seems, applied for their surrender was necessarily in the negative.

In any event, it would not be competent for this Department to take any steps with a view to the extradition of the prisoners unless their names shall have been furnished, and the offenses with which they are charged shall have been specified. The fact, too, that they are charged with being revolutionists shows that whatever may have been their other crimes they may also have been guilty of a political offense for which the treaty stipulates that no extradition shall be granted.

I avail, &c.,

WM. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

No. 503. Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts. No. 503.
Señor Navarro to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Mexico in the United States,
New York, October 18, 1880.

Mr. Secretary: I have the honor to inclose a copy of two communications which have been addressed by the governor of the State of Chihuahua to the department of foreign relations of Mexico, and which contain an account of some fresh outrages that have been committed on Mexican soil by the band of otlaws which is headed by Robert E. Martin. These copies have been sent to me by my government, with instructions to transmit them to your Department in support of, and as a sequel to, the complaint contained in my note of the 28th of August last, not doubting that the Government of the United States will issue orders for the apprehension and punishment of the persons composing the aforesaid band, which has for some time been a source of great annoyance to the inhabitants of those frontier districts.

I renew, &c.,

JUAN N. NAVARRO.

[Inclosure l.]

[A stamp containing the words: “Mexican Republic, Government of the State of Chihuahua.”]

No. 69.

The political chief of the canton of Galeana, in a communication of the 12th instant, writes as follows to the secretary of this government:

“On the 1st instant I received a letter from the municipal president of Janos, of which the following is a copy:

“‘On the 30th ultimo this presidency was informed that cattle and horses were being stolen from Agua Fria, two leagues distant from this place, and that the thieves were driving the animals in the direction of La Soma Blanca, or Salto del Ojo de la Pelotada. I immediately ordered as large a force of citizens as possible to be organized in order to go in pursuit of the thieves, and succeeded in securing the services of fourteen men, who started with all speed. On the 31st, in the afternoon, this presidency received information that the theft was much larger than had been supposed. I, therefore, ordered sixteen more men to go for the purpose of protecting those who had started first. To-day, August 1, the party returned, reporting that the first fourteen men overtook the thieves at San Luis, to the south of the Sarampion Mountains; they had stolen eighteen horses belonging to the citizen Juan B. Zerzaya; these they sent forward on the gallop, when they became aware of the approach of their pursuers; there remained eighty-five head of cattle, which they were unable to send forward; it was evident that the theives were Americans, because they were heard conversing with one another by the pursuing party, when the latter were a very short distance from them; they made a stubborn resistance, opening fire upon their pursuers, so that the latter were obliged to assume a defensive attitude; a fight ensued, in which one horse was wounded in the fore-leg; it being impossible to remove this animal, he was left on the field. It was observed that one of the thieves was severely wounded, and eighty-five head of cattle were abandoned, which were brought to this presidency, together with a mule, a saddle and bridle, and some other articles of small value which had been abandoned by the wounded man above mentioned. The cattle have now been returned to their rightful owners, and this presidency has taken such measures as were in its power to prevent a repetition of similar acts. I beg you, Mr. Political Chief, to be pleased to bring to the knowledge of the supreme government of the State the critical situation in which this section of country is, to the end that it may communicate the information to the national government; and I beg you, sir, to take such measures as may lie in your power to afford us assistance, and to send as large a force for our protection as can be spared by the governor of the State, for if this is not done, the situation of our people is an utterly defenseless one. I have the honor to bring this to your knowledge that you may communicate it to the governor of the State.’”

I have the honor to communicate to you the foregoing, for the information of the President of the republic, informing you, at the same time, that the party of American outlaws referred to belong to the band which is under the leadership of the notorious criminal Robert E. Martin, and begging you to take measures for the speedy pursuit and punishment of the said band; for, otherwise, between these outlaws and the Indians, cattle raising, which is even now seriously prostrated, will he crushed out entirely on the northeastern frontier of the State.

Liberty and the constitution!

Chihuahua, August 18, 1880.
LUIS TERRAZAS.

To the Secretary of State of Foreign Relations, Mexico.

A copy. New York, October 18, 1880.

JOSÉ T. DE CUELLAR,
Secretary.

[Inclosure 2.]

[A stamp containing the words: “Mexican Republic, Government of the State of Chihuahua.”]

No. 70.

The political chief of the canton of Galeana writes to the secretary of this government, under date of the 12th instant, as follows:

“The citizen municipal president of Janos communicates to me, under date of the 11th instant, the following information: ‘A few days since, an American, who is an agent of the owner of the estate ‘Corralitos,’ came to this place with a party of fifteen men, requesting several citizens to join him in pursuing thieves from the United States, who, as he said, had been stealing cattle from various citizens of Mexico, and who were believed to be but a short distance off. Several persons volunteered to accompany him, and joined his party; after having been out two days, they came upon two or three Americans who were well fortified in a sort of stockade, which they had built; these at once opened fire upon the pursuing party, who returned it; the result being a lively fight, in which Sabas Talamante, and a negro who accompanied the men from Corralitos, were wounded; two horses were also wounded and one remained stuck in a mud-hole. The American in charge of the party then resolved to return, finding: that he would be obliged to expose the lives of some of the men who were with him if he persisted in capturing the outlaws; on their return, when near this town, they fell in with two horses belonging to Don José Cásares, which had been stolen and already reshod: they had been in the possession of the thieves when the firing commenced, but had taken fright at the noise of the shots, and galloped off in the direction of their home.’ I must further inform you, citizen secretary, that the same mail which brought the communication which is here transcribed, brought the news of a similar occurrence at Ascension. It appears that several citizens of that town who were in pursuit of thieves from the United States who had been stealing horses, overtook them, when a fight ensued, in the course of which several men and horses were wounded.”

I have the honor to communicate to you the forgoing for the information of the citizen President of the republic, and to inform you that the party referred to belong to the band under the leadership of the notorious criminal Robert E. Martin.

Liberty and the constitution!

Chihuahua, August 18, 1880.
LUIS TERRAZAS.

To the Secretary of State,

In charge of the Department of Foreign Relations, City of Mexico.

Compared.

PORTILLA.

Correct copies.

Mexico, September 11, 1880.
JULIO ZÁRATE,
Chief Clerk.

A copy. New York, October 18, 1880.

MoroccoMorocco

[504] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the U. S. of America, Tangier, December 7, 1879. (Received January 17, 1880.)

[505] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America, Tangier, February 28, 1880. (Received April 6.)

[506] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America, Tangier, March 8, 1880. (Received April 15.)

[507] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews.

Department of State, Washington, April 13, 1880.

[508] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America, Tangier, April 16, 1880. (Received May 17.)

[509] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

United States Consulate at Tangier, April 17, 1880. (Received May 17.)

[510] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews.

Department of State, Washington, April 22, 1880.

[511] . Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America, Tangier, July 30, 1880. (Received September 4.)

[512] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews.

Department of State, Washington, October 28, 1880.

No. 504. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. No. 504.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the U. S. of America,
Tangier, December 7, 1879. (Received January 17, 1880.) No. 343.]

Sir: * * * * * * *

Down the coast of Morocco we hear of copious falls of rain which have rendered the prospects of a good harvest next year very hope ful, and if the weather continues to favor the land it may be expected that the trade, which at present, with the exception of the shipment of a few bones, is at a standstill, will be enlivened; in some of the southern provinces, however, and notably those of Abda, Hamar, Erhauma, Sedla, and Haha, matters are in a very pitiable condition.

Both men and beasts were decimated during the late famine, and the survivors amongst the miserable peasantry have neither cattle nor seed. Such animals as did not succumb to the famine have subsequently been seized by the governors and sheiks for arrears of rent, and the state of misery and desolation which consequently prevails is most distressing. In order to make up for the great scarcity of animals, the women as well as the men are all turning their hands to the field, and may be seen in great numbers digging the land.

The rains at Tangier and its neighborhood have been unprecedented, the floods causing considerable damage both to property and to the early crops. The rainfall from September 9 to date has been 17.94 inches.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

No. 505. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. No. 505.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Tangier, February 28, 1880. (Received April 6.) No. 353.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith for your consideration copies and translations of the circulars issued by the Moorish minister of foreign affairs to the foreign representatives residing at Tangier (inclosure No. 1), and my answer to the same (inclosure No. 2), relative to Moorish subjects naturalized in foreign countries who may return to Morocco becoming again amenable to Moorish jurisdiction.

The naturalized Moorish subjects who have embraced foreign nationalities, affected by the circular in question, are mostly French, Portuguese, Brazilians, and Italians. The Moorish subjects naturalized in the United States are few, and, with two exceptions, all Israelites, of temporary residence in Morocco, most of them visiting this country for commercial transactions carried on between Morocco and the United States.

The proximity of Spain and the British colony of Gibraltar to Morocco induced those governments many years since to place obstructions in the way of the naturalization of Moorish subjects; otherwise, almost the whole population of Morocco able to cross the straits would have long ago become Spanish and British subjects. * * *

The French minister plenipotentiary and the chargés d’affaires of Portugal, of Brazil, and of Italy have protested and formally acquainted the Moorish Government, in the name of their respective governments, that they will not admit the request contained in the circular, holding the Moorish Government responsible for any arbitrary measures or acts the Morocco officials may adopt towards any Moorish-born subject holding any proofs of being a naturalized citizen of their respective countries. In view of which, and that the statutes of the United States make it the duty of all United States officers to afford to naturalized citizens of the United States the same protection of persons or property which is accorded to native-born citizens, and not finding in our treaties with Morocco anything to the contrary, I have based my reply to the circular in question on Articles 5 and 15 of the Spanish treaty with Morocco of the 20th November, 1861, and Articles XIV, XX, and XXIV of our treaty of 1836, and which is in conformity with the instructions contained in the third paragraph of your dispatch No. 119, of the 7th December, 1877.

The barbarous manner in which everything is unfortunately conducted in Morocco towards the inoffensive Jews and other subjects of Morocco renders the matter a most serious one for the consideration of those governments who profess liberty and humane feelings towards their fellow beings.

It would be absurd to compare Morocco with Turkey, notwithstanding that the Ottoman Government still lacks many reforms and much morality to place it within the circle with Germany and other civilized nations as regards the liabilities of naturalized citizens returning to their native countries.

There are numerous reasons and motives to make Morocco an exception to all other nations. The Moorish governors obtain their appointment from the Sultan by paying large sums of money, followed by annual contributions and presents, all arbitrarily exacted from their subjects. As there is no system of taxation in Morocco, they all must pay tithes and any sum of money imposed on them by their officials. They are subject to the caprice of * * * governors whose conduct is regulated by no law.

The source of all Mohammedan law is the Koran. It is therefore hopeless to expect reforms so long as the law is administered by “true believers,” before whom the evidence of non-Mohammedans is not admitted, whilst a fictitious document subscribed to by two Mohammedan notaries is binding upon a third party, who, perhaps, may be entirely ignorant of its contents, his signature not being necessary, and the evidence of two Mohammedans is quite sufficient to compel a party to the payment of an imaginary debt. Therefore, in a country with such extraordinary laws and where all manner of violence and oppression is continually practised by its rulers, it is nothing but humane that the same protection should be extended to those natives of Morocco who have become American citizens, as the protection extended by the foreign representatives to subjects of Morocco under their employ or acting as agents holding interests of foreign merchants in their hands, which is in conformity with the tenor and articles of various treaties and conventions between European nations and Morocco.

I now beg to quote the articles of the Spanish treaty referred to in my answer to the circular of the Moorish minister: Article 5. Spanish subjects shall not be obliged to pay, under any pretext whatsoever, any impositions or taxes; they shall be exempt from all military service, Whether by land or sea, from personal charges, forced loans, and every extraordinary contribution; their dwellings, warehouses, and all appertaining to them shall be respected, &c., &c.

Article 15. Spanish subjects, or protégés, whether Christians, Mohammedans, or Jews, shall alike enjoy all the rights and privileges granted by the present treaty, or which shall at any time be granted to the most favored nations.

It is manifest that if even a person holding interest of a citizen of the United States having a right to his protection is not liable to Moorish jurisdiction as stipulated in Article XX of our treaty with Morocco of 1836, much more is entitled to protection a regular naturalized citizen under the protection of the United States Government as demanded on his passport. The Spanish treaty makes no distinction between citizens and protégés, be they Christians, Mohammedans, or Jews.

Trusting that my course in this matter, based as it is on treaties and custom, on behalf of American citizens and their interests, may meet with your approval,

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 353.—Translation.]

Translation of a circular note addressed by the Moorish minister of foreign affairs to the foreign representatives, dated 26 Saffar, 1297 (18 February, 1880).

Praise be to the only God!

To our prudent friend, the respectable and wise gentleman, Mr. Felix A. Mathews, representative of the American nation, &c.:

You are aware that we have already manifested to you and all the other foreign representatives verbally, with regard to the prejudice which our nation suffers by the naturalization of our subjects who consider themselves out of our jurisdiction and exempt from contributions to our government, and we have received letters from His Shereefian Majesty that this is against the laws of this happy empire. All this people who leave this country and return, are under the laws of this country, and now, since this prejudice still exists and these people are still protected, we are ordained by His Shereefian Majesty to renew our demand wherein he has his rights; and the following are the text and words of His Majesty’s letter:

“Confirming our former letter, relative to the naturalization to be communicated to the foreign representatives at Tangier, that the laws of our happy empire do not permit that our subjects, either Moors or Jews, should change their nationality for another, and that notwithstanding this that prejudice still exists: Now, we are going to write to our governors not to recognize all this, as the rule of our country is not to recognize either passports or certificates of naturalization, and we ordain you to renew this matter before the foreign representatives before we address ourselves to our governors, and explain to them that our desire is to be in good relations with all the nations, still we cannot admit a thing which is against our regulations and to the prejudice and detriment of our rights.”

We beg you to bring this to the knowledge of the powers that you represent, of whose friendship we are sure, so that they may not permit a detriment to our laws; and you are aware that the subjects of Turkey are not allowed the right of withdrawing themselves from the jurisdiction and laws of their country.

Peace and friendship.

The servant of the throne elevated by God,

MOHAMED BARGASH.
Tangier, 26 Saffar, 1297 (18 February, 1880).

[Inclosure 2 in No. 353.—Translation.]

Translation of Mr. Mathews’s reply to the note addressed to the foreign representatives by the Moorish minister of foreign affairs.

To my prudent friend, the wise and literary minister of foreign affairs of His Shereefian Majesty Sid Mohamed Bargash, &c.:

I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your circular to the foreign representatives, dated the 26th Saffar, relative to the Sultan’s objection to the naturalization of his subjects, and that he will order his governors not to recognize their change of nationality, being contrary to the laws of this empire and of prejudice to his contributions. You also were pleased to quote the text of His Majesty’s letter requesting you to reiterate his wishes previous to notifying his governors on the subject. You also mention that the subjects of Turkey are not allowed to withdraw from the jurisdiction of their government, &c.

I shall transmit your circular to the government I have the honor to represent, and in due time will inform you of its reply.

In the mean time permit me to observe that, as you are aware, a treaty exists between the Government of the United States of America and that of Morocco, written at Meccanez, the City of Olives, on the 3d day of the month Jumad el Lahhar 1252, corresponding with our September 16, 1836, and I beg to call your attention to Articles XIV, XX, and XXIV of said treaty; also to articles 5 and 15 of the Spanish treaty with Morocco, of the 17 Chained a the first, 1278.

As I am not aware that a treaty can be altered by the issue of a circular, I shall adhere to its articles as regards the rights of American citizens, and therefore consider it my duty to hold His Shereefian Majesty’s Government responsible for all the injuries and losses that may accrue towards native-born or naturalized citizens of the United States residing in the Empire of Morocco by acting in conformity with the circular in question.

I may add that I am not aware of any citizen of the United States having refused to accept the laws of the land or having infringed any of the articles of the treaty.

With regard to your remark on the subject of Turkey, permit me to state in consideration of our personal good friendship that in Turkey exists a parliament where the voice of its subjects is heard, and justice is administered by a mixed tribunal, where the testimony of Mohammedans, Christians, and Hebrews is held alike; Morocco has no parliament, and you once officially informed me that the Moorish tribunals of justice admitted of no other testimony but that of those only professing the Mohammedan religion. If justice were administered in Morocco as it is in Turkey, I am confident that no subject of Morocco would seek or accept foreign protection or jurisdiction.

With my best wishes for the welfare and prosperity of His Shereefian Majesty and his empire,

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.
Tangier, the 28th February, 1880.

No. 506. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. No. 506.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Tangier, March 8, 1880. (Received April 15.) No. 354.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a translation of an unofficial letter addressed by me to the Sultan, through his prime minister, on the subject of the recent atrocities committed on the Jews of Morocco, with the object of ameliorating their present condition.

The withdrawal of foreign protection from several Israelites, natives of Morocco, who had enjoyed the same, unfortunately was understood by various Moorish officials in the interior and by the populace as a sign for them to commit their excesses and ill-treatment upon the Jews.

I beg to cite an instance of the unwise predisposition of the Moorish authorities on the occasion of the Spanish minister withdrawing his protection from an elderly Jewish merchant called Isaac Amar. The latter was at once seized by the Moorish authorities, who, in their eagerness to pounce upon their prey, quickly devised an accusation of murder against the man, who was imprisoned, loaded with irons, and would have been summarily executed, and his property confiscated, but for the timely interference of a member of the Anglo-Jewish Association, who happened to be at Tangier, and who at once proceeded to Casablanca, where the prisoner was confined, with the object of being present should a trial have taken place. At the request of several Jewish delegations, some of the foreign vice-consuls at Casablanca were instructed by their ministers at Tangier to be present at the trial. I also instructed our consular agent, Captain Cobb, to be present and watch the proceedings. The Moorish authorities receiving intelligence that their proceeding was going to be witnessed by foreign officials, and having no evidence whatsoever that could be brought against the prisoner, the latter was released after suffering four months of close confinement in irons.

Simultaneously with the news of the withdrawal of foreign protection from some Jews reaching the interior towns, we received information of several Jews having been murdered, flogged to death, and lately, at the capital Fez, an old man, aged seventy, was burned to death in the street.

A committee of the “Alliance Israélite de Maroc” called on me, begging my intervention on behalf of their coreligionists in the interior; upon which I addressed my letter to the Sultan, and, I am happy to state, with apparently the most beneficial effect 5 an express courier arriving this morning from the court with the news that the Sultan, on receipt of my letter, at once issued strict orders to the effect that any Moor found insulting or in any way offending a Jew would be at once severely punished and imprisoned.

Intelligence reached Tangier from Morocco that the governor of that city, on hearing of the withdrawal of protections from the Jews, immediately gave orders that all the Jewish houses in the Ghetto having a second story from which the Kashbah (Basha’s residence) could be seen were to be demolished at once. It is further stated that fifteen Jews, having remonstrated against this arbitrary order, were flogged and imprisoned, and subsequently released on payment each of $30.

It is hoped that, should the International Congress at Madrid take place, to regulate the protectorate of foreign nations over subjects of Morocco, provision will be made to put an end to the excesses against the Israelites of this empire in future.

The Moorish Government could easily do away with all foreign protections over its own subjects by protecting them itself, by simply administering equal justice to all.

My friendly intervention on behalf of the Jews of Morocco in this instance is in conformity with the request of the president of the board of delegates of American Israelites to you on the 15th June, 1878, and to your dispatch No. 132, dated July 2, 1878, to me (see Foreign Relations, 1878, p. 685), and I hope it will meet with your approval.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

[Inclosure in No. 354.]

Translation from the Arabic of a letter addressed by F. A. Mathews to the grand vizier of the Emperor of Morocco, on the occasion of the recent atrocities committed on the Israelites of Morocco.

Praise be to the only God!

To my good friend and gentleman, the wise counsellor, the selected amongst the prudent and upright to interpret the decrees of His Shereefian Majesty, the Vizir Sid Mohamed Ben Elarby Elmoktar Dchami:

I desire that His Shereefian Majesty be convinced that, as the representative of the United States of America in this country, not only am I his best friend and of his people, but that I always pray for the welfare and greatness of the empire, without the least self-interest, being the firm wish of the American nation that this country may always be independent, happy, and powerful, and that under no consideration its power be weakened or its rights transgressed. Even without the kind feelings that the American nation has always entertained towards Morocco, it is against her policy and desire that any part of this empire should pass to other hands. Having no ambition to acquire territories, seeing that amongst our fifty-two States there are some which can hold, not only the Empire of Morocco, but other large kingdoms of Europe with all their inhabitants, and still more; therefore, what I am about to expose is only for the utility, benefit, and welfare of His Shereefian Majesty.

I inform you that considerable agitation has been excited in Europe, and even in America, on account of news which daily reach them, one worse than the other, of the atrocities committed on and persecution of the industrious and peaceful Jewish people from the hands of the subjects of His Shereefian Majesty, without the least motive or provocation on their part; it matters not whatever pretext or exculpation those who have been and are practicing on them iniquities may attempt to invent. Of late we hear of nothing more than at Mazagan they beat an old Jew to death on the streets; that in Taza they shot another, and near by they cut the throats of others; and now what has created more sensation, and has alarmed all classes, is that, at the great city of Fez, the capital, the royal residence of the Sultans, the city that should be without a stain, and where the unfortunate should be protected under the shadow of His Majesty’s presence, an inoffensive old Jew, aged seventy, was burned alive in the streets.

Centuries past, a nation expelled from their soil Moors and Jews, and these took refuge in this empire, where the reigning Sultan at the time received them with kindness and induced them to make Morocco their home, offering them protection and assistance. The country thus prospered and became rich and powerful, the Jews introducing, in large scale, commerce and arts, and in those days the Sultans always had for counsellor in their foreign intercourse a Jew, who was a member of his court, and the empire thus flourished. But of late years the persecution and ill-treatment to which the Israelites are subjected is attracting the attention and sympathy of the foreign nations, and this state of affairs cannot continue without great prejudice and injury to the Empire of Morocco.

In this country the Hebrews are despised and humiliated to the utmost; they are obliged by compulsion to walk barefooted in many cities in order that they may excite contempt, but in the eyes of the foreign nations this mortification imposed on the inoffensive Jew brings the ridicule to bear on the party sanctioning this persecution in a country where they should be the first protected, being under the shadow of His Shereefian Majesty, as a guest who is sheltered in a strange house should be protected and well treated by the host.

You should be aware that in the greatest nations the Jews are found in large numbers, and many of them occupying the highest positions in the management of the government affairs, and they prosper and flourish, they having the same rights and enjoying the same protection as the other subjects or citizens, no matter how high be their standing and position.

The Hebrews when they rise united are capable of doing much. The Hebrews bring commerce and wealth to the countries where they establish themselves; they are the most pacific, religious, and hospitable people in the world; they never shed blood, and you are aware that they are the most industrious subjects; these are facts that every one knows, and it is also a fact that the nation that continually ill-treats them brings its own ruin, as it is proved by history. God placed the Jews in the world on a level with the rest of mankind, having the same form and propensities as other men; they live and die the same as the Christians and Mohammedans; then why should they be ill-treated and partially dealt with in law? This is against God’s will. It is pretending to be able to do more than God Himself, for the Almighty makes them equal to all other men, and no one has the right to take away from them that equality without being exposed to its consequences, as it is proved in our days.

About three years since Turkey, that powerful nation, still persisted in misusing her non-Mohammedan subjects, who, oppressed and worn, raised their voice and they were heard; another nation came and emancipated them, through which Turkey lost several principalities and territories, larger than the Empire of Morocco, and all this Tiappened for having persecuted those subjects who were not of their religious persuasion.

It is necessary that you should remedy the evil at once and forever, that it may not Tiappen again. It is essential that the world should know that those who have murdered and burned the poor Jews have received their merited punishment in proportion to the terrible crime by them committed. It is indispensably requisite that the Israelites of Morocco should be protected by the local authorities, otherwise it will not be long before they will all be protected by foreign nations, as it cannot be further countenanced that because of different religion they must be ill-treated, trampled down, humiliated, and assassinated, and the authors of these crimes receiving no punishment whatever, merely because the victims are Israelites. Several representatives of foreign nations as well as myself have already received instructions from our respective governments to inquire into the condition of the Jews in Morocco, and to consult for the amelioration of their status, using our friendly offices on their behalf. If you do not at once put a stop to this continued ill-treatment, God only knows how this matter will end.

The Jews have powerful coreligionists everywhere, and when these rise united they are to be dreaded; yet still to the eyes of those unacquainted with this fact they appear insignificant. Should you properly protect your own subjects they will never seek for any other protection, and when your subjects shall be protected and supported in their rights they will be prosperous and happy, and the prosperity of your subjects will undoubtedly make the country and government prosperous and happy, as the subjects of various creeds are the body or what compose a nation, and should they flourish and become wealthy, then the nation itself is rich and fortunate, and in this consists the great secret.

As the great disinterested and best of friends of His Shereefian Majesty, for whose welfare and that of his people I always pray, I entreat you to apply a speedy remedy to the evil, to severely punish those who so cruelly have murdered and burnt the defenseless and inoffensive Jews, that the world may know that we have laws and justice here, and that lives and property are well protected, and thus put an end to all misbehavior, in order that the suffering of these quiet people should cease. It is necessary that you should let out criers to proclaim that those who may ill-treat the Jews will be summarily chastised.

Should the Jew misbehave himself, there is the law, but no one should take the law into his own hands.

I beg you to acquaint His Shereefian Majesty of all the foregoing as the advice of” his best friend, wishing at the same time to His Majesty and yourself all happiness, fortune, strength, and welfare.

Peace and friendship.

FELIX A. MATHEWS.
Tangier, 21st Saffar, 1297 (21st February, 1880).

No. 507. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews. No. 507.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews.

Department of State,
Washington, April 13, 1880. No. 165.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 353, transmitting a copy of the circular of the Moorish minister of foreign affairs relative to the Sultan’s desire that Moorish subjects naturalized in foreign countries shall become amenable to Moorish jurisdiction, has been received, and I take pleasure in informing you that your action thereunder, based upon the treaty of September 16, 1836, between the governments of the United States of America and Morocco, meets with entire approval.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 508. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. No. 508.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Tangier, April 16, 1880. (Received May 17.) No. 361.]

Sir: In compliance with the instructions conveyed to me in your dispatch No. 162, dated the 13th ultimo, I have the honor to transmit to you herewith copies of my correspondence with our minister at Madrid inclosing copies of the annexes accompanying my dispatch; also a copy of the address of the Italian minister plenipotentiary at the last conference at Tangier, referred to in my dispatch to Mr. Fairchild.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 361.]

Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Mathews.

Legation of the United States of America,
Madrid, April 7, 1880.

Sir: You have, doubtless, been informed by the Department of State that I have been authorized, on behalf of the United States, to take part in a friendly conference of foreign representatives, which it is proposed to hold at Madrid, for the purpose of discussing the question of the protection extended to native Moors by the diplomatic and consular agents of foreign States resident in that country.

I am informed by the Department that you will give me all the information you can on the subject.

I am now in possession of copies of all pertinent documents regarding the question, which were on tile in the Department of State up to March 12, 1880, including copy of the Department instruction to you, and of your dispatches. From those papers I gain much information, but I would thank you to give me such information as you may deem valuable regarding the practice of protecting Moorish subjects by foreign representatives who are not in the employ of such representatives, and also as to the practice of protecting persons who, having been originally Moorish subjects, are now naturalized subjects of another power. What is the advantage to such naturalized person? Is it claimed that he is not to pay taxes, or obey the laws of Morocco, in all respects, so long as such laws are honestly and impartially administered? Is it held by the foreign representatives that such person, once a Moorish subject, is entitled to return to Morocco and permanently reside there, entering into business, &c., and be exempted from the operations of Moorish laws? Is anything more claimed for such persons than the right of the representatives of the country of which they may now be naturalized citizens to see that they are not abused and harshly treated by Moorish officers, thus interfering for their protection?

I shall be very glad to hear from you at length on these questions and on any other points you may deem worthy of my attention. I am sure you can give me very much valuable information, because of your long experience and of the great attention you have given to the subject.

I am, &c.,

LUCIUS FAIRCHILD.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 361.]

Mr. Mathews to Mr. Fairchild.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Tangier, April 11, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge receipt of your dispatch of the 7th instant, relative to your being authorized by the Department of State to take part in the international conference designed to take place at Madrid at an early day, and requesting me to furnish you with any additional information besides that already in your possession that may be pertinent to the subject, and also answers to your various questions in the matter.

I beg to state that I have also received instructions from the Department of State to the same effect, and I shall endeavor to comply with these demands by first giving you a brief review of the State of Morocco and the objects of protection; also copies of the opinions of several of the foreign representatives in Tangier.

As you are aware, this country is shut in by the Mediterranean, Algeria, the Desert of Sahara, and the Atlantic Ocean, crossed by the great chain of the Atlas, bathed by many rivers opening into immense plains, with every variety of climate, endowed with inestimable riches in all the three kingdoms of nature, and destined by its commanding position to be the great commercial high road between Europe and Central Africa, so soon as the rivalries and jealousies between some of the foreign representatives in Morocco cease to exist and the Sultan is unanimously advised and made to enter into the path of progress and civilization.

This country is occupied by about seven millions of inhabitants (so calculated in the absence of any census, as such a thing, as well as statistics or the art of printing, is ignored in Morocco) composed of Arabs, Berbers, Moors, Jews, Negroes, and Europeans sprinkled over a more vast extent of country than that of the Peninsula of Spain and Portugal.

The Berbers, who form the basis of the indigenous population, are a savage, turbulent, and indomitable race, living on the inacessible mountains of the Atlas in complete independence of the Sultan’s authority.

The Arabs, the conquering race, occupy the plains, a nomadic and pastoral people, not entirely degenerated, notwithstanding their oppression, from their ancient haughty character.

The Moors, corrupted, demoralized, and crossed by Arab and, in many instances, by negro blood, are in part descended from the Moors of Spain, and, inhabiting the cities, hold in their hands the wealth, trade, and portion of the commerce of the country.

The blacks, about five hundred, originally from the Soudan, are generally slaves, servants, laborers, and soldiers.

The Jews, calculated in number to 200,000, descend for the most part from those who were exiled from Spain in 1492, and from Portugal in 1496, and are, except those under foreign protection, persecuted, oppressed, hated, and degraded here more than in any other part of the world; they are even compelled to walk barefooted in the Moorish section of the cities, and with a handkerchief tied over their heads and chin to prevent the Moorish boys from tossing their caps in the air. My last address to the Sultan on their behalf has done much in the way of preventing, at least for the present, unprovoked personal ill-treatment. They exercise various arts and trades and display the ingenuity, pliability, and tenacity of their race, finding in the possession of money earned from their oppressors a recompense for all their woes.

The Europeans, whom Mussulman intolerance has little by little driven from the interior of the empire towards the coast, number about three thousand in all Morocco, the greater part inhabiting Tangier and living under the complete jurisdiction of their respective ministers or consuls, and exempt by treaty from all taxes, imposts, and military service.

The heterogeneous, dispersed, nomadic, and irreconcilable population of Morocco is dreadfully oppressed and totally unprotected by a military government, whose officers purchase their positions for the highest bid. This system, like a monstrous leech, sucks out all the vital juices from the state. The tribes, boroughs, or suburbs obey their sheiks, who purchase their office from the basha; the cities and provinces, the cadi, caid, and pasha; and the pasha, who buys his official post from the Sultan, obeys the Emperor, who is Sultan grand shereef, high priest, and supreme judge, executor of the laws emanating from himself alone, free to change at his caprice money, taxes, weights, and measures; complete master of the possessions and the lives and properties of his subjects. Under the weight of this government, and within the inflexible circle of the Mussulman religion, unmoved by European influences (which unfortunately are constantly laboring under rivalries and jealousies), and full of a savage fanaticism, everything that in other countries moves and progresses here remains motionless or falls into ruins.

This extraordinary state of affairs, which for centuries past has existed and at the same time prevented the increase of population and the civilization of Morocco, has been the cause of the practice of extending foreign protection to the subjects of Morocco, who had to deal, in commercial transactions or otherwise, with foreign merchants, consular officers, and ministers, in order to protect from the grasp of Moorish functionaries the interests of the foreign merchants in their hands, as otherwise these officials would undoubtedly appropriate to themselves the property placed for commercial purposes in the hands of Moorish subjects, either Mohammedans or Jews.

* * * * * * *

It is pretended in the name of the Moorish Government that the protection extended by foreign representatives is a growing evil and a detriment to the Moorish treasury, which is thus deprived of the taxes, which are properly due from the protected persons to the Moorish Government. This pretension under such an excuse is absurd, for it is well known that Morocco has no system of taxation, but only the arbitrary will of the Moorish officials, who deprive their subjects of all they possess. The Jews are the only subjects of Morocco who have a regular prescribed tribute or annual tax imposed on them, which is called the “guezzia,” and indeed it is paid principally by those Jews who are naturalized citizens or protégés of foreign nations in more proportion than the non-protected Jews, as the former are better able to pay owing to their protected state than the latter unprotected.

The laws of the country are obeyed by all, irrespective of nationality, religion, or protection.

It is further stated on behalf of the Moorish Government that the system of protecting Moorish subjects is of great prejudice to the rights and independence of Morocco. Morocco has a population of seven millions inhabitants; of these, five hundred are those under foreign protection, and chiefly Israelites, who invariably pay their tribute and are the most submissive and inoffensive people.

Under these circumstances the assertion that this insignificant number of quiet, peaceable people are of prejudice to the rights and independence of Morocco is well nigh baseless.

It is further stated that there have been irregularities and even corruption in according protection. Giving for granted that such has been the case in some instances, though it cannot be proved, there is undoubtedly a remedy, to put a stop to any or all such irregularities, (and it is in the hands of the chiefs of missions and the Moorish minister of foreign affairs, to whom the lists of protected persons is furnished), to investigate each case that comes within their notice, and which cannot very well escape detection.

* * * * * * *

Limited by the instructions which I had from our honorable Secretary of State, I had nothing additional to say at the last meeting, to what I had already reported to have stated to the Department, and of which you have the copies. My statements almost comply with the Moorish demand, and t herewith beg to insert my words as taken from the procès verbal of the last conference at Tangier with reference to the naturalized citizens of the United States natives of Morocco:

“M. le représentant des Etats-Unis ne peut accepter cette demande parce qu’il est de son devoir de protéger toutes les citoyens américains ayant ohtenus la naturalisation selon les lois des Etats-Unis, et après en avoir rempli toutes les conditions requises. Il a consulté son gouvernement à ce sujet et il lui a répondu de protéger les sujets marocains qui out obtenu cette naturalisation en tout qu’une puissance quelconque soutienne ces droits envers les mêmes sujets naturalisés par elle; et celà en vertu du privilège de la nation plus favorisée octroyé aux Etats-Unis par la Traité de 1836.

“Il profite de cette occasion pour déclarer qu’on acceptant les demandes de Sid Mohamed Bargash tant par le passé que pour I’avenir, il entend que tout privilège reconnu par le Maroc à une puissance quelconque est considéré reconnu de même an gouvernement qu’il a l’honneur de représenter.

“M. le consul des Etats-Unis dit que puisqu’un simple consul ale droit de protéger les sujets du Sultan il est plus juste de reconaître la nationality aceordée par les gouvernements mêmes. C’est là d’après lui une anomalie inexplicable.”

I considered my course most advisable in the premises, as by the terms of our treaty of 1836 with Morocco we are entitled to adopt for our citizens the same rights and privileges accorded by the Moorish Government to the most favored nation, and as Portugal, Brazil, and France will not relinquish their protection to the naturalized Moorish subjects of their respective nations, and as neither of them will abandon their rights of protecting Moorish subjects, * * * we can always make use of those privileges should occasion require its exercising the same on behalf of our commerce.

So long as Morocco refuses to establish mixed tribunals for the fair administration of equal law to its subjects irrespective of religious persuasion, it will be imprudent to abandon the only way of protecting the interests of our citizens or merchants having to deal in Barbary; we cannot depend on Moorish promises, for we have the very recent cases of Amar, the Jew, from whom Spanish protection was withdrawn, and immediately he was seized and imprisoned under a false accusation with the only object of extorting from him all his money—the assassination of Jews and the burning alive of another. All this took place immediately after the rumors spread that the foreign representatives had withdrawn their protection from the Jews.

Hadje Nassar, a naturalized citizen of the United States, but of Moorish birth, who came from New York to invest in Moorish goods, gave a Moor $800 in the presence of witnesses and notaries; the Moor went to the interior, where, on the governor knowing of his having money, he at once put him in prison and robbed him of all he had, and up to this day the victim is still in prison, and I expect I shall have some difficulty in causing the restoration of the money to our citizen. Another instance is that of Captain Cobb, a native-born American citizen of Clinton, Conn., who placed some cattle he bought in the hands of a Moor for pasture, and on the governor having knowledge of the fact of that poor man having cattle in his possession, he seized him, put him in jail with chains on his neck, and carried away all the cattle. Captain Cobb has been complaining to the authorities about it, and though they have promised; to do him justice, they have done nothing yet.

Only the mere supposition that the foreign protections have been abandoned, has induced the Moorish officials all through Morocco to come down on all who were even suspected of having had the slightest degree of protection; therefore, unless the Moorish Government moderates its morals and effects a complete change in the administration of justice, establishing mixed tribunals, equalization of taxes, and payment of its officials with a regular salary, there will be no security for their persons and property.

In conclusion, I may add, that the so-called Moorish law is based on the Koran,, which admits of no evidence whatever but from those professing the Mohammedan religion; hence the practice of consuls exercising their jurisdiction over their subjects, citizens, or protégés, as otherwise a Christian or an Israelite, having only Christians or Jews for witnesses, who are not admitted in the Moorish tribunals, could never substantiate his case.

The foreign naturalized citizens, natives of Morocco, as well as those of Moorish subjects under foreign protection, are most willing to pay any regular tax imposed on them by the Moorish Government, notwithstanding that the Spanish treaty exempts them from the payment of any tax; but the Moorish Government have no system of taxation but the arbitrary will of governors and officials who have bought their appointment from the Sultan, and must make up from those subjects under their jurisdiction for the sum disbursed to obtain the position; hence the practice of almost all Moors to bury their money and conceal their property, always pleading poverty in order to escape being taken up under an imaginary pretence and divested of all their savings.

All persons in Morocco engaged in agricultural pursuits have to pay tithes.

This immoral and corrupted state of affairs is the real cause of the anxiety of the Moorish subjects in retaining or obtaining foreign protection, but not to evade their payment of regular taxes. I beg to inclose the translation of an exposition which, through the prime minister of the King of Spain, will be presented to the members of your congress, which proves that the Israelites are the only community directly taxed, and who, whether protected or not, always pay the tax imposed on them, and are still willing to pay any additional tax that may be consented to by the foreign representatives, provided their lives and property are secure, which is all they desire.

The Moorish Kabyles of Riff, who sent delegates to Spain with a view to annex themselves to that kingdom, were all willing to pay the tax to Spain regularly, and knowing it would be higher than that which the Sultan himself claims from them. This fact proves that their aim was not to escape taxation, but to prevent imposition and extortion from the unpaid Moorish officials, who always take for themselves the lion’s share.

I shall forward to you copies of my last dispatches to the Department of State pertinent to the subject of protection in addition to those transmitted to you by the Department.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

Exposition of the Grand Rabbi, the elders, and several Israelites of high standing in the city of Tangier to Don Antonio Cánovas del Castillo, prime minister of His Majesty the King of Spain.

Most Excellent Sir: Convinced of the high degree of humanity, impartiality, and justice which distinguish your excellency, we have the honor to expose through your excellency’s worthy channel to the illustrious representatives which will form the diplomatic congress which is to take place in that court, that the object of the Hebrews of this empire in soliciting so earnestly the foreign protection has never been, nor is, to exempt themselves from the payment of taxes, as some of the newspapers have wished to conceive, but only to secure their lives and properties. Moreover, even the tax of capitation (Guezzia) imposed exclusively to the Hebrews is religiously paid by those who are protected as well as by those who are not, and they would equally submit themselves to pay any other tax imposed on them by the Sultan’s Government, should it be sanctioned by the representatives of foreign nations.

May God preserve your excellency for many years.

Tangier, April 12, 1880.

Most excellent sir, yours, &c.,

(113 signatures follow.)

No. 509. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. No. 509.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

United States Consulate at Tangier,
April 17, 1880. (Received May 17.) No. 362.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 354, dated the 8th of March, I have the honor to transmit to you herewith a copy and translation of the reply to my letter addressed to the Sultan through his prime minister on the occasion of the recent persecution of the Jews of this empire.

From most reliable information on the subject of the burning of a Jew aged eighty-five, at Fez, the statement in the Sultan’s prime minister’s letter to me is incorrect. It is well known that no Barbary Jew would ever dare to even carry a walking-stick at Fez; they are only allowed to use a reed as a cane to walk, and it must be of a certain length.

The well known timid character of all Moorish Jews who are obliged to walk barefooted and never permitted to ride any kind of an animal through the streets of Fez, makes it ludicrous to learn from a Sultan’s minister that an old Jew, eighty-five years old, insulted and threatened a crowd of Moors at the fanatical city of Fez, when they are pent up in a ghetto, in constant fear of their lives. I have the most reliable evidence of the fact that no Moor died, nor even was wounded at the hands of a Jew, and that the story is a fabrication got up to extenuate the magnitude of the crime.

I herewith beg to inclose copy of a letter from Captain John Cobb, our consular agent at Casablanca, who happened to be at Fez at the time this affair took place.

I am happy to state that my letter to the Sultan has been productive of good in preventing thus far further ill-treatment on the Israelites, and it has been a source of satisfaction to the European Jews, who have expressed their gratitude and thanks to me through their various delegations, and through the press.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 362.]

The Prime Minister to Mr. Mathews.

Praise be to the only God!

To our dear friend the judicious, the gentleman, the honorable mediator for the welfare between the two nations, the representative of the powerful American nation, Mr. Felix A. Mathews:

We always inquire for you, and we pray to God for your preservation and welfare. We received your letter relative to the Jew that was burned, and we have taken note of all you have said and heard, and that His Majesty should take more care of his Jewish subjects, and that those that committed the crime were not punished, also that we should see that the Jews are well treated, &c. We have informed ourselves of all you have stated, which is all due to the good friendship which exists between us; and you also state that we must punish the aggressor, and you recommend us the safety of the persons and property of the Jews and that we should write to our governors so that they be well treated and that no injustice should be done to them.

We have read your letter to His Majesty the Sultan, who attentively took note of all its contents, and His Majesty recognizes and considers that your good advice emanated from the good friendship which you profess towards him, and His Majesty the Sultan ordains us to make known to you his acknowledgment, which we now do in his name.

You must be acquainted of the fact of the matter as we have been informed: that a Moor of the suburbs of Fez came into the Yames Market in company with his wife to make purchases, and on returning in the afternoon the husband remained behind and she waited for him alone, when a French Jew appeared in her presence intoxicated, and the woman got frightened and called for help; her husband came up and pushed the Jew away, and the latter drew a pistol and wounded the Moor on the head, and afterwards threw stones at him; when those present arrested the Jew, who was imprisoned by the authorities. Soon after an old Jew made his appearance, insulting the government and menacing the people with an arm then the crowd gathered, and it ended in his death and in his being burned.

From the foregoing you will observe that the fault rests on the Jews. His Majesty the Sultan was much annoyed when he was informed of what happened, and he gave orders for the arrest of some of those who were present, both of the country people as well as those of the city, but they could not make out who were the guilty parties, and when the Jews became acquainted with the facts they came to an understanding, and the prisoners were set free, and the governor of Fez was deprived of his official position for being a man of little energy, and we appointed in his place Kaid El Arby Usef Urbah Mohamed Shergin.

The husband of the woman, who was wounded, died from the effects of the wounds inflicted on him by the Jew; and there was a settlement of the affair with the widow of the Jew who was burned, for the life of her husband, but there has been no settlement for the life of the Moor. You will thus see how well behaved are the people of Fez, which, if it had not been for those of good sense, we cannot imagine what would have taken place, as the populace never reflects upon consequences, therefore the Jews must behave well with the Moors.

You are one of the oldest representatives in this happy empire, and you know what difference is in the present behavior of the Jews from what it was; and His Majesty, the protected by God, does not countenance injustices, and heeds what you advise us as to ordain our governors recommending the Jews. His Majesty the Sultan has issued strict orders on behalf of the Jews, and any one molesting them will be severely punished.

His majesty wishes you much happiness, and for friendship and peace.

The Sultan’s vizier, protected by God,

MOHAMED BEN LARBY EL MAJTAR.
At the city of Fez, 7th Rabi the 1st, 1297.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 362.]

Mr. Cobb to Mr. Mathews.

City of Fez, February 3, 1880.

Dear Sir: I regret to state that a sad affair took place at this city just on my arrival, and I now beg to give an account as related to me by an eye-witness, and which has been corroborated by many respectable Moors and Jews during this day, which is as follows:

An Algerine Jew, strongly under the influence of liquor, walking near the Sultan’s residence at the city of Fez, met a Moor with a woman; the Jew made an attempt to take the woman with him; the Moor retaliated by striking him; the Jew then drew a pistol and fired it off, not injuring any one; he was then set upon by a number of passers by and severely beaten and taken off to prison; soon after, three Jews were passing by the Sultan’s residence, when they were suddenly surprised by a party of Moors in a most violent manner; two of the Jews being young and strong made good their escape, but the victim, some eighty-five years old, was stopped; he inquired why he was to be dealt with in this foul manner, assuring them that he was not aware he had committed any wrong; when they told him they wanted to show him about that, and immediately threw him down, saturated his clothes with petroleum, set fire to him, and there and then he was burned to death. A Moor of a most respectable appearance to-day informed me that he was an eye-witness to this operation.

* * * * * * *

Since which the authorities have asked the Jews to let the matter pass, offering $400 to the family of the deceased, and say no more about the affair. The Sultan liberated the French Jew who, during his state of intoxication, fired the pistol, without inflicting upon him any punishment whatever. After this affair the Jews all remained in their houses four days with barred doors, not daring to show their faces outside, under a terrible state of excitement, fearing death was to be dealt out to them all in the same cruel manner; but now they go out unmolested, otherwise than by occasional threats from Moors that soon the day will come when they will all share the fate of the aged victim.

From the Melah, where the Jews are quartered, to the house where I now reside, as you know, is a long walk, and many of them have come to lay their complaints before me, and, although the weather is cold for this country, the streets muddy, and very roughly paved, they all, rich and poor, male and female, come barefooted, assuring me that they would be murdered if they attempted to walk the streets of Fez otherwise; which is truly a barbarously cruel state of affairs and should be noticed by the more civilized governments, and a matter which I believe could most easily be remedied.

* * * * * * *

You have no doubt, ere this, been made aware of the petroleum murder, but as these reports as they travel come in to you so conflictingly, I give it to you as I believe it actually occurred, and shall give you further information if such appears.

I have, &c.,

JOHN COBB.

No. 510. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews. No. 510.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews.

Department of State,
Washington, April 22, 1880. No. 166.]

Sir: I have read, with much sympathy and interest, your dispatch No. 354, of the 8th ultimo, in relation to the deplorable condition of the native Jews of Morocco now that foreign protection has been withdrawn from even the few merchants heretofore exceptionally sheltered, and have to express my approval of the humane sentiments contained in your communication of the 21st of February last, addressed to His Majesty the Sultan, through his prime minister. It is sincerely trusted that this disinterested appeal in behalf of an oppressed race, made by the representative of a country which has ever stood foremost as the advocate of the cause of liberty of conscience, will have a beneficial effect.

A copy of your dispatch and its inclosure will be sent to Mr. Fairchild at Madrid, for use, if necessary, in the approaching conference on the subject of civil rights and protection in Morocco.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 511. Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts. No. 511.
Mr. Mathews to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate of the United States of America,
Tangier, July 30, 1880. (Received September 4.) No. 383.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that in consequence of the exorbitant imposts laid on several Kabyles of the interior by the Sultan of Morocco, these people, being unable to comply with this renewed extortion, have taken up arms and resisted the troops sent by the Emperor for their subjection.

The imperial forces having lately met with so severe a reverse at the hands of the rebel tribes, who not only dispersed the Sultan’s troops with heavy losses, but captured their guns and equipage, the Sultan has determined to collect all his available forces, consisting, besides the regulars, or Askars, of contingents from the Berber, Schloch, and other ferocious tribes, and to dispatch them without delay to Wazan, in the vicinity of which city the imperial forces met with so severe a defeat.

The governor of Tangier is also gathering the various contingents of this neighborhood in order to force the adjoining tribe of Angera to pay the sum of $30,000 imposed on them by the Sultan for the second time j as the first amount collected by the governor of Angera and his lieutenants (by which they confiscated and sold even the last head of cattle of many of this unfortunate Kabyle), was never delivered into the imperial treasury, and now these poor people are about being forced to pay a sum which in their state of destitution and misery they are unable to raise.

The commander of the Tangier troops of the line was killed during his attack on the rebel tribes. On the news reaching Tangier, the governor confiscated all the property of this brave officer who died at his post of duty, leaving his unfortunate widow without even the least means of subsistence. These proceedings and others from the Sultan’s officers are the cause which induce his own subjects to seek foreign protection.

* * * * * * *

Under this state of affairs it is impossible for trade, commerce, and agriculture to progress, as communications with the interior are obstructed, and the chiefs appropriate at will the crops raised by the farmers, unless the latter have some sort of protection, or are associated in the crops with foreigners.

I have, &c.,

FELIX A. MATHEWS.

No. 512. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews. No. 512.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Mathews.

Department of State,
Washington, October 28, 1880. No. 179.]

Sir: This Department is in receipt of a communication from Mr. Adolphe L. Sanger, secretary of the board of delegates of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations in New York, acquainting it with the designation of Mr. Levi A. Cohen as the accredited agent of that board at Tangier, Morocco, to look after the interests of Hebrews in that locality. It is one of the purposes of Mr. Cohen’s appointment that he should present to you authenticated facts in relation to any wrong which may be done to Hebrews in Morocco, in order that the perpetrators thereof may be punished and reparation made in proper cases. The board of delegates in communicating this information desires that you may be officially advised of the capacity with which Mr. Cohen, who resides at Tangier, is invested, and that your co-operation with him may be invited.

Your earnest and urgent intercessions in behalf of this persecuted race in Morocco have for some time past commanded the cordial sympathy and approval of this Department. In view of this it seems unnecessary to do more than acquaint you with the mission undertaken by Mr. Cohen as the representative of the large and influential Hebrew organizations of this country; and in the interest of humanity and civilization you will doubtless upon any future occasion continue your good offices in behalf of the Jewish race.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

The NetherlandsThe Netherlands

[513] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

The Hague, November 27, 1879. (Received Dec. 10.)

[514] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, December 20, 1879. (Received January 6, 1880.)

[515] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, March 10, 1880. (Received March 29.)

[516] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, May 18, 1880.

[517] . Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, The Hague, September 30, 1880. (Received October 13.)

Contents

Correspondence with the legation of the Netherlands in Washington. (Documents 518-521)

No. 513. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. No. 513.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

The Hague, November 27, 1879. (Received Dec. 10.) No. 134.]

Sir: Near the opening of each session of the Staats General of the Netherlands, it is usual for each minister on presenting his budget to make a statement of topics in regard to which he thinks legislation may be required. This statement is referred to the appropriate committee, who, after examination, make such response as they may deem pertinent, adding interrogatories relating to such subjects as they may desire information upon.

I have the honor to state that I have obtained a copy in the Dutch language of the last answer of the minister of foreign affairs to questions propounded by such a committee. As some of them relate to subjects which have given occasion for correspondence with this legation, and in which you have manifested much interest, I herewith inclose the copy, together with a substantial translation of the more important points.

When the minister speaks of the non-resumption of diplomatic relations between the Governments of Venezuela and the Netherlands, because of the assertion of a condition unacceptable to the latter, I know not to what he refers, unless it may be the bill of damages presented by the former, founded upon alleged toleration of conspirators who resorted to Curaçao to concoct revolution in Venezuela. This government declined to consider the claim while the ports of Maracaibo and Coro were closed.

I am, sir, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 134.—Translation.]

His excellency Mr. Van Lynden Van Sandenburg, in replying to interrogatories propounded by a committee of the Second Chambers of the Staats General of the Netherlands, used in his report language of which the following is, in part, a substantial translation:

Paragraph § 3. There is no change in our relations with Venezuela; its government has expressed the desire to resume diplomatic intercourse with us, but made it depend upon a condition unacceptable to the Netherlands.

The prohibition against the exportation of munitions of war from Curaçao is severely maintained. At the same time, however, it is the duty of the government at Caracas, to guard against smuggling along the Venezuelan coast; if there is smuggling it is of course attributable to the neglect of its officials. Besides, in the letter referred to in your report, it is not claimed that the munitions to be forwarded by Mr. Jesurun were to be exported from Curacao. The fact mentioned in the Dagblad, of no exequatur having been delivered, is not in consequence of our present relations with Venezuela; such relations would make no difference with regard to consular exequaturs.

Although this government is aware of the rumors referred to in the report, it is absolutely without any official intimation in relation to any intention of the Venezuelan Government to close the harbors of Vera Coro and Maracaibo.

Paragraph § 4 (latter part). In regard to the extradition treaty with the United States of North America, I can state, that in March 1878, after a laborious negotiation, a draft treaty was sent by our minister resident at Washington, which draft, although it was not yet approved in all its particulars, was considered, as was understood by our minister, to be generally acceptable to Mr. Evarts. This draft contained, with other objectionable points of minor interest, an article stipulating that the expenses of seizure, &c., should be borne by the government requesting the exradition. When it became quite sure that the American Government was resolved to insist on this point, this government decided in April, 1879, to yield to the American Government.

When, however, our minister at Washington wished to pursue the negotiations on the basis of said draft treaty of the State Department, he was told that Mr. Evarts was ready to negotiate a treaty provided “that the same shall not materially differ from the treaties of like character which the United States have with other powers.”

This reply was the occasion of the declaration of our former minister of justice that the negotiation had taken a new shape, and was of quite uncertain aspect. Meanwhile, however, the negotiation is progressing, and the undersigned expects that if will be crowned with success.

Paragraph § 6. Differential duties, in the United States of North America, upon indirect importations of our colonial productions.

The undersigned is fully aware how important it is for the Dutch trade to have these duties abolished; and he will do what may be possible to obtain the withdrawal. Thus far it has been a matter of surprise to him that his predecessor appealed in vain not only to the stipulations contained in article 5 of the additional treaty with the United States of August 26, 1852. but also to the equity of the abolition of such duties.

Be this as it may, the great difficulty, however, resides in the fact that the abolition requires the approval of Congress, which Congress, as was seen last year by the rejection of the Wood tariff bill, is not disposed to withdraw the surtax of 10 per cent. on coffee from our East Indies imported viâ Holland.

No. 514. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. No. 514.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, December 20, 1879. (Received January 6, 1880.) No. 138.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 134, you will learn by the Inclosure thereto annexed, that the minister of foreign affairs was interrogated in the Staats General of the Netherlands, as to whether any progress had been made in obtaining the abolition of differential duties imposed by the United States upon the indirect importation of coffee. This question is constantly recurring here, and is one of intense Interest among the political and mercantile men of Holland.

Since my residence here, I have frequently been spoken to on the subject by the several incumbents of the foreign office, as well as by members of the Staats General. They have generally treated the question as though it only needed the action of the Executive and his cabinet to remove the imposition, evidently not understanding that feature of our system which authorizes the President to execute only existing laws, and that he does not assume to put into operation a provision of a treaty which may be contingent upon future events, without the aid of legislation.

I have ordinarily replied that to meet their wishes would require an amendment of the tariff law, and this would necessitate the concurrent action of both branches of Congress with the approval of the President ; that, as there was such a marked division of sentiment among members of Congress upon the subject of tariff, the accomplishing of such an alteration might be of slow progress.

The measure had not been urged as one of right, founded upon a treaty stipulation, but as one which, if gained, would be of essential benefit to all parties concerned. But upon a recent examination of the treaties that have been entered into between the United States and the Netherlands, I found in one of them an express agreement covering this question.

During a subsequent conversation with his excellency the minister of foreign affairs, * * * he said that he would soon address me a note, which he desired to be regarded as an application on the part of this government to that of the United States for the necessary legislation to maintain the terms of the said convention. His note has been received, and is hereto annexed with translation.

It would seem that prior to 1852 both countries had imposed extra duties upon certain articles of indirect importation. In the matter of coffee, Holland owns the most of Java, and some neighboring islands, and farms out the plantations of coffee. Her share of the product, which is said to embrace that which is of the better quality, is transferred to Amsterdam and Rotterdam, and placed in government storehouses, at which an annual sale takes place.

American merchants are buyers to a large extent; but upon whatever is taken from these sales to the United Stated there is a duty of 10 per cent, in addition to that which is imposed upon coffee that comes directly from Java or other neighboring islands to the United States. This the merchants regard as very onerous, and the effect of it is to encourage the importation of inferior coffee that remains in the islands after said selection.

In the year 1852 the United States and the Netherlands entered into a convention supplementary to the treaty of 1839. The signing plenipotentiaries were Daniel Webster, on the part of the United States, and Baron Testa, on hehalf of tire Netherlands. The latter part of Article V of said convention supplementary contains the following language: Likewise the United States shall continue to levy the discriminating duties imposed by the present tariff on teas and coffee, in favor of the direct importation of these articles from the place of their growth, but also without discriminating between the flags of the two countries. And if at any time the Netherlands or the United States shall abolish the said discriminating duties, it is understood that the same shall be in like manner abolished in relation to the commerce of the other country.

The Government of the Netherlands asserts that in the year 1872 it abolished the discriminating duties referred to in said Article V, and it now claims that by the terms of said article it is incumbent upon the United States to do likewise. I replied to his excellency the minister that if this view were presented through the Secretary of State to the President it might be that he would deem the matter of sufficient importance to call the attention of Congress to it, and this might be followed by legislation that would in good faith maintain the treaty. He desired very much that it might be presented and that such would be the result. He also agreed to send me a copy of the act of 1872, by the Staats General, that I might inclose it with this dispatch. It is annexed.

The alleged grievance of the Netherlands Government, if I am correct, grows out of the collection of duties by the officers of the United Staats under the authority given in section 2501, on page 459, of Revised Statutes of 1878.

I submit these suggestions, feeling assured that such action will be taken as maybe required.

I am, sir, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

[Inclosure in No. 138.—Translation.]

Mr. Van Lynden Van Sandenburg to Mr. Birney.

The Hague, December 9, 1879.

Sir: Some days ago I had the honor to call your attention to the subject of the additional customs duty of 10 per cent, ad valorem which the Government of the United States, according to the present law, imposes upon the products of the countries situated to the east of the cape of Good Hope, in the case where those products are imported into the republic from a port situated to the west of the cape, and of submitting to you my observations upon the administration of the customs of the United States in continuing to discriminate against our products of the East Indies, particularly of coffee, although we abolished in 1872 all discriminating customs upon the exportation of such products, as a practice, which, in accordance with the opinion of the Government of the King, is not in harmony with the convention (supplementary) concluded with the United States the 26th August, 1852.

On that occasion you were so kind as to assent to my opinion that this question had not until now been considered under its true point of view, although it had been submitted by my predecessors to the Government of the United States; and as I have already explained myself to the Staats General, as well as in our conversation, it is only a question of right and equity which leads to no infraction of the customs legislation of the republic.

Very far from insisting upon a modification of this legislation, as for example has been proposed the past year to Congress by Mr. Wood, it is only a question of no longer applying, by your administration of the law, the said discrimination of 10 per cent, upon the products above mentioned as the consequence of our abolition of discriminating duties.

If such a step, which would not only be absolutely in accordance with the stipulation of Article V of the aforesaid convention, but which cannot but be considered as perfectly just and equitable on account of our action in 1872, be taken, there is every reason to believe that it will not exclusively enure to our profit, but be equally advantageous to those inhabitants of the United States who are importers of coffee.

I wish to believe, Mr Minister, that as yon already made the subject intelligible to me, you will be so kind as to submit to your government the question which has occupied us and as it clearly presents itseif; and I venture to natter myself that its solution in the above-mentioned sense will be a new proof of the good and cordial relations which exist between our two countries.

You will, Mr. Minister, &c.,

VAN LYNDEN VAN SANDENBURG.

Note.—For a copy of the Dutch tariff referred to, see the volume of Commercial Relations, 1873, pp. 881, 855.

No. 515. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. No. 515.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, March 10, 1880. (Received March 29.) No. 143.]

Sir: Nothing that has occurred within the borders of the Netherlands during the past twelve months has excited more intense interest than the extensive defalcation in which Messrs. Lodewick Pincoffs, and H. Kerdijk, of Rotterdam, were the chief participants. As the former took refuge in the United States no event has given greater occasion for the expression of regret by the officers of government here, and of other citizens, for the absence of an extradition treaty between this country and the United States.

As you have been under the necessity of considering an application for extradition, a brief summary of the circumstances of the case may interest you, especially as the terms of such a treaty are now under advisement. I discovered, when last in the United States, that the newspaper accounts at the time of the occurrence of this defalcation had given a wrong impression. While calling at the Department of State I was asked by Mr. Seward, if I remember aright, how I reconciled the failure with the representation I had given of the soundness of banks in the Netherlands in a former dispatch. It will appear that it was not the failure of a bank, but the misdemeanor of the members of a commercial association.

The heretofore high character of the parties involved add much to the interest so extensively felt in the matter. The most undoubting confidence had been felt in their reliability and honesty. The disastrous consequences to the many who had made investments of millions of money that followed the sudden development of the want of these qualities gave intensity to the excitement felt throughout the Netherlands, as well as other countries more or less affected.

Mr. Pincoffs had been regarded for years as one of the most enterprising business men of this country. In the city of his residence he had participated actively in almost every important public undertaking connected with its commercial prosperity. He was at an early period of life made a member of the city council of Rotterdam, and placed at once upon its financial committee. He afterwards was elected a member of the state or provincial legislature of South Holland, and when subsequently chosen by the legislature as a member of the House of Lords of Parliament, or, more correctly speaking, a member of the first chamber of the States General, and on that account resigned his position as one of the city board, he was presented with an elegant album signed by seven hundred of his fellow-citizens as a token of their regards and respect. He was an influential member of the first house of Parliament, having in a more than usual degree a popular manner and the power of persuasive eloquence. In 1869 His Majesty the King decorated him with the order of the Netherlands Lion, and in 1874 the King personally presented him with the order of Commander of the Oaken Crown, and about the same time the Emperor of Germany presented him with the order of Commander for his useful services in superintending the interests of German emigrants to the United States on their embarkment from the port of Rotterdam.

Kerdijk was the brother-in-law of Pincoffs, and early had become associated with him in commercial business; and the advocate of Kerdijk, in his plea on his recent trial, represented him as thinking Pincoffs to be the greatest man in the world, and that he was entirely controlled by his influence.

Among other indications of the high regard in which the business qualifications of Pincoffs were held, is the fact that he was enabled to induce the merchants of Rotterdam to form a trading company, with a capital of fifteen millions of florins. One object of this company was to construct large and commodious warehouses on the banks of the River Maas, where it flows through Rotterdam. Unoccupied grounds were selected, and enough has already been erected to give it the appearance of the beginning of another magnificent city. The different sections of buildings have marked upon them the several countries of the world from which cargoes were expected to be stored and reshipped to the interior of this continent. Pincoffs was made president of this company, but on account of the exhaustion of the funds the work does not progress. He was also elected chief superintendent of the Netherlandish East Indian Gas Company. The design of this association was to supply with gas the cities of the islands and the East Indies belonging to the Netherlands. This adventure was not attended by the success anticipated. The most responsible bank of Rotterdam had also availed itself of the reputed financial skill of Pincoffs, by making him a member of the controlling committee of its board of directors. Although it lost some money by giving him too much credit, its financial standing was hot weakened.

There was still another association in which Pincoffs was chief manager, and out of which the grand dénoûement sprung. This was called the “Africanische Handelsvereinigung,” or the African Commercial Association. Its object was to concentrate, as far as practicable, trade with the coast of Africa, with headquarters at Rotterdam. It was a union of capitalists commencing with a fund of two and a half millions of florins. This subsequently, by the influence of the sanguine hopes infused by Pincoffs, was enlarged to four and a half millions of florins. The business operations were placed almost exclusively under the control of Messrs. PineofTs and Kerdijk. They had the direction of ships agents’ purchases, and the planting of stations upon the shore of Africa. They drew the money, bought goods, and guided clerks in the keeping of accounts. The operations, though very extensive, were not remunerative. Pincoffs having great faith in the outcome of the scheme, desired to sustain the hopes of shareholders until they should be realized. To this end he reported to the annual meeting of directors larger receipts than facts warranted. To make a showing of property on hand, he added to the original cost of goods 120 per cent, upon their arrival in Africa; and he ordered his clerks to make the entries upon the books of account so as to correspond with his annual report. The association was organized in 1869. At the annual meeting in May, 1870, a gain of 227,000 and some hundreds of florins was reported. In 1871 again, 278,000 florins; in 1872 near 279,000 florins; in 1873, over 278,000 florins; in 1874,201,000 florins; in 1875, 144,000 florins; in 1876, 221,000 florins; and in 1877, 182,000 florins. These false reports were made at seven annual meetings. But in May, 1879, the development had to come. On the 12th of that month, Pincoffs reported to the board of directors that the losses had been continuous, and so great that the entire capital had been consumed. The excitement consequent was intense and universal. The commercial world hereabouts was shocked. This surpassed anything of the kind Holland had ever known. Pincoffs at once escaped and fled with his family to New York, and still has refuge in the United States; Kerdijk fled in the night to Belgium, and during the first hours of his stay at a hotel in Antwerp attempted suicide by cutting his throat with a razor. He was taken under custody to a hospital; Belgium extradited him, and he has since been in prison in Holland. The Government of the King instructed its minister at Washington to apply to the Government of the United States for the extradition of Pincoffs. This was declined for the want of a treaty.

On the arrival of Pincoffs at New York, he was met by detectives, under direction of the Netherlands minister, for the purpose of ascertaining whether he had brought with him funds to any considerable amount; but none could be found except-what was necessary to meet traveling expenses. It was desired to get hold of something that could be attached, and by some process put the fugitive under restraint.

It has not been discovered that the defaulters converted to their own use any considerable amount of the money that passed through their hands. Their chief error was that they “flattered” the accounts.

As Pincoffs was a member of the first chamber of the Staats General, that body, as soon as the revelations were made and his escape announced, took up his case and summarily expelled him. Then the procureur général or public accuser prepared charges against Pincoffs and Kerdijk for their arraignment before the high court. On account of the privilege of the former as a member of Parliament he could not be tried before the ordinary criminal court, but must be tried before the supreme court of the land, which does not take jurisdiction over criminals of inferior rank. This made it necessary that his accomplice should be tried before the same court.

The defendants were charged with having knowingly falsified entries, in the books of account to the number of fifty-four times, and of converting to their individual use certain balances during the years 1870–1877. The trial came on to be heard upon the 23d February last. The venerable judges, clothed in gowns, ermine, and velvet caps, marched in and took their seats. Pincoffs was called, and declared an absconder. Kerdijk was brought in from prison between two officers, and seated with a guard on each side of him. His case proceeded.

And here I may digress so far as to make a passing note in regard to the admirable and very effective method of the administration of law in the Netherlands. There is perhaps no country in which its requirements are more respected and more generally observed, crime more restrained, and litigation diminished. The courts try the causes. They consist of from five to fourteen judges. The decision of a majority is conclusive, saving the right of appeal. The whole jury system is abolished. It never existed here except for a short period during the French control. There is no inclination among judges, barristers, nor citizens of any degree to return to it. Some of the money expended in other countries upon juries is here employed in placing the best talent and experience upon the bench. The judges are selected from those who have earned the highest position as barristers, are appointed for life, and made entirely independent of political influence. The community appear to have unbounded confidence i them. They cannot be disturbed except for misdemeanor, and the instances are of the rarest of them having been charged with any impropriety. This high court, now in session, is selected in this wise: It consists of fourteen members. When a vacancy occurs, the remaining thirteen select six names from the most learned and suitable barristers of the kingdom. These six names are sent to the second chamber, or to the house of representatives of Parliament, where, after a canvass of merits, a vote is taken, and the three names receiving the higher number of votes are sent to His Majesty the King, who selects one, generally that one who had the highest number, and he is then installed.

To the accused, when arraigned, every fair advantage is given for his defense. He has freedom of speech, through himself or attorney, as he elects, and has the closing plea. If he conceives that for any cause either of the judges entertains prejudices or bias, he objects to his sitting, and if the objection is reasonable, it prevails; and if either of the judges calls to mind circumstances that render his sitting a matter of doubtful propriety, he retires. The court, however, does not act upon the presumption that knowledge of the facts is necessarily followed by loss of impartiality. As all interrogations are propounded by the president judge, he seeks to make himself acquainted with the case, as far as practicable, from the depositions and evidence taken before the magistrate or the lower court. When the evidence and pleadings are concluded, the court takes time for consultation, and renders its decision in writing, from which the defendant has the right of appeal. When it is considered to what an extent this system promotes economy, dispatch of business, certainty of punishment to the guilty, and that it prevents the browbeating and hectoring of witnesses, and appeals to the sympathies and prejudices of a jury, and that it diffuses throughout the masses no hope of miscarriage of justice by the “glorious uncertainty of the law,” it is well worthy the attention of the jurist and statesman.

Kerdijk, the defendant, is a man of large person, of intelligent expression, and has the demeanor and address of a well-to-do merchant. He is not regarded as nearly so culpable as Pincoffs, because he is looked upon as having been only his shadow. On several occasions during the trial he was unable to control his feelings, and completely broke down.

After the submission of the evidence and the closing of the pleadings, the court adjourned for eight days, in order to make up its judgment. On the 6th instant the sitting was resumed. The attorney of Kerdijk informed the court that his client had become so prostrated by the wearing care of the trial that he was unable to be in attendance. Upon the admission of the prosecutor that the physician had certified as to the sickness of the prisoner, the court delivered its judgment. It decided that the defendant, Kerdijk, was acquitted of the charge of falsifying the entries in the books, but that he was guilty of knowing that seven annual reports signed by him were false and misleading, and also of converting to his own use some of the receipts. He was thereupon sentenced to close confinement for two years, to pay a fine of fifty florins for each of the false reports, and to pay all the expenses of the prosecution. If Pincoffs had been upon trial, the penalty to which he would have been liable would be five years’ imprisonment for each false entry, together with a fine for each offense.

It was noticeable that during the trial armed soldiers were stationed at the several doors of the court-room. But this is the custom here. It is merely to show that the court, in whatever it may decide, is sustained by the power of the government, and by being uniformly done excites no attention and lets everybody see that any resistance would be useless. No person imagines his freedom curtailed, for the soldiers are as harmless as lambs until the law is violated.

I have, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

No. 516. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. No. 516.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, May 18, 1880. No. 151.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 138, bearing date April 26, ultimo, with annexed copies of letters, addressed to Hon. John Van Voorhis, member of Congress, and referred by him to the honorable Secretary of State, stating that they make inquiry whether any estate has been left in Holland to one Stephen Bove, of Wayne County, New York.

* * * * * * *

After reading the correspondence, I called at the bureau of the state commission, which, by a law of Parliament in 1852, was established as the successor of all the orphans courts of the kingdom, for the care of the estates of deceased persons over which the government might lawfully assume jurisdiction, and examined the list of all the names that appeared on the rolls of all the orphans’ courts that existed prior to 1852, but did not succeed in finding the name of Philip Bove, the great-grandfather, Stephen Bove, or of any other Bove.

Not relying upon my own examination, I then addressed the following note to the secretary of the commission, whose relation to the body is similar to that of a clerk in one of our own courts: Legation of the United States,
The Hague, May 12, 1880.

Sir: Will you be so kind as to inform me whether the records in your care show that at anytime either of the orphans’ courts that existed prior to 1852, or the state commission that superseded said courts, has had under its control any money or other property to which Philip Bove, or his descendant, Stephen Bove, now of the United States, might assert claim as legatee or as heir at law?

Hoping the question may not give you trouble, I am, my dear count, your obedient servant,

JAMES BIRNEY.

Count F. Raudwyck,
Secretary of commission for estates of deceased persons.

The following is the reply sent me, as translated from the Dutch language, signed by the president of the commission as well as by the secretary: The Hague, May 14, 1880.

Mr. Birney,
Minister of the United States of North America:

In answer to your letter of the 12th May, we have the honor to report to you that any estate in the name of Bove is unknown to us.

We take this opportunity to inform you in relation to the numerous inquiries from people of the United States in regard to estates they suppose have been under our charge, that you may say to them that now all the estates ever taken in charge by us are either distributed to the rightful owners or have been turned over to the state treasury by direction of the law of 5th March, 1852 (State Paper No. 45). There is no longer any tiling to be claimed, either from the orphans’ chamber, the state commission, or any other state authority. Our commission will soon be dissolved.

For the general commission of liquidation, successor to courts for estates of orphans,

W. G. HOVY.

By order:
F. Raudwyck.

As to how far such an answer may be regarded as conclusive, it may be stated that the names of all claimants that ever appeared in the courts prior to the organization of the state commission have been transferred to it; that it has preserved all the advertisements and notices that were ever given by the state, and appeared in the Staats Courant under authority of the law of 1852, having complete bound volumes of all the dates of such paper.

The anxious claimant may, however, say there maybe estates that have never come under the care of the courts or of the commission. That this may be true I suppose possible. But very little property will be found here unless in possession either by undisputed title or by title that has been made good by statutes of limitation and lapse of time. To any of these, adverse claims might be set up in the courts. But success would be among the extremest of improbabilities. The chain of descent must be exhibited without a missing link. In the almost innumerable applications made to me from the United States, not even the first link has been exposed. The showing of Mr. Bove in this case Is a sample of all the rest. His letter to Mr. Mandeville, of Washington, in answer to one asking for some facts upon which to proceed, says: “Do not know where the estate was settled; cannot tell in what part of Holland. All we know is that there was money left, but at what point in Holland cannot tell. We cannot tell where the money is, but are sure there is money rightfully belonging to us. We are in earnest, and we know we have property lawfully belonging to us.”

This certainly indicates very positive faith; but it may take something more than his assertion of belief to create confidence in the minds of others. He gives about as much aid to inquiry as the well-digger has, who in search of a subterranean current has as his only guide a forked twig of the peach tree. If the census returns that could be found in the bureau of statistics or the enrollment on file in the office of the prefect of police were looked over for the past century and the name of Bove appeared, it would not be conclusive that the property came of that name. It might be from the maternal side. Even if property was found that was once in possession of that name, it mightrequire litigation, lasting through a quarter of a century, to establish aright superior to that of the present possessor. If the last will and testament of the decedent is to be found, it might require advertising extensive enough to reach the eye of every notary in the realm. All this demands money and the constant personal attention of some one. No legation could undertake it. So much may suffice as a direct answer to the inquiry now referred; but if I may be allowed to embrace the occasion to add a few suggestions that will have any influence in checking the delusion that prevails in the United States about fortunes in Holland, waiting for owners, they will not be without use.

Every now and then a mania of most extraordinary extent is seen to exist in many portions of the United States, excited by the expectation that in a short time a large amount of money will be distributed to heirs of a certain name if they will apply. It leads to a vast correspondence between expectants all over the Union. Sometimes conventions are held of those supposed to be interested. Funds are raised and agents appointed. Newspapers are filled with glowing accounts of large amounts that certain families are soon to receive. Then letters from America jour in upon this legation and upon the several consulates of the Netherlands. One wonders why this can be so. If he speaks to an intelligent citizen about it, he laughs at it as an absurdity; if he consults a respectable barrister, he ridicules the delusion and wants nothing to do with it. If he looks about him he sees evidence that money is as much coveted and sought for here as anywhere else; that all property is conserved with much care. He can hear of none “lying around loose,” wanting ownership. He sees that no man can live here without money, because it is entirely out of fashion to get into debt. If he inquires of the commission that acts for the government in the care of estates he is told that a law of limitation has closed its coffers, and that so far no American applicant has ever found his name upon its lists. What arouses the excitement? It will be found that some shrewd and irresponsible person in the United States has discovered that a large family connection traces its origin to the same ancestor in Holland. He procures insertion in some newspaper, of wide circulation, of a paragraph setting forth the brilliant prospects of certain families. When the excitement is at its height he introduces himself as a suitable agent to prosecute the claim. Funds are raised and he is sent to Europe. There he remains and occupies himself in writing letters that more money is yet wanted; that the case is in court and cannot progress until some special costs are aid, and he awaits remittances. Air this while he is doing nothing; knows he can do nothing; and intends to do nothing but live upon innocent contributors. As long as the gullible will send him money he seems to be safe. He has violated no law of Holland, and if he has violated any of the United States, there is no extradition treaty to reach him. He is taking money under false pretenses as palpably as any man can do.

As illustrative of the process I will cite the case now uppermost before the American public. On the 26th March last, the Cincinnati Inquirer contained the following telegram, with bold headings: much money.

A $200,000,000 legacy in Holland awaiting the Kern heirs in America.

Kokomo, Ind., March 25.

Your correspondent has just been put in possession of the particulars of a fabulous estate in Holland belonging to the Kern heirs in America. It is claimed that nearly two hundred years ago the original Kern family loaned a fabulous sum of money to the Government of Holland for the term of ninety-nine years, which time has now expired, leaving the fortune swelled by accrued interest in valuation .about $200,000,000. This figure is so large as to evade the grasp and comprehension of the human understanding, but such it exists nevertheless.

The effect of this announcement during the succeeding month was to fill my table with letters from North Carolina, West Virginia, District of Columbia, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Missouri, and Minnesota. The amount shows that the Kern family is numerous enough to make a full regiment or more. Now, it would be very remarkable, if the government borrowed such a sum of money, that it did not give its obligation in some shape, and still more remarkable that two hundred years should pass by without presentment of it for payment. I have had the government book examined, and there is not a trace of the name mentioned, nor of Gildner, the name of the female branch, through whom it is said the Kerns descended. The announcement is evidently the fabrication of some agent, who will make a speculation out of the credulity of those innocent people before they can be correctly informed. If he were to remain in the United States he would soon be complained of and severely punished, but he can reside here as an American citizen, and continue the perpetration of this foul wrong so long as he can find victims. One or two considerations ought to allay all such excitements. Suppose that the true heirs, who could make clear their descent beyond dispute, should find an estate that had been under the care of the government prior to 1852, and make demand, the financial officer would not respond without the order of the commission. But the law governing its action prevents it from hearing proof after the expiration of five years from the date of its organization. The only decision would be that the estate had been covered into the treasury of the government.

In 1878 I made a schedule of all the names of claimants mentioned in the very many letters received from the United States prior to that date, and submitted it to the secretary of the commission, with the request that he would, after thorough examination, report to me whether any of them appeared upon the records. On the 19th December of the year above mentioned he replied as follows: I regret that the researches after the estates described in your note some days ago took more time than I expected. None of those estates have been in the possession of the commission for the orphans’ chamber. About several of them inquiries have heretofore been made, but in vain. In any case the commission has no more money belonging to whatever estate.

This ought to be conclusive so far as relates to property that has been under the control of the government. Other property must be in the hands of individuals. A stranger and an alien that would establish a superior right to its possession must conform its procedure to methods established by the laws of the land. In all such cases the sending of letters of inquiry unaccompanied by any facts is useless. An idle rumor is of less account in Holland than in America.

I make these suggestions with the hope that some measures may be devised to suppress the impositions of these so-called agents. The dispatches on this subject from this legation that have been published had very much checked such operations. The number of letters had diminished, but upon any such announcement as that in behalf of the Kern heirs a revival ensues. If the fabricators of such rumors could be restrained, the core of the plague would be reached. It will be impossible to allay the anxiety of the people so long as they can be duped.

I am, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

No. 517. Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts. No. 517.
Mr. Birney to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
The Hague, September 30, 1880. (Received October 13.) No. 162.]

Sir: I have the honor to state that the annual session of the Staats General of the Kingdom of the Netherlands was, in usual form, opened by His Majesty the King on the 20th instant. Of the address read by His Majesty I herewith inclose copies in Dutch and French, with a translation.

I am, &c.,

JAMES BIRNEY.

[Inclosure in No. 162.—Translation.]

Opening of the Staats General, 1880–1881.

address from the throne.

Gentlemen: It is with gratitude that I appear before you with mention of the prosperity with which the country continues to be favored.

The birth of a princess has increased the happiness of my house. I have received with satisfaction, on the occasion of this memorable event, renewed assurances of the attachment of my people.

The relations of the Netherlands with other powers are most cordial.

There are manifest signs of improvement in the trade and industry of the country.

Agriculture and the rearing of cattle are flourishing.

The reports concerning the harvest are, in general, very satisfactory. The pneumonia has nearly disappeared. The State taxes promise a larger return than the preceding year.

The inevitable augmentation of public expenses makes necessary the increase of supplies to the State. The construction of commercial roads continues to be actively prosecuted. New propositions for the improvement of the canals will be presented to you.

A proposition having in view the advantageous restriction of the labor of children will be laid before you at this session.

The navy and army continue to acquit themselves in their duty with a zeal worthy of praise.

Important military measures, having in view the completion of the national defense, are in way of elaboration.

There will be submitted to your deliberations some projects of law regarding the national militia and civic guard.

Although the armed resistance may not be completely subdued in Acheen, the Dutch authority is nevertheless, sufficiently established thereto admit of preparations by the government to introduce there a regular administration.

In general, the situation of the Dutch Indies could be called satisfactory were it not for the devastating maladies in some countries, not only among the population, but among cattle.

The more marked interest which agriculture and industry bears exerts a happy influence upon the financial situation of the colony of Surinam.

Some important projects of law submitted to your examination during your preceding session, and not completed for want of time, will again claim your attention.

May the benediction of the Almighty rest upon our united efforts to contribute to the prosperity of the country.

I declare open this session of the Staats General.

Correspondence with the legation of the Netherlands in Washington.Correspondence with the legation of the Netherlands in Washington.

[518] . Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, January 6, 1880.

[519] . Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, February 10, 1880.

[520] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. de Pestel.

Department of State, Washington, March 2, 1880.

[521] . Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the Netherlands, Washington, May 12, 1880.

No. 518. Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts. No. 518.
Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, January 6, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: The Netherlands abolished all discriminating duties in their East Indian colonies on the 1st day of January. 1874.

While the United States have now for six years enjoyed the benefits of this liberal measure, they continue to levy a discriminating duty of 10 per cent, on Dutch colonial ‘products imported from ports of the Netherlands.

From this results a state of things which is very unfavorable to trade in the principal articles of export of those colonies in the American market; that is to say, in coffee, tea, and tin.

Coffee is especially affected by the existence of a discriminating duty which renders competition in the United States with the other countries producing this article exceedingly difficult. Coffee is a colonial product which belongs exclusively to the government, and of which it has a monopoly; the coffee is brought for the most part to Holland to be sold in the Amsterdam market, where the large periodical sales of this product take place.

The levying of an exceptional duty upon Java coffee when imported from a port of the Netherlands (this duty constituting under the circumstances a discriminating duty) is, in reality, excluding the commerce of the Netherlands as regards One of its principal articles of export to the American market for the benefit of other countries which produce the same article.

In view of the foregoing, I take the liberty of propounding to your excellency the question whether, in your opinion, it is just, equitable,, and in harmony with the spirit which dictated Article V of the convention of 1852 between the Netherlands and the United States, and with the principles of reciprocity which have usually governed the commercial relations between the two countries, to maintain an exceptional duty of 10 per cent, on the coffee of the Dutch East Indies imported from Holland, now that the Netherlands have abolished all discriminating duties in those colonies.

I submit this question to your excellency’s kind consideration, and if you share the opinion of my government that the reclamation is just, I beg you to call the attention of Congress to the propriety of exempting the Netherlands from the operation of section 2501 of the Revised Statutes of the United States.

I avail myself of this occasion, &c.,

DE PESTEL.

No. 519. Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts. No. 519.
Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, February 10, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: In pursuance of orders received from, my government, I have the honor to inform your excellency that it has pleased the King, my august sovereign, to recognize the principality of Roumania as an independent state.

The government of His Majesty has always been of the opinion that the decision which it would have to propose to the King on this subject should be subordinate only to the final and satisfactory settlement of the religious question in the principality. That question having now been thus settled, His Majesty has not esitated to adopt a decision which was called for both on international grounds and by his personal sympathies, and to officially recognize a dynasty which is connected with the royal house of the Netherlands by ties of relationship.

On this occasion the King has seen fit to raise the consulate-general of the Netherlands at Bucharest to the rank of a diplomatic agency.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

DE PESTEL.

No. 520. Mr. Evarts to Mr. de Pestel. No. 520.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. de Pestel.

Department of State,
Washington, March 2, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 10th ultimo informing me of the recognition of the principality of Roumania by His Majesty the King of the Netherlands, and in reply it is, proper to state that the President has caused such steps to be taken on the part of the Government of the United States in a like direction as will, it is hoped, result in the establishment of diplomatic relations with the Prince of Roumania at no very distant day. To this end I have already addressed the proper committees in Congress.

Accept, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 521. Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts. No. 521.
Mr. de Pestel to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the Netherlands,
Washington, May 12, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: I take the liberty of again calling your excellency’s kind attention to the subject of my letter of the 6th of January last relative to the duty of 10 per cent, which is levied in the United States on Dutch colonial products imported from the ports of the Netherlands.

If the Government of the United States admits, as I hope it does, the justice of the claims of my government, and is disposed favorably to receive its request for the removal of this discriminating duty, it is important that the matter should be taken into consideration while Congress is still in session, unless the government is able to satisfy our desire by a simple executive measure.

Awaiting your excellency’s reply, I avail myself of this occasion to renew to you the assurances of my highest consideration.

DE PESTEL.

PeruPeru

[522] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, December 23, 1879. (Received January 22, 1880.)

[523] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, December 26, 1879.

[524] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, December 31, 1879. (Received January 22, 1880.)

[525] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, January 21, 1880. (Received February 17.)

[526] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, January 28, 1880. (Received February 25.)

[527] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States Lima, Peru, January 28, 1880. (Received February 25.)

[528] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Chrtstianey.

Department of State, Washington, March 1, 1880.

[529] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, March 2, 1880.

[530] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, March 24, 1880. (Received April 13.)

[531] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, March 24, 1880. (Received April 13.)

[532] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, April 6, 1880. (Received April 27.)

[533] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, April 14, 1880. (Received May 5.)

[534] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, April 18, 1880. (Received May 17.)

[535] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State, Washington, April 19, 1880.

[536] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, May 9, 1880. (Received June 5.)

[537] . Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lima, Peru, June 20, 1880. (Received July 29.)

Contents

Correspondence with the Peruvian Legation in the United States. (Documents 538-538)

No. 522. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 522.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, December 23, 1879. (Received January 22, 1880.) No. 94.]

Sir: Since my dispatch No. 93, of last week, several important facts have occurred with reference to the Peruvian Government.

On the afternoon of the 18th instant President Prado, without any previous notice or suspicion, but with the full knowledge of the minister of war and the minister of foreign affairs, and probably of the whole cabinet, left Lima; went to Callao, and about 4 p.m. embarked on the English mail steamer Payta for Panama, as it was given out by his friends, with the intention of visiting the United States, and perhaps Europe, in the interest of Peru. But the general belief here among all classes seems to be that it was a desertion of the post, which, under an accumulation of calamities, he felt he could no longer hold with advantage to himself or to the country. I have no decided opinion as to which is the true version of the affair. I am inclined to judge him leniently, because he has been more favorable to constitutional government than most Peruvian politicians, and yet the difficulties of his position were so overwhelming that it is possible the most unfavorable explanation of the cause of his leaving may be the true one.

I inclose herewith a correct translation of his decree on leaving, taken from the South Pacific Times, merely remarking here that the resolution of congress of the 2d May, to which he alludes, was that which was intended to authorize him to command, the armies of the republic in the south.

I inclose also a translation from the same paper of his address to the nation and the army on leaving.

General La Puerta, the first vice-president, was thus left as President, and though all the old ministry tendered their resignations, he refused to accept them, and they all continued in office; General de La Cotera, minister of war and marine, continuing as president of the council, and virtually the head of the government, and though for years known to be a Pierolist, yet, like a true and gallant man, as he seems to have been, he felt bound to sustain the constitutional government. But immediately upon the departure of Prado a spirit of inquietude and want of confidence in the government seemed to pervade the public mind, and it was not difficult to discover that there was a general wish that Piérola should assume the dictatorship, all seeming to have more confidence in his intelligence and capacity than in any other man, and I must also say that the large majority of American citizens here (of whom there are perhaps one hundred in Lima) seemed to sympathize with this Piérola movement, though, like true Americans, they carefully abstained from taking any active steps in that direction.

Martial law having been already declared in Lima and Callao, on the 19th appeared a decree prohibiting the assembling in the streets of more than four men at any one place. But the inquietude still continued to increase. I could not avoid feeling the effects of a terrible premonitory swell about to sweep over the land like an earthquake wave.

Yesterday (Sunday) afternoon, while writings a private letter, about half past 4 p.m., I began to hear the tramp of infantry, and soon after of cavalry, in front of the legation. I supposed it to be a review, and kept on writing. But the tumult increased. I went to the balcony (which no one can understand who has not been in a Spanish town, and which is a projection in the second story over the street, some five feet wide, with sash and glass front and ends, from which you can see all along the street), and then I saw about one thousand infantry forming in line and some cavalry at each flank. The number was soon increased to about two thousand, and presently I saw mules and donkeys hurrying up with ammunition, and I began to be interested. I soon learned that two battalions of infantry, who had refused to obey the orders of the minister of war and whose colonels the government had attempted to remove, had mutinied and declared for Piérola, and their quarters were in the palace of the inquisition, on the opposite side of the Plaza de Bolivar (or Plaza de la Inquisition), and adjoining buildings exactly the opposite side of the same block on which the legation is situated.

In a few minutes after 1 had noticed this position of forces, and learned the object of La Cotera, to reduce the mutineers, the battle opened, at first only with small-arms—a constant roar and sheets of flame. General La Cotera (at the southwest corner of the plaza), fully exposed to the fire, on horseback, giving his orders with as much coolness as upon a dress parade. Soon there arrived upon the ground two mountain howitzers (they had no heavy artillery) and a Gatling gun, which kept up a constant roar. The mutineers being on the housetops, all of which have flat roofs, and many of them a kind of parapet near the eaves, rising from 2 to 4feet, were effectually protected from the shots of the assailants, while the government troops, in the open streets, were fully exposed to their shots. The mutineers were but about 600, who had declared for Piérola, but the advantage of their position made them more than equal to the (about) 2,000 government troops. The soldiers fought well on both sides, except that come of the government troops, in the midst of the action, went over to the mutineers (as I learned afterwards; but it was around the corner and out of my view), and some of them whose officers were Pierolists disbanded and dispersed. But I saw not the slightest evidence of cowardice. The private soldiers on both sides are substantially all Cholos Indians, and a few negroes and mixed blood. These Indians are a mild, gentle, amiable, and very industrious people, who do about all the labor that is done in Peru except by Chinese and negroes; and, though kept in slavery for more than three hundred years (and many still living who have been slaves), they are as good material for the rank and file of an army as can, I think, be found anywhere. They are small, wiry men, capable of much greater endurance than any white race I have ever seen, and only need to be well commanded to make most formidable armies. There was no shrinking as they fought in the streets exposed to the terrible fire from their almost invisible foes. I saw many wounded and carried away; saw several fall and one man killed instantly about five rods from my balcony on the street of Abancay, along which the main force of the government troops were placed—the lower or north end of the Plaza de Bolivar, where the hottest of the fight was, being in full view and about twenty rods from my balcony.

But these details are of no interest to you. I will only further remark that the battle continued from about twenty minutes before five until dusk. The mutineers were not dislodged. Continual defections had been going on among the various other regiments of the government troops elsewhere in the city, one after another going over to Piérola, and by the time that La Cotera returned to the Grand Plaza (on the north side of which the government palace is situated) he found Piérola in full possession of two sides—the east and south. He ordered his cavalry to charge, which they did, but they melted away before the terrible Remingtons of Piérola’s infantry. But the government troops kept the north side plaza and the palace. This was early in the evening. The government forces seemed everywhere to be rapidly going over to Piérola, and about this time he received information that the city of Callao had declared for him, as well as the officers of the principal forts and batteries; and though he might, in a very short time, have triumphed in Lima and taken the palace by continuing the fight, he wisely determined (and I hope and believe from motives of humanity) to march with his forces for Callao, which he did, where he was hailed as a deliverer, all the forces, forts, and batteries declaring for him. He took possession of both railroads to Lima. No trains were run during that clay. He was simply waiting for the remaining government forces at Lima to disintegrate or to declare for him; and he judged rightly’ knowing the powerful in influences at work.

The Catholic bishops, with whom Piérola has always been a favorite, went yesterday afternoon to the acting president, La Puerta, and satisfied him that, as the great mass of the people as well as the army were in favor of Piérola, to continue the contest longer would be a wanton waste of life. But La Cot era was the last to yield, and he was only made to yield by the officers of the regiments in the palace itself going to him late yesterday afternoon and assuring him that they could no longer be accountable for the fidelity of their men, and had themselves determined to yield to Piérola; when, mounting his horse in the patio of the palace, with a few faithful friends as a guard, he rode out of the palace hissed and jeered by the rabble, but undismayed, and, with the rigid features of a bronze statue, scorning the servility of the crowd, rode off to his own house in Lima, preserving his honor and fidelity to the last, and commanding the respect of the thinking Class, even of his enemies, who could not fail to see in him one of the last survivors of the proud and chivalric hidalgos of the Spanish race in its better, or, at least, its more heroic age. And yet, among the more intelligent men of all classes, the general verdict is that he was a man of more courage and chivalry than mental capacity.

* * * * * * *

Piérola, as is now supposed, will proclaim himself dictator. He is admitted on all hands to be a man of great mental capacity, of boldness, and decision, and it is generally believed that his inclinations are kind and humane. But he most thoroughly believes that in time of war, or any great national crisis, the law of self-preservation is superior to any written constitution. He is now to be tested, and so much is expected of him that it will be hard to meet all those expectations; and it is quite possible he may fail, and, in the course of a year, become as unpopular as Prado is to-day. In the mean time, however, since he has found that the whole responsibility rests upon him, he grows circumspect. He might have come in here last evening (Monday), and taken quiet possession of the palace and the government, and there was none to oppose him. But he waited, was expected to-day, and his friends telegraphed him to come, to which he replied, just before noon, in substance (I saw the dispatch in the telegraph office when it came): “Let all the military officers sign a document stating to whom they acknowledge obedience, so that I may know what orders to issue”; and up to this time, 6.30 p.m., he has not yet arrived in Lima. No one, however, seems to doubt that he will proclaim himself dictator.

I inclose you his letter of last evening, published in his paper this morning in Spanish, and if I can get the time before the mail will translate it.

December 24—11 a.m.

Piérola at 7 p.m. came up with a large body of officers and took quiet possession of the palace and the government, and to-day for the first time in three days the doors of the various places of business and of the private dwellings are open, the police are again on duty at every street corner, and all seems quiet and peaceful.

The revolution in this part of Peru is an accomplished fact.

* * * * * * *

You will see by my dispatch No. 88 that I had anticipated the present state of things, and asked instructions, which, for the present, I shall await.

I have expected to see before this hour some proclamation or promunciamento issued by Piérola showing his general plan of government, but up to this hour, 12 m., none has appeared.

I am, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 94.]

Departure of President Prado.

[From the South Pacific Times.]

His Excellency President Prado, came from Lima, accompanied by several of his ministers, by the train which left Desamparados Station at 3.5 p.m. on Thursday last. Arriving at Callao, he at once proceeded on board the Pacific Steam Navigation Company’s steamer Payta, which left that afternoon on her regular itinerary for Panama. The following morning two documents, of which the following are translations, were published:

Mariano Ignacio Prado, Constitutional President of the Republic.

Inasmuch as I am authorized to leave the country by a legislative resolution of May 2, 1879, and very urgent and important matters demanding my presence abroad, and it being my duty and desire to do all I can in favor of the country,

I decree:

Solely. That the first vice-president take charge of the presidency of the republic in conformity with articles 90 and 93 of the constitution.

* * * * * * *

Given in the government house in Lima on the 18th day of December, 1879.
MARIANO I. PRADO.

Manuel G. de La Cotera.

B. Elguera.

Adolfo Quiroga.

J. M. Quimper.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 94.]

Proclamation of President Prado.

The Constitutional President of the Republic to the Nation and to the Army:

Fellow Citizens: The great interests of the country demand that I shall leave to-day for abroad, separating myself for a short time from you, at a time when considerations of a different order counsel my remaining among you. The motives which induce me to adopt this resolution are in reality very great and very powerful. Respect it, for a man who like myself serves his country with good will and complete of denial has a right to exact it.

Soldiers, if our arms suffered partial disaster in the first days of November, on the 27th of the same month they were crowne with glory in the province of Tarapacà. I am sure that under any circumstances you will imitate the example of your comrades in the south.

Peruvians, his excellency the senior vice-president of the republic remains intrusted with the executive power, in accordance with the law. I recommend him to you to aid him in all his acts with your co-operation.

In taking leave of you, I give you the assurance that I shall in due time be with you again. Have faith in your fellow citizen and friend,

MARIANO I. PRADO.
Lima, December 18, 1879.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 94.]

Proclamation of General Piérola.

To the People and the Army:

Silent and sorrowful before the exigent demands of the people and the army, I resigned myself to circumstances during the days which followed the shameful flight of Prado and the advent of the superanuated General La Puerta, hoping that the army would decide at last to overcame the scruples of a misunderstood loyalty which stayed a part of it from acting according to its convictions, which are those of the nation, and desirous of avoiding any collision between brothers and the loss of a part of our forces.

The headlong and impatient ambition of General La Cotera, after brutally stifling the unanimous voice of the people of Lima and Callao, provoked a conflict yesterday, employing the forces under his command to disarm the patriots of the army whose only aim was the salvation of the country and the defeat of the foreign foe.

In Lima but a few moments sufficed to show how irresistible was the patriotic desire of the people and the army, and it would have sufficed for me to remain a few hours more in the capital to end all resistance.

Yielding, nevertheless, to the motives I have already expressed, I preferred to retire to this city, which has received me without any manner of resistance, to the end of making impossible ail chance of strife between brethren and of favoring the tranquil adhesion of those remaining in Lima to the political régime proclaimed months ago by the whole nation.

Thus all conflict is made utterly inexcusable, and throws in its true light the responsibility for its evils upon its sole authors.

That portion of the army still under their orders in Lima, will not, I am confident, permit this responsibility to become a fact, to the immeasurable injury of all. The hour of national reparation has struck. In the series of disasters which have marked the history of our foreign war, Peru has no part. In shaking off, as she now does, the old rule, she raises the most eloquent protests against that deplorable history, and presents herself worthy of her name and her destinies before the other peoples of the earth.

For us there is, as there can only be, but one aspiration; a swift and full triumph over the foreign enemy. To achieve this work, we are now all brothers, without the-memory even of our past divisions, and drawn one to another by the indissoluble tie of love for Peru.

Whatever may retard for an instant the complete national unity is an act of treason to our country. Unity is the one condition of the power and triumph of Peru. To that end has ever consecrated and now consecrates his most zealous efforts, your fellow citizen and comrade in arms,

N. de PIÉROLA.
Callao, December 22, 1879.

No. 523. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. No. 523.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, December 26, 1879. No. 53.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 77, of November 5, 1879, has been received. You express in it the opinion that the time has arrived for a definite and precise declaration of the principles which are to govern the ministers and consuls of the United States, and more especially our naval officers, in reference to the use of the American flag by foreign-built ships, claimed to have been purchased by American citizens from subjects or citizens of a belligerent power, during the existence of an actual war between such belligerent government and another belligerent, towards both of which our government maintains the position of a neutral. You say that if left to your own judgment, you would decide at once and without reserve that any transfer made by citizens of one of the belligerents to a citizen of the United States, during the pending war, so far from being treated as prima-facie evidence of good faith and validity,, should be treated as prima facie fraudulent and void; and that it should be so held, as well by our consuls as by our naval officers, until clear and satisfactory evidence of the reality and good faith of the transfer should be produced. You then go on to say that your doubts in regard to the matter arise from the fact that you are informed that this Department has approved not only your views, but also those of the minister of the United States in Santiago and our consul at Valparaiso. which you say are diametrically opposed to yours. You then proceed to state the views of these officers in a manner which, it is necessary to say, is not justified by any dispatches which have been received from them at this Department. You next refer to the case of the Itata, expressing your opinion that that vessel is about to assume again the American flag, and that a large part of the Chilian merchant marine will range itself, by means of the fraudulent transfers, under the same colors. You ask, therefore, for definite instructions in view of these possibilities as to the duty of diplomatic representatives and consular officers, as well as of officers of the United States Navy.

This Department, in its instructions numbered 7, 11, and 23, to your legation, and in instructions of similar purport, numbered 65 and 67, to the legation in Santiago, has already defined the principles which should guide you in the determination of these questions.

In reply to your request for further instructions, this Department can do little more than reiterate and reaffirm the leading principles hitherto laid down, relying upon your discretion and judgment for their proper application in matters of detail, as it is manifestly impossible to frame an instruction which shall meet every possible incident as it may arise.

The right of Americans to buy foreign-built vessels and to carry on commerce with them is clear and undoubted. A reference to paragraphs 220 and 221 of the Consular Regulations will show how perfectly this right is recognized and how clearly the exercise of it is defined. It has existed, as stated in instruction to your legation, No. 11, of May 8, ever since the origin of this government. The fact that it is possible for collusion to take place between consuls and American merchants in foreign countries in connection with these transactions is not a sufficient reason to invalidate a right which exists independently of statute law and which is advantageous to the interests of American commerce and enterprise. As a consequence and adjunct of this right, the flying of the American flag cannot be absolutely prohibited. As stated before in the above-mentioned instruction, if circumstances justify on the part of the consular officer an opinion that the sale was honest and that the vessel has really become the property of a citizen, she may properly fly the flag of the owner’s country, as an indication of such ownership and an emblem of the owner’s nationality.

The duty of the consul in reference to these transactions is clearly enough indicated in Article XVII of the Consular Regulations. He is forbidden by law to grant any marine document or certificate of ownership, but he may properly make record of the bill of sale in his office, authenticate its execution, and deliver to the purchaser a certificate to that effect, and also certify that the owner is a citizen of the United States. A considerable discretion and responsibility rests upon consuls in regard to determining the good faith of such transactions. They are not to conclude, as a matter of course, that all such transactions are genuine and honest. They are to take notice of any circumstances which would indicate that the transfer is fraudulent, and in all such cases it is their duty to refuse the certificates referred to. But, on the other hand, they are certainly not required to consider the mere fact of the transfer of a foreign-built vessel to an American citizen as an evidence of bad faith. The presumption is rather on the other side, as in all transactions in civilized countries. In the absence of any indications of fraud, a sale in the regular way, with the usual business formalities, is to be regarded by the consul as made in good faith.

When such transactions have been perfected, and when a consul, thoroughly satisfied of the good faith of the parties, has given his certificate of the transfer of a foreign built vessel to an American citizen, and a vessel furnished with such consular certificate has been regularly cleared from the port where the consul referred to is stationed, and has come within the jurisdiction of another consular officer or diplomatic representative of the United States, it should require very strong evidence of fraud to induce the second consular officer to deny the American character of the vessel, to refuse the regular and necessary clearance to enable the vessel to pursue its voyage, and still more, to insist upon such a vessel hauling down its flag. In cases where a consular officer or diplomatic representative is thoroughly convinced that a vessel has no right to an American certificate of sale, and consequently no right to the use of the American colors, he will be justified in going to the extent indicated; but this discretionary power should be used with the utmost caution and reserve.

Vessels in these circumstances, of course, cannot claim the privileges and immunities and the thorough protection which are accorded to regularly registered American vessels plying between ports of the United States and those of foreign countries. The American owners domiciled abroad, engaging in business of this sort, take upon themselves all the risks incident to such traffic. If they are seized by the war-vessels of one or the other belligerent and carried into courts of admiralty as prizes, they have no right to demand from the diplomatic officers of the United States that they shall be accorded anything more than fair treatment in such courts that is to say, the fact that they are provided with consular certificates of American ownership, secures for them only a presumption that such is the fact, and they are not necessarily for that reason entitled to demand from the legations of the United States anything more than that protection afforded to every other species of property belonging to American citizens domiciled in foreign countries.

In the absence of any statutory provisions in regard to these important and delicate matters, it seems to be the duty of the executive branch of the government to prevent as far as possible any damage or danger to American interests, and in addition, to guard and cherish to the extent of its power the right of neutrals to carry on honest commerce between nations engaged in hostilities, reducing to the least possible degree the hinderances to neutral trade which inevitably arise from a state of war.

You will, therefore, in all cases that may arise, keep these considerations constantly in sight, and apply them with that judgment and discretion which have hitherto won the approval of the President. Your action and that of your predecessor, in the matter of the Itata, has been commended, because there seemed sufficient reason to doubt the regularity of the transfer, in virtue of which she was displaying the American flag. If, as you intimate, that vessel and her consorts are now about to resume our flag, and other merchant vessels are preparing to pursue the same course, it will be the duty of the consul, under the direction of the legation, in that country where these ships first display American colors, to inquire strictly into the circumstances of the alleged transfers, and refuse or grant clearances, according to the merits of each particular case. This being done, it is obvious that the act of one American consul or minister should not be challenged or reversed by another except upon the strongest proof of mistake or collusion.

I am, sir, your obedient servant,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 524. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 524.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, December 31, 1879. (Received January 22, 1880.) No. 98.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 94, showing the events which led to the breaking up of the old constitutional government and the accession of Don Nicolàs de Piérola to the dictatorship, I have the honor to inclose you several decrees and addresses of the dictator showing the nature of the government established by him, and the nature of the means employed to carry his will into effect; all of which, as you will perceive, have the merit of clearness and brevity.

* * * * * * *

From these various papers you will be able to judge of the present status of the government here.

I enumerate these various papers in the statement of inclosures herein.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No.98.—Translation.]

Nicolás de Piérola, Supreme Head of the Republic:

Considering: First. That the inhabitants of Lima and Callao, by their respective acts, have spontaneously invested me with the supreme authority in the State, with full and complete powers;

Secondly. That the army and navy of the republic have adhered to this step, which has been long the general aspiration of the country, and that it is continued by the army in the south and by all the towns in telegraphic communication with the capital

I decree:

Sole Article. With the title of Supreme Head of the Republic I accept the position and powers with which I have been invested.

The chief clerk of the ministry of foreign affairs is intrusted with the publication and communication to the proper persons of this decree.

Given in the government house in Lima, this 23d day of the month of December, 1879.
NICOLÁS de PIÉROLA.

By order of his excellency.
The chief clerk of foreign affairs,
E. Larrabure y Unánue.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 98.—Translation.]

Letter to His Holineaa, Leon XIII.

Nicolas de Piérola, Supreme Chief of the Republic of Peru.

Most Blessed Father: A spontaneous vote of Peru, given simultaneously and unanimously by the people and the military and naval forces, has just invested me with the supreme command of the republic, with omnipotent powers, which, in accordance with national inspirations, manifested perseveringly for some time back, and with the most ardent desires of my heart, will be employed for the regeneration of the political institutions, which urgently demand it, striving before all else to prepare the triumph of our arms in the war in which we are engaged with Chili.

In communicating to your holiness my investiture with the supreme authority of this republic, so dear to the paternal heart of your holiness, I feel the most intimate complacency in solemnly ratifying the sentiments of unyielding faith and filial love with which I kiss the august hands of your holiness, asking from you your apostolic benediction.

Given in the palace of Lima on the 23d day of the month of December, in the year of Grace 1879.
[l. s.] NICOLÁS de PIÉROLA.
The secretary of state for the department of foreign affairs and worship:
P. José Calderon.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 98.—Translation.]

The supreme chief has addressed the following letter to the chiefs of friendly States:

Nicolás de Piérola, Supreme Chief of the Republic of Peru.

Great and Good Friend: The unanimous acclaim of the people, the army and the navy of the country, has just invested me with the supreme magistracy of Peru, with omnipotent authority, which I shall exercise, keeping in view the regeneration which our institutions demand, hut above all and before all the triumph of the arms of the republic in the war in which it is engaged with Chili.

In announcing to —— —— my investiture with the supreme power, I have the very especial satisfaction of expressing the sentiments of loyal friendship in which I abound towards the and the person of , for whose prosperity and glory I offer the most sincere and fervent prayers.

Given in the palace of Lima on the twenty-third day of the month of December in the year of our Lord 1879.
[l. s.] NICOLÁS de PIÉROLA.
The secretary of state for the department of foreign affairs and worship:
Pedro José Caldekon.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 88.—Translation.]

Nicolás de Piérola, Supreme Head of the Republic.

Considering the inconvenience of the decree of interdiction of the 8th of November last, it is hereby annulled.

The secretary of finance is intrusted with the fulfillment, publication, and circulation of this decree.

Given in the government house in Lima this 25th day of December, 1879.
N. de PIÉROLA.

Manuel A. Barinaga.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 89.—Translation.]

Provisional statute.

Nicolás de Piérola, Supreme Head of the State.

Inasmuch as it is my intention to conciliate the respect due to natural justice and the traditional policy of the republic, with the ample and speedy action which the regeneration of our institutions and the definite and glorious triumph of the national arms require—

I do hereby sanction the following provisional statute:

Article 1. The sovereignty and independence of Peru are the bases of its political and social existence.

Art. 2. The unity of the Peruvian family and the integrity of the territory, historically and juridically belonging to it, cannot be interrupted nor lessened without committing an act of treason against the country.

Art. 3. Article 4 of the old constitution relating to the religion of the State will remain unaltered.

Art. 4. The government guarantees primary instruction to all citizens, and encourages superior and scientific instruction.

Art. 5. The independence of the judicial power is sanctioned; but the government reserves to itself the right of watching effectively over the prompt and correct administration of justice.

Art. 6. The civil and penal codes remain in full vigor and force, whilst the necessary reforms are being initiated with regard to them.

Art. 7. Personal security, liberty, and property are guaranteed by the government.

The right to honor; equality in the eyes of the law; the liberty of the press, anonymous writings being prohibited; any such will be punished as pasquinades. Offenses, committed through the medium of the press will not change their nature thereby, and will therefore be judged by the respective courts.

“The liberty of industry, provided that same be in no way harmful.

The liberty of association.

The right of petitioning for justice or pardon, individually or collectively, but in due form and manner.

Art. 8. Treason against the country, military cowardice and insubordination, desertion in the field, peculation, breach of public trust, bribery, embezzlement of public property, premeditated and treacherous homicide, robbing in gangs, whatever be the condition of the guilty party or the character with which he be invested, will be judged according to military law during the present war, and capital punishment inflicted. The property of anonymous societies, industrial, mercantile, or banking establishments, will be considered as public property for the application of the sentence.

Art. 9. Civic virtues and brave and heroic deeds will be rewarded by the munificence of the nation through the medium of its head.

Art. 10. Acouncil of state is hereby created, composed as follows:

Of the archbishop of Lima.

The president of the congress of jurists.

The president of the supreme court of justice.

The president of the comptroller’s office.

The prior of the consulate court (of commerce).

The rector of the University of Lima, and six councillors more, who will be appointed by the Supreme Head of the Republic, and one of whom must be a general of the army.

Art. 11. The government will consult the council of state with regard to such matters as, in its opinion, may require it. It will also act as a court of appeal and final decision in all litigious questions connected with the administration.

Art. 12. This statute will remain in force until the republic be endowed with definite institutions.

Given in the government house in Lima this twenty-seventh day of the month of December, 1879.
NICOLÁS DE PIÉROLA.
The secretary of state for foreign affairs and worship, and temporarily for government and police:
Pedro José Calderon.
The secretary of state for justice and instruction:
Federico Pánizo.
The secretary of state for public works, commerce, &c.:
Mariano Echegaray.
The secretary of state for war:
Miguel Iglesias.
The secretary of state for maritime affairs:
Manuel Villar.
The secretary of state for financial matters:
Manuel A. Barinaga.

[Inclosure 8 in No. 98.—

Military organization of the Republic

Nicolás de Piérola, Supreme Head of the Republic.

Considering:

That it is absolutely necessary to furnish the country with a proper military organization in order to insure the defense of its sovereignty and integrity of its territory,

I decree: Article 1. The military forces of the nation will be formed of four armies in active service, as follows: Two armies of the south, styled first and second, respectively; one army of the center; one army of the north.

Art. 2. The reserve forces of these armies will be divided into movable and stationary reserves.

Art. 3. The following rule will be observed in raising the contingents for the formation of the different armies: Every Peruvian from 18 to 30 years of age must enter the army on active service, and those from 31 to 50 years old the reserve.

Art. 4. The respective contingents will be formed by the sub-prefects of the provinces, and placed at the orders of the departmental authorities.

Art. 5. The following are exempted from obligation of belonging to the army on active service and the movable reserves: 1st. All public employés in general.

2d. Professors of instruction exercising their profession.

3d. Members of colleges and universities.

4th. Those citizens who contribute 50 soles or more monthly for the war.

5th. Proprietors and employés of printing offices and printers.

6th. Lawyers and medical men exercising their professions, as proved by the respective license.

7th. Hospital and ambulance employés.

8th. The only sons of widowed mothers.

9th. The only brother of any citizen killed in the battles of the present war.

10th. All citizens physically disqualified for the profession of arms.

Art. 6. The stationary reserve will be formed of the citizens exempted by the foregoing article, and the superfluous forces of the movable reserve.

Art. 7. The contingents of the army on active service which result to be superfluous will join the reserves.

Art. 8. The organization of the armies will be decreed separately.

Art. 9. The secretary of state for war is intrusted with the fulfillment of this decree.

Given in the government house in Lima this 26th day of December, 1879.
N. de PIÉROLA.

Miguel Iglesias.

No. 525. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 525.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, January 21, 1880. (Received February 17.) No. 106.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose translations of nine several decrees of the dictatorial government of Peru.

I call special attention to inclosures Nos. 3 and 5, in reference to the currency of the country, adopting gold as the standard coin and the pound sterling as the denomination for general use. The value of paper soles, when received for taxes or duties due the government, has been fixed at 12 pence sterling for the present (see No. 5), though in private transactions between individuals the rate ranges from 11 to 12 pence, and is daily fluctuating within these limits,

I also call special attention to the circulars issued by the secretary of foreign relations (Nos. 6 and 7) to the representatives of friendly and neutral nations in reference to the war, and the question of the right of neutral vessels to ship, under the authority of Chili, nitrates from the nitrate beds in those parts of Bolivia and Peru now in possession of the Chilian forces. This is a peculiar question, and one upon which I would like to receive and follow the views of the Department.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 106.—Translation.]

The currency of the country

Office of the Secretary of Finance.

Nicolás de Piérola, Supreme Head of the Republic.

Considering: First. That one of the principal causes of the present bad condition of business affairs ha been the creation of paper money of forced circulation, and for this reason, it being urgent to put end to the changeable value of the actual circulating medium, ruinous alike to commerce, industry in general, and especially to employés of the government and the laboring classes;

Secondly. That among the precious metals gold unites the best properties for use as money;

Thirdly. That it being impossible to coin at once national gold coin, it is necessary to adopt one of the foreign circulating mediums;

Fourthly. That the pound sterling has the most extensive circulation and is the one which is almost wholly adopted as the basis of drafts, and it being also the unit in which we ought to receive a considerable portion of our income;

I decree: 1st. That gold be considered the legal circulating medium, and I will shortly issue the new law in conformity with which national money shall be coined.

2d. Meanwhile the pound sterling will be adopted as the legal money.

3d. The public receipts and expenditures shall be fixed and met in said money.

4th. Obligations contracted from now in future shall be considered by the tribunal of justice as stipulated in this money, if they do not contain an express condition to the contrary. Regarding anterior contracts, whatever currency is therein expressed shall not be ignored, and in consequence will be complied with in the money agreed upon.

The secretary of state in the office of the department of treasury and commerce is charged with the due execution of this decree, and will cause it to be published and made known.

Given at the government house in Lima on the 14th day of January. 1880.
N. de PIÉROLA.

Manuel A. Barinaga.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 106.—Translation.]

Value of the paper note

Nicolás de Piérola, supreme head of the republic.

Considering: First. That, the legal circulating medium being established by decree of this date, it is requisite to provide for the actual condition of the paper note of obligatory circulation, and likewise the means of redeeming the entire issue;

Secondly. That, there not being a sufficient quantity of gold coin or silver soles in the market, to require debtors to the state to pay in coin would be to impose an impossible and extremely onerous obligation upon them;

Thirdly. That the depreciation of paper money, as is consequent, having occurred successively and in different hands, to receive it in the fiscal offices for a greater value than its actual price in hard money in the market would be to benefit unjustifiably the present holders at the cost of the entire country;

Fourthly. That, as it is already impossible to remedy the loss suffered by the people, it is necessary to put an end to it by preventing the further depreciation of the paper note, and to secure a fixed price for it at present, until it be redeemed;

Fifthly. That, according to the duly-proved commercial fact, the price of the paper note is at present something less than 12 pence per sol;

I decree: 1st. That the paper note of obligatory circulation be received in the offices of the state at a fixed price of 12 pence for every sol.

2d. That the issue of notes intrusted to the old committee of issue, to the amount of 60,000,000 soles, be closed, and all the superfluous notes in their possession, and the plates which have served to manufacture them, destroyed.

3d. That a monthly sum of fifteen thousand pounds sterling, which shall be entered in the general estimates, be set aside for the exclusive purpose of redeeming an equal amount in notes, effected by the fiscal committee, created by decree of this date, independently of the extraordinary redemption of same which the government may be enabled to effect.

The secretary of state for finance and commerce is intrusted with the execution of this decree, and with its publication and circulation.

Given in the government house in Lima this 14th day of January, 1880.
N. de PIÉROLA.

Manuel A. Barinaga.

[Inclosure 6 in No. 106.—Translation.]

The following two circulars referring to the war have been addressed to the representatives of friendly nations:

Circular.]

Lima, January 14, 1880.

Your excellency is aware that a question of limits, though twice decided, finally brought on war between Bolivia and Chili, which latter country finished by declaring war against Peru also, on account of her having formally expressed her intention of remaining faithful to the treaty of alliance adjusted with the former of the two countries, although at the same time, and in virtue of that very treaty, she was straining every effort to re-establish fraternal relations between the belligerents and preserve the equilibrium and peace of the continent.

Chili, pretending to enforce an act of revindication in which she was herself both judge and plaintiff, had already, in a treacherous and violent manner, seized hold of the Antofagasta region, which had been adjudged to belong to Bolivia by two successive treaties, and subsequently occupied the entire Bolivian coast and opened hostilities on Peru without allowing herself to be detained in her course by any consideration of humanity for defenseless towns, or out of respect for the rights conceded by the laws of nations, or even out of consideration for the interests of neutral nations.

Peru, reposing in fatal confidence and totally unprepared for a war which she never expected to be engaged in, was forced to sustain an unequal and disastrous naval campaign, in which the heroism she displayed is a sufficient recompense for the final glorious, but disastrous, result.

Peru has likewise beeen similarly unfortunate on land, although one single day, the only one on which strictly speaking it can be said that a battle was properly fought in spite of the superiority of the forces and elements opposed to her, was sufficient to enable the final result, which will not be long delayed, of the terrible duel to which this noble republic has been provoked, in spite of her generous desires and frank and honorable intentions, to be prophesied with the most complete certainty.

Finally, the department of Tarapacá, which forms the southern boundary of the Peruvian territory, has been occupied by the Chilian army, and Peru will reply to this act in the only way which her honor and pride dictate.

Chili, however, in the mean time, whose actions with respect to the territory temporarily occupied by her, should be limited to the exercise of the hostilities permitted by the law of nations, doubly violates it, attacking both the sovereignty and property of the republic. She arrogates the former to herself, imposing taxes on the nitrate industry of the department in question, the importance of which is notorious throughout the world, and she assails the latter, appropriating to her own uses the portion of the nitrate riches belonging to the Peruvian fisc, exporting and selling same in foreign markets.

To these attacks on the dignity and property of the nation, Peru opposes the moral force of justice, and will employ it, as may be thought most convenient, aided by the material force at her disposition to rescue her property from the hands of her enemy or from those whoever may assist her in her work of plunder. And this is not a matter of a possible contingency in the future; for it is an actual fact that the saltpetre of Tarapacá, as well as that of the Bolivian coast, is being exported in neutral vessels, without the aid of which Chili would be powerless to carry out her criminal intent.

The flag of friendly nations cannot protect property of which Peru has been violently defrauded and over which she will exercise her due rights as far as her strength enables her.

The good faith and considerations which Peru shows for her friends induce her to make the foregoing frank declaration, which I have the honor of communicating to your excellency on behalf of the new government which the republic now possesses:

Begging your excellency to accept, &c.,

PEDRO JOSÉ CALDERON.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 106.—Translation.]

Lima, January 14, 1880. Circular.]

One of the first acts of the new government of Peru, which I have the honor to represent in the department of foreign affairs, was to annul the decree issued by the former government establishing a commercial interdiction with Chili.

This act proves the elevated spirit and the sentiments of justice and propriety which preside over its every resolution, and testify to its firm intention of lessening as far as possible, of reducing to the narrowest limits, the inconveniences and evils attendant upon a state of war.

The enemy however does not appear to he animated with a like spirit, since not content with the flagrant violations of international law it has been guilty of whilst engaged in hostilities with Peru, and which have merited universal reprobation, Chili now pretends that the mere notification of the blockade of such ports, the closing of which she doubtless thinks will cause us the greatest damage, is sufficient for the efficaciousness of the blockade.

Being powerless to close the entrance to the principal ports on our extensive coast by occupying said entrance with a sufficient force for that purpose, she is manifestly striving to introduce into the Pacific a system of paper blockades, which can never possibly be maintained as legitimate, and which none of the principal European powers would even think of at the present day.

The right of neutrals to consider such a blockade as null and void of effect is manifestly plain, and to tolerate it or show the slightest respect for it, would be to encourage a pretension radically unsustainable, and which would become a scandal to the times we live in, were it to be supported in the slightest degree by those whom it most prejudices.

As it is right that the true state of the case should be laid before our friends in a matter of such weighty importance, I feel certain that your excellency and your government will look upon this communication as another proof of the cordial sentiments with which Peru maintains her relations with —— ——.

I take this opportunity of assuring your excellency, &c.,

PEDRO JOSÉ CALDERON.

No. 526. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 526.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, January 28, 1880. (Received February 25.) No. 111.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose to you a copy of my letter of the 25th instant to C. A. Nugent, esq., our consular agent at Arica, also a copy and translation of the letter of Admiral Montero, in command of the Peruvian forces at Arica, on the subject of the blockade of the port of Mollendo by Chili, dated the 9th instant.

The whole substance of the reply of the consuls to the note of the admiral appears in my letter, of which copy is inclosed.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 111.]

Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Nugent

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, January 26, 1880.

Sir: Your letter (No. 2) of the 14th instant received, inclosing a copy of the letter of Admiral Montero, commander of the Peruvian forces at Arica, dated January 9, on the subject of the blockade, and the reply of the consular corps thereto, informing the admiral that the contents of his letter would be referred to the ministers of their respective countries.

At this distance, with the uncertainty and irregularity of the mails, I can give you no specific advice applicable to the precise state of facts which may exist at any moment, as that state of facts may be changing from day to day. In fact I am informed here, through the British minister, that since the letter of Admiral Montero, another vessel has been added to the Chilian blockade squadron in front of Arica, and another to that blockading Mollendo. I can only lay down for your guidance some general principles recognized and insisted upon by the Government of the United States, as applicable to blockades, and leave you to apply them to cases of American vessels entering or seeking to enter the port claimed by Chilian authorities to be blockaded. No nation has taken stronger ground or more persistently maintained it against mere paper blockades. The American doctrine is that, to entitle a blockade to the recognition of neutrals, or in any manner to affect the rights of neutral vessels to enter or depart from the port claimed to be blockaded, the blockade must be maintained by the presence of such a force as to render the entrance or departure of the neutral vessel manifestly dangerous. The principle adopted by the treaty of Paris (of April 16, 1856), to which both Chili and Peru have become partios (upon this point), does not differ very materially from the American doctrine, though it may seem to go even further, as it requires “that blockades, to be binding, must be effectual; that is to say, maintained by a force sufficient in reality to prevent access to the coast of the enemy.” But, whether this really goes further than the American rule we need not discuss, as you and I are to be governed in our official action by the latter, and under this, the mere fact that a neutral vessel might slip in or out unobserved, at night, or during a fog, could not of itself be held to invalidate the blockade. And if the blockading squadron be driven off the port by a storm, this will not invalidate it, if they return to their post as soon as the weather will permit. But if they are driven from the port by the enemy or voluntarily leave it, for even a few days (possibly for a single day), this terminates the blockade, and it cannot be re-established without giving, de novo, a fair notice to neutrals.

A practical question of some importance may arise upon the course which I understand has been quite usual with the Chilian blockading squadron, of withdrawing so far from the port at night, and sometimes by day, that first, vessels might innocently enter without the knowledge that a blockade had existed there, and second, vessels which had been informed that the blockade had existed some time before, might, on approaching the port to see whether it still existed, and seeing no blockading vessels and receiving no warning from them, might enter in good faith, believing that the blockade had been abandoned.

In neither of these cases could such vessel be properly seized as a prize for a breach of the blockade; but should receive reasonable notice to depart, or not to land or receive cargo. And if this habit of leaving the port thus unguarded should continue for any great length of time, I doubt whether all neutral nations would not be justified in treating it as inefficient for any purpose, and absolutely null. Such intermittent blockade must, in time, it seems to me, become intolerable to neutrals.

Should the blockading squadron attempt to seize or interfere with any American vessel, in violation of any of the principles above laid down, my advice is: that you make a proper protest, and allow officers and owners of such vessels, through you, to protest against such action.

I am. &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 111.—Translation.]

The Peruvian admiral to the consular body at Arica

Arica, January 9, 1880.

Sir: I think it opportune to place under the knowledge of the honorable consular corps residing in this department, that some merchant vessels of neutrals have entered and departed freely the port of Mollendo, notwithstanding the men-of-war of the republic of Chili, which announced the blockade, were cruising off the port mentioned. Such has been the case with the steamer Bolivia of the English company on the 17th of the same month; nevertheless, two Chilian vessels, perhaps, were at sight, which is publicly known. And as these cases are frequently and inevitably repeated, and especially on the south coast of the republic, where the naval forces of Chili are simulating that hostility which the law of nations recognizes as blockade, and for the efficiency of which invariable rules have been established, I think it my duty to call the attention of the foreign consular body here to the subject, they having under their care the custody of the interests of the citizens of their respective nations, in order to guard the rights which they so worthily represent, and in obedience to the principles universally acknowledged. Be pleased to consider seriously the tenor of this note, and appreciate properly the question of the legality of the proceedings to the Chilian squadron; as it is seen that they cannot substantially sustain the effectual blockade in conformity to the sound and incontrovertible doctrine of international law. Such blockade, although claimed to have exisied, is de facto relinquished for want of effectual and immediate force to maintain it, and in virtue of the facts to which I have referred.

With distinction and consideration of esteem, it is grateful to me to subscribe myself, &c.,

L. MONTERO.

To the Dean of the honorable consular corps residing in Tacna.

No. 527. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 527.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States
Lima, Peru, January 28, 1880. (Received February 25.) No. 112.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose to you a copy of my letter of the 24th instant to Mr. Merriam, our consul at Iquique.

I call attention to this letter, especially as regards granting clearances to American vessels shipping nitrates from Iquique on account and under authority of Chili. The circular of the secretary of foreign relations of Peru on this subject will be found in my dispatch No. 106, inclosures 6, 106, and 7, 106.

It does not seem to me that the right of our consul at Iquique, holding his exequatur from Peru, necessarily depends upon the merits of the question of belligerent right to ship nitrates as between Peru and Chili, nor that the question is necessarily the same as would arise upon a clearance granted by an American consul in a Chilian port to a vessel loaded with such nitrates But if I am in error in the advice I have given, I wish to be promptly corrected.

The question is to me a somewhat novel one, and I have to depend upon the general principles which seem to me applicable to the circumstances. Fortunately, however, there is very lithe American shipping on this coast.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHKISTIANCY,

[Inclosure in No. 112.]

Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Merriam

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, January 24, 1880.

Sir: Your letter No. 49, of the 17th instant, is received. I think your course in exercising your official functions with the full consent and approbation of the Chilian authorities now in possession of Iquique and the surrounding country, is strictly right so long as your official acts shall in no measure be made to operate to the injury of or in hostility to the rights of Peru, or to such as she claims and which are still in contest between her and Chili. But any official act which might aid either of the parties to the contest might be complained of by the other as a departure from the duties of strict neutrality.

You are appointed only as a consul to Peru, and hold your exequatur from its government only, and, therefore, as it seems to me, you cannot, even with the assent of the Chilian authorities, do any official act to which the assent of the Peruvian Government might not fairly be presumed. That assent may be presumed to the extent of allowing you to protect American citizens and to exercise your ordinary functions in reference to American seamen, and upon conflicts arising between the officers and seamen of American merchant vessels, and no objection would now be made to granting clearances to American vessels engaged in any other trade than that of shipping salitres (excepting also contraband, of course).

But the question of granting clearances to American vessels which may load with salitres at Iquique stands upon peculiar grounds. These salitres come from Peruvian soil, which, though now in possession of Chili, is yet in dispute and subject to the arbitrament of arms. Peru, in the circulars of her secretary of foreign relations, has taken the ground that the rights of war, as the contest now stands, do not give Chili the right to deprive the territory of this property and to transport and sell it on Chilian account, and Peru claims that no title can thus be acquired.

Under these circumstances, for you to grant clearances to vessels shipping this nitrate in hostility to Peru and for the direct benefit of Chili, may, I am inclined to think, be properly looked upon by Peru as an unfriendly act tending to aid her enemy in the prosecution of the war. I know that such is the view taken by the government here, and as the shipping of this nitrate at Iquique must be under the exclusive authority of Chili, and you are not accredited to that country, I think the Peruvian Government would withdraw your exequatur should you grant clearances in such cases. It is true that your refusal to grant such clearances may not stop the injury to Peru, because the Chilian authorities may authorize their own captain of the port or other officer to give clearances, which would avail for what they were worth as the acts of a government or authority de facto.

I shall lay the matter before our government and be guided by its instructions, but in the meantime, until different instructions are received from our government, I think the safest course for you is to act upon the advice above given.

I am, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

No. 528. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Chrtstianey. No. 528.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Chrtstianey.

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1880. No. 63.]

Sir: Your dispatch, No. 106, of the 21st January last, has been received. It is accompanied by translations of certain recent decrees of the Peruvian Government and copies of circulars addressed by the minister of foreign affairs of Peru to the representatives of friendly nations. All these inclosures, with the exception of those which you number 6 and 7, relate to internal affairs of that country, and do not appear to call for any special instructions. One of the papers referred to, however, assumes that Chili has seized those nitrates on the Peruvian coast which Peru claims as her own, and is exporting their products in neutral vessels, and that, therefore, Peruvian cruisers will not respect a neutral flag detected in that business.

Although in the present subdued condition of the Peruvian navy there may not be much risk of capture of neutral vessels by the Peruvian men of war, it is proper that you should remind that Government of the eighteenth article of its treaty of 1870 with the United States, which expressly stipulates that free ships shall give freedom to goods, and that everything shall be deemed free which shall be found on board the vessels belonging to citizens of either of the contracting parties, although the whole lading or a part thereof should belong to the enemies of either, articles contraband of war always excepted. It seems clear, therefore, that if a Peruvian cruiser should capture an American vessel whose cargo, in whole or in part, should consist of the nitrate referred to, the treaty would be violated in a case for which it was specially intended to provide. For such an act that government would certainly be held accountable. It is hoped, therefore, that that government, as a proof of its friendly disposition toward that of the United States, and of its desire to observe in good faith its formal treaty stipulations, will either so modify the circular referred to or will give such orders as may prevent an act of which we should have such just cause to complain.

I have received copies of the two circulars through the chargé d’affaires of Peru in Washington, and have prepared replies thereto, which I inclose. You will please retain copies of the same on your fifes and deliver the originals.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inolosure 1 in No. 63.]

Mr. Evarts to Señor Calderon.

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1880.

Sir: I have received, through Mr. José Cárlos Tracy, the chargé d’affaires accredited to this government, your excellency’s note of January 14 last, complaining that nitrate from that part of Peru which is occupied by the military forces of Chili is shipped thence in neutral vessels, and claiming the right to detain or capture such vessels on the high seas.

In reply, I have the honor to acquaint your excellency that I have received a copy of the same paper from Mr. Christiancy, the minister of the United States at Lima, and I have instructed him upon the subject. He will, doubtless, in due time, make known to your excellency the views therein expressed, which, therefore, I will not now repeat.

I avail, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS,

[Inclosure 2 in No. 63.]

Mr. Evarts to Señor Calderon

Department of State,
Washington, March 1, 1880.

Sir: I have received, through Mr. Tracy, the note of your excellency of the 14th of January last, which represents that the prohibition against intercourse with Chili, which had been decreed by the late administration of Peru, had been repealed. Your excellency also represents that the blockade declared by Chili of certain ports and inlets of the territories of her adversaries, is inefficient.

In reply, I have the honor to state that hitherto this Department has not received from any other quarter similar information or any complaint upon that subject. If, however, the fact should be as your excellency represents, it will probably enable those interested in a resumption of the intercourse between Peru and Chili to avail themselves of the opening made for them by the repeal of the prohibitory decree to which your excellency adverts.

The views of this government on the subject of blockade are, it is presumed, well known to the Government of Chili. If, therefore, the cruisers of that government shall capture or detain a vessel of the United States for having, in the absence of a force competent to prevent it, entered a port or inlet of her enemies, which had been declared in a state of blockade, reparation for that act will be required.

I avail, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 529. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. No. 529.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, March 2, 1880. No. 65.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 112, of the 28th January last, has been received. It relates to the authority of the consul of the United States at Iquique to grant clearances to American vessels. Your letter to him upon the subject is in general approved. No consul, pursuant to our law or regulations, has the right to grant a clearance to any American vessel, even if his post is at a port conquered and possessed by the enemy of the country from whose government he may have received his exequatur. It is the exclusive province of the belligerent authority for the time being—civil, military, or naval—to grant such clearances, and the consul, as is required in time of peace, should not deliver the vessel’s papers until the clearance shall have been presented to him by the master. The consul’s course is not to be governed or influenced by the components of the cargo of the vessel. If these, according to the existing authority, may lawfully be exported, the consul cannot properly gainsay that opinion. It is natural that Peru should be incensed at the exportation of nitrate for the benefit and account of her adversary. It is to be regretted, however, that she should allow her resentment to lead her to claim a belligerent right not acknowledged by any authority, that of capturing on the high seas vessels of a neutral for having on board a cargo from a place which she controlled before the war. In this case, however, her title to it was annulled, or at least suspended, by the armed occupation by Chili of the region whence the article was taken. The attempt of Peru, therefore, to avenge upon neutrals her want of good fortune in the contest will not, it is to be feared, add to her reputation for magnanimity or regard to public law, and certainly will not be acquiesced in by the governments of neutrals, whose interests may thereby be affected.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 530. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 530.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, March 24, 1880. (Received April 13.) No. 138.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose to you the circular issued on the 17th instant by the secretary of foreign relations of Peru to her diplomatic agents abroad, in relation to the sale of nitrates by Chilian authority in the province of Tarapaeá, and to the alleged inhuman manner in which Chili is carrying on the war.

Probably you will receive the same circular from Mr. Tracy, the chargé d’affaires of Peru, if not already received. On the subject of the nitrates, you are probably sufficiently informed already, or soon will be, through the representative of Peru. (See my dispatches Nos. 112 and 117.)

* * * * * * *

This mode of carrying on the war by Chili has produced a strong feeling here among all the representatives of foreign (neutral) powers—English, German, Italian, and French. A protest of the diplomatic corps has been suggested, * * * not only against attacks made without notice upon the peaceable citizens of unarmed towns, but to insist that, before any of the towns upon the coast, even Callao, should be bombarded, a reasonable time should be given for the inhabitants, and especially neutrals, to remove themselves and property from danger, and for all foreign shipping to leave and all foreign consuls to remove their archives and effects to some place of safety; and that, if these reasonable demands should not be complied with, then to place the vessels of war of the neutral nations between the Chilian fleet and the shore, with orders to return any fire the assailing fleet might make upon the town.

There will, doubtless, be a meeting of the corps in a few days, and, if so, I shall endeavor to act coolly and with circumspection; and while I shall avoid protesting against any of the regular and legitimate means which one belligerent may, according to the more humane practices of modern warfare, properly use to weaken its opponent, I shall nevertheless join in protesting against all such measures as are supported only by savage or semi-barbarous practices of past ages, but condemned by the more humane codes of modern warfare. Humanity has some rights, even higher than those of belligerents.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 138.—Translation.]

Circular to the diplomatic corps

Department of Foreign Affairs,
Lima, March 17, 1880.

Chili continues still further to advance on the path of illegal hostilities and of her own dishonor.

In my circular of 14th January to the representatives of the friendly powers, I have already denounced and condemned the attempts against the sovereignty and against the property of Peru, committed up to that time, as also the manifest abuse of the occupation of the province of Tarapacá, and all solely to carry out the condemnatory purpose of wresting from Peru the rich provinces of that territorial division of the republic.

Now, as you will see in the accompanying “Boletin,” by the proclamations published in Iquique on the 23d and 25th February last, Chili resolves to wrest from the hands of the nitrate refiners, nitrate, which, according to their respective contracts, was to be exported and sold as the property of the Peruvian exchequer, in order to export and sell it in favor of the Chilian treasury and as if it were its property; and on the pretext of a supposed demand for permission of the foreign holders of Peruvian bonds, it authorizes the extraction of guano from our deposits, which, it says, are occupied by its arms, although the latter are insufficient to maintain a real and permanent occupation, still circumscribed to certain deposits, which are not even mentioned in the said proclamation.

Although this supposes the perfect right of the said bondholders to obtain payment Of this credit by the means indicated, the permission involves the payment to the Chilian Government of twenty or thirty shillings per ton, a manifest defraudation, and the sole object of the license conceded, and every thing points to the conclusion that their petition has been brought about by a secret manœuvre, a veritable collusion to steal and divide amongst them the riches of Peru, made by those who in that fraudulent bargain have thought to find a quick, although disgraceful way of satisfying an asperation which they can with difficulty reconcile to their own conscience.

Against these attempts, dictated by an insatiable desire for the property of others, and on account of the urgent want of resources to continue an unjust war, the vandalic character of which is becoming more marked from day to day, the Peruvian Government sees itself under the necessity of making the declaration expressed in the decrees of the 15th instant, which you will find contained in the same “Boletin.”

You will also read in it the frank and loyal report of the secretary of hacienda, dated January 27, wherein he fully justifies all that has been done by the new government in regard to its external finances, consulting the interests of its creditors, notwithstanding the exigencies of the war.

Provoked to a war which it has never, for its part, been able to look upon o the wise than as a high continental expedient, and as a duel of honor, Peru finds herself opposed to an enemy who does not accept the combat on the same footing, and who is insensible to the noble sentiments of justice and chivalry, and, ignoring the most obvious principles of the law of nations, of humanity, and of civilization, converts an international struggle into a treacherous assault on defenseless persons, pillage, war without quarter, and destruction without limit.

To this frenzy which is even making Chili forget what she owes to herself as a Christian republic, Peru will uphold that manly perseverance which is necessary for the vindication of her right, and the reparation of the injuries at present inflicted on her through the scandalous abuse of force.

In the mean time she cannot but consider as accomplices of her enemy all those who, under the cover of a foreign flag, co-operate in the depredation of her rights and the increase of the rescources with which Chili tramples upon and outrages what the community of cultured nations regard as most sacred and respectable.

She will treat, therefore, such co-operators as enemies who, having broken by their own deliberate will the neutralty which they ought to observe for their protection, lose ipso facto all right to any protection, associating themselves in a work of usurpation and detention, which nothing can justify, inasmuch as in the present war, Chili, neither before nor subsequent to its declaration, has expressed any demand or pretension against Peru. Chili declares and makes war against Peru solely because the latter is the ally of Bolivia. This is the only cause of her hostilities. All that has not for its object the paralyzation of the forces of the republic, or the destruction, when the evident necessity requires it, of the elements which might be used to injure it, is iniquitous and contrary to universal morality and the law of nations, and authorizes reprisals in such measures as a nation respecting itself and being conscious of its imprescriptible duties, will not go beyond. You will please transmit the contents of this dispatch and the inclosed “Boletin” to the prime minister of the government where you are residing, and leave him a copy of both should he so desire.

God keep you, &c.,

PEDRO JOSÉ CALDERON.

No. 531. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 531.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, March 24, 1880. (Received April 13.) No. 140.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose to you the copy of a letter and protest from Mr. Monuoy, our consul at Lambayeque, which I have just received, in reference to the depredations of the Chilian fleet at Lobos Islands, and at Eten. The injury, as you will readily perceive, is much clearer than the remedy.

I shall, however, forward a copy of his letter and protest to our minister in Santiago.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHEISTIANCY.

[Inclosure in No. 140.]

Mr. Monjoy to Mr. Christiancy

Consulate of the United States of America,
Lambayeque, March 17, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to transcribe to your excellency the following report from Mr. Stalpe, of Lobos de Afuera Islands, of the proceedings of the Chilian cruisers at those islands, and also the attack made by the same vessels upon the port and town of Eten.

“Lobos de Afuera, March 16.

“On the 10th instant there arrived here the Chilian corvette Chacabuco and transport Loa, which, after notifying the governor of their intent, proceeded to burn and destroy moles, platforms, cars, launches, &c., and to embark everything movable found on the islands, including mules, horses, live-stock, and provisions, as well from the company’s stores as from the purveyor’s store, over which the English consular flag was flying. In fine, they have completely stripped us of everything, and, as I telegraphed you on the 13th instant, I am sending the people away as fast as possible, leaving the contracted Chinamen until the last. In the interest of humanity and at my urgent solicitations, the commander, Don Oscar Viel, left me rice and charqui for eight days, and spared the steamer Ballestas, which he said was forfeited by her voyages being illegal, on my representation that she was absolutely necessary to transport the people to the mainland, as we could not depart upon the ships, which do not feel inclined to move at present.

“The commander assured me that his orders to take away everything were most positive. The mole is this time completely destroyed, and the loading may be considered as definitely suspended.

* * * * * * *

“The commander of the Chilian naval forces notified us that his orders are to await a re-enforcement of ships and to destroy all the ports from Payta to Callao. A third Chilian ship joined the squadron at Eten Rafter which they proceeded to sea, and we have seen them no more.”

The resolution of the Chilian Government, as expressed by the commander of the bombarding forces, Capt. Oscar Viel, to destroy the ports of the coast, will, no doubt, arouse your attention as also that of the other foreign diplomatic officers in Peru, from the fact that at least 90 per cent. of all the immovable property in those ports belongs to foreign residents, such as dwellings, storehouses, &c. What favorable effect the destruction of such property can have upon the result of the war is not very clear to me, and therefore I request your serious consideration of the disastrous effects of such acts upon the Americans engaged in commerce and trade on the coast—effects which destroy the strenuous efforts of our government and citizens for the last few years to promote and encourage trade and commerce with Peru and to procure in this country an outlet for our manufactures and products. The solution of this difficult situation I leave to your excellency, as eminently qualified by your capacity and position. Still, I consider it to be my duty, as an officer of the United States, to protest, in the name of our government and of her citizens resident in this district, against all such barbarous and inhuman acts as directed chiefly and solely against American and other foreign citizens and their lives and property, and declaring that such acts do not and cannot contribute in any manner towards debilitating or harassing the people or Government of Peru, with whom Chili is at war, but are evidently and solely acts directed with premeditation against neutral residents of foreign nations who are peaceably prosecuting their legitimate trade and commerce under the protection of the general law of nations.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

S. C. MONTJOY,
United States Consul.

No. 532. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 532.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, April 6, 1880. (Received April 27.) No. 151.]

Sir: Referring to your dispatch No. 63, I have the honor to inclose herein a copy of my official note to the secretary of foreign relations of Peru, of April 3 (No. 39), calling his attention to the 18th article of the treaty between the United States and Peru, and expressing to him the views entertained by our government of the effect of that treaty as to American vessels transporting nitrates from that part of Peru now in the military occupation of Chili.

I desire further to say that, from the first appearance of the circular of the secretary of foreign relations, I had taken the same views of the clause to which you allude, that you have expressed in your dispatch. But as I knew that Peru had no cruisers which could safely get south of Iquique for the present, I looked upon that clause in the decree as brutum fulmen, an abstraction, so far, at least, as the United States were concerned, and thought it good policy to allow the other foreign representatives here to deal with that abstraction until it should become a practical question.

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure in No. 151.]

Mr. Christiancy to Señor Calderon.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, April 3, 1880.

Monsieur le Secrétaire: By reference to the letter of Hon. William M. Evarts, Secretary of State of the United States, to your excellency, dated the 1st of March last, which I had the honor to send to your excellency to-day, it will be seen that I am expected to explain to your excellency the views which my government entertains of that part of your excellency’s circular of the 14th January last which, in effect, declares that the flag of a neutral and friendly nation shall not protect from capture by Peruvian cruisers nitrates shipped under the authority of Chili from that part of Peru in military possession of Chili upon such vessels of neutral and friendly nations.

In the performance of the duty thus imposed upon me, I have the honor to call your excellency’s attention to the eighteenth article of the treaty of 1870, between the United States and Peru, and to inform you that in the opinion of the Government of the United States the shipment of such nitrates upon vessels owned by citizens of the United States is directly and expressly covered and protected by said article, which in substance (among other things) provides that free ships shall give freedom to goods, and that everything shall be deemed free which shall be found on board the vessels belonging to the citizens of either of the contracting parties, although the whole lading or a part thereof should belong to the enemies of either, articles contraband of war always excepted; and that in the opinion of the Government of the United States, if a Peruvian cruiser should capture an American vessel, or seize its cargo or any part of it, because that cargo, in whole or in part, should consist of the nitrates referred to in the circular of your excellency, such capture or seizure would constitute a clear violation of said eighteenth article of the treaty.

The Government of the United States therefore confidently trusts that the Government of Peru, upon having its attention thus; called to the treaty, will, from its friendly disposition to the United States and its desire to preserve inviolate the faith of its treaty, either so modify the circular referred to or will give such orders as may prevent an act which would give to the United States such just cause of complaint.

The undersigned will not permit himself to doubt that upon a careful examination of the treaty this reasonable request will be readily complied with.

I improve, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

No. 533. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 533.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, April 14, 1880. (Received May 5.) No. 156.]

Sir: * * * * * * * *

The Chilians have full command of the sea, and on Saturday last, the 10th instant, a portion of the Chilian fleet, consisting of Blanco Encalada, Huascar, Angamos, Pilcomayo, and Matias Cousino, and two other vessels (whose names are not yet ascertained), with some torpedo launches, appeared at the northern entrance of the port of Callao, just before daylight, and an attempt was made by a torpedo launch to blow up the Peruvian corvette Union, which failed on account of the launches and timber collected around the Union for the purpose of making repairs. On the same day a notice was given by the Chilian admiral to the dean of the consular corps of Callao, of his intention to blockade that port, and giving eight days for the neutral vessels then in port to load, unload, and depart; at the same time intimating his intention to attack the military defenses of that port, and that it might become necessary for him, in attacking such military defenses, to fire upon and endanger the town.

The fair inference from his language was that the same period of eight days would be given for the peaceable inhabitants to remove themselves and their movable property out of the range of the guns. The consular corps subsequently requested of him to extend the period of eight to fifteen days, to which he, on the 13th, by letter addressed to the corps, assented to add to the former notification two days, making the period ten instead of eight days, and at the same time signifying that the same length of time would be given for neutrals and non-combatants to remove from the town before he should open fire upon its defenses, unless, in the mean time, he should be provoked to an earlier attack by being fired upon by the Peruvian forces, or an earlier attack should become necessary by some demonstration made by such Peruvian forces.

Considering that Callao is a fortified town, defended by forts, batteries, and military forces, which, by the laws of war, the Chilian fleet have a right to attack, I deem this notice entirely reasonable.

In the mean time it is understood that the regular line of mail steamers from Panama to Callao and back will be allowed to enter and depart with the mail and passengers, but we have no assurance, as yet, that a similar privilege will be accorded after the ten days expire, the 20th of this month.

It is therefore quite probable that it may be several weeks before I shall again be able to communicate with you.

The inhabitants of Callao are fleeing with their property to Lima, and American citizens both of Callao and Lima are appealing to this legation for protection, and though I am out of health, and have no means of protecting them, except such as the United States flag and the position of a minister of the United States may give, I propose to remain at my post and afford them all such protection as may be in my power; though my own private affairs make it imperative that I should leave for the United States at the first moment I can receive leave for that purpose.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

No. 534. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 534.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, April 18, 1880. (Received May 17.) No. 157.]

Sir: Though scarcely able to be out of my bed, yet, as events are becoming interesting here, I make this effort to keep you informed.

Referring to my last dispatch in reference to the progress of the war (No. 156) I will say that since that dispatch the diplomatic corps have had two meetings, and at the meeting yesterday all unanimously approved and signed the communication to the Chilian admiral, a copy of which I here inclose with translation.

The third point is understood to apply at present to the city of Lima, six miles from the bay of Callao (but it might be reached by shot from very long-range guns from the bay of Chorillos, say five miles, the intention to do which has been declared), and of course generally to all other towns due notice of the bombardment of which shall not have been given.

I will further say that immediately after my last dispatch, No. 156, at a meeting of the ministers of England, France, and Germany, and the chargé d’affaires of Italy, it was unanimously resolved that the notice of the blockade given by the Chilian admiral applied only to Callao.

Knowledge of this resolution was, I suppose, conveyed to the Chilian admiral, when he declared that the notice was intended to apply also to the towns of Chorillos, Miraflores, and Magdelena; but I am satisfied from information received through the British minister, who, as well as the commander of the English naval vessels here, seems to be on very friendly terms with the Chilian admiral, that the Chilian fleet do not intend to fire upon the three latter towns unless provoked by hostile demonstrations therefrom, though the blockade will apply to them.

The regular line of English mail steamers (upon which we all have to rely for our mails north and south) is no longer permitted to enter Callao. But the port of Ancon (20 miles north) is as yet open, and a steamer from there to Panama is expected to leave on the 22d, by which I expect this to go.

On the 20th, at 12 m., we expect the bombardment upon Callao to commence. The Chilians have eight vessels here, among which are the Blanco Encalada, the Huascar, and the Angamos, and it is believed they will have more before the attack is commenced. Our consul, Mr. Clayton, has, with my advice, removed the archives of the consulate on board the Onward to await the result.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 157.—Translation,]

Lima, April 17, 1880.

The undersigned, after reading the note of Admiral Riveros to the consular corps of Callao, are convinced that, in conformity to his declarations, the chief of the blockading squadron, on making use of the rights of war, coinciding with his own interest, is aware of the rights due to neutral individuals and their properties. Nevertheless, the correspondence between Admiral Riveros and the consular corps leaving some points uncertain, they deem it their duty, in order to protect the interests of those under their charge, as well as to cover their responsibility towards their respective governments, to make the following declaration: 1st. That they reserve all questions in regard to the damages which maybe caused, without military necessity, to the persons and property of neutrals.

2d. That they especially make these reservations in case of the bombardment of open and undefended localities.

3d. They do so likewise in the case of a bombardment of a town not expressly designated in a previous notification.

The undersigned hope that the Chilian admiral will be pleased to acknowledge the receipt of these reservations, and avail themselves of this occasion to offer him the assurance of their high consideration.

The minister of Ecuador:
J. DE T. PINTO.
The minister of the Argentine Republic:
JOSÉ DE URIBURU.
The minister of France:
E. DE VORGES.
The minister of the United States:
I. P. CHRISTIANCY.
The minister of Great Britain:
SPENCER ST. JOHN.
The minister of Germany:
V. GRAMATZKI.
Chargé d’ Affaires of Italy:
J. B. VIVIANI.
Chargé d’Affaires of Brazil:
MELLO EL ALVIM.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 157.—Translation.]

Admiral Riveros to the diplomatic corps

April 18, 1880.

The undersigned has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the esteemed collective note, dated yesterday, which the honorable diplomatic corps of Lima has been pleased to address to him.

That valuable communication has for object to establish declarations and reservations on the following points: 1st. In case that the persons and property of neutrals will be damaged without military necessity.

2d. In case of the bombardment of open and undefended localities.

3d. In case of the bombardment of a town not expressly designated in a previous notification.

The undersigned, while sustaining the declarations and communications which, in the proper opportunity, addressed to the honorable consular corps of Callao, and to the commanders of the naval forces of neutrals in this harbor, has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of that respectful note, placing to the knowledge of the honorable gentlemen who signed it that, by the first opportunity, he will make it his duty to transmit the original to the Supreme Government of Chili.

The undersigned commander thinks proper to repeat here his declaration that, as far as the necessities of war and his instructions will permit, he will never forget the duties which the principles of humanity impose upon him, and the respect due to those who have not the character of belligerents.

The undersigned has the honor to offer, &c.,

No. 535. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy. No. 535.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Christiancy.

Department of State,
Washington, April 19, 1880. No. 76.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 140, in which yon inclose a report of Consul Montjoy, relative to the destruction of neutral property at the Lobos Islands by Chilian vessels.

The Department had received information from our minister at Santiago of the issuance of the order, which appears to have been in part carried out at these islands, on the occasion referred to, and also of a representation made by the minister to the Chilian Government, to the end of procuring a modification of the order in the interest of neutral citizens of the United States. This government will not fail to protest to the minister of Chili in Washington against the conduct of the war, to the injury of citizens of the United States; and should Peru pursue a like course to that of Chili, it will be expected that you will make due representations to the minister of foreign affairs, to prevent damage to the citizens of this country and to restrict the collisions of a military character, the cruelties and devastations of the war.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 536. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 536.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, May 9, 1880. (Received June 5.) No. 164.]

Sir: Premising that on the 12th of April last, the Supreme Chief of this republic had issued a decree prohibiting the sale of articles of the first necessity at prices higher than those at which they were sold on the 8th April, when the blockade of Callao was notified, that this means that they should not be sold at higher prices in paper soles, the only currency in circulation, that these soles were on the 8th April worth in exchange on London about 8¾ pence sterling, and that they are worth, to day, only about 5¾ pence, the following decree of the prefect of Lima of the 4th instant will be understood: prices of the necessaries of life.

His honor, the prefect of Lima, has issued a decree regulating the prices of daily necessities, of which the following is a translation:

Considering, 1st. That by the supreme decree of the 12th ultimo it is prohibited to sell articles of first necessity at higher prices than those at which they were sold on the 8th of same month;

2d. That such prices, in conformity with the said supreme decree, having been determined on by the municipality of this capital:

I decree—

Article 1. The articles of first necessity and the highest prices at which they shall be sold are to be as follows:

Rice, first class, of the country, sack of 190 pounds 34 soles, 1 pound 20 cents; East Indian, sack of 190 pounds 33 soles, 1 pound 19 cents.

White sugar 100 pounds 25 soles, 1 pound 35 cents.

Brown sugar, 100 pounds 21 soles, I pound 24 cents.

Fresh beef, first class, 2 pounds 70 cents, 1 pound 50 cents; second class, 2 pounds 54 cents, 1 pound 40 cents; third class, 2 pounds 36 cents, 1 pound 30 cents.

Pork, 60 cents per pound.

Mutton, first class, 2 pounds 78 cents, 1 pound 60 cents; second class, 2 pounds 54 cents, 1 pound 50 cents.

Sweet-potatoes (camotes), per sack 4 soles, per pound 5 cents.

Arrowroot, 100 pounds 17 soles, 1 pound 20 cents.

Beans, white and brown, 182 pounds 15 soles, 1 pound 13 cents.

Biscuit, ordinary, 100 pounds 36 soles, 1 pound 40 cents.

Pease, 182 pounds 18 soles, 1 pound 20 cents.

Flour, 100 pounds 21 soles 50 cents, 1 pound 25 cents.

Corn flour, 100 pounds 8 soles, 1 pound 15 cents.

Lentils (pease), 182 pounds 20 soles, 1 pound 18 cents.

Wood, for kindling fires, 100 pounds 2 soles.

Lard, foreign, 100 pounds 63 soles, 1 pound 70 cents; native, 100 pounds 55 soles, 1 pound 60 cents.

Corn, 156 pounds 9 soles, 1 pound 7 cents.

Potatoes, per load 25 soles, 1 pound 7 cents.

Beans, large, 156 pounds 15 soles, 1 pound 20 cents.

Bread, 140 to 180 grams, 10 cents each.

Soap, 300 in a box, 52 soles 20 cents; each piece 20 cents; native soap, large, 1 piece 10 cents.

Quinine, 24 soles per ounce.

Rum, per block 2 soles, 1 bottle 40 cents.

Salt, per block 3 soles, 1 pound 5 cents.

Candles, per box of 25 packets 23 soles, 1 packet 1 sole.

Yuca, per sack 21 soles, 1 pound 5 cents.

Kerosene, per box, containing 2 tins, 16 soles 75 cents; 1 gallon, 2 soles.

Art. 2. The sub-prefects, commissioners, and governors, in their respective jurisdictions, and the municipalities and the municipal agents in the groceries, markets, and slaughter-houses, exercising the most active vigilance so as to discover all infractions, are encharged with the punctual fulfillment of this decree, applying to all who contravene the same arbitrarily and immediately, the proportioned penalties to the gravity of the offense.

Art. 3. The authorities of the police will lend to the aforesaid municipalities the aid and assistance of the armed force, so that the above resolution be duly carried into effect.

Given at the prefecture in Lima the 4th day of May, 1830.

JUAN MARTIN ECHENIQUE.

The effect of this decree, as might have been anticipated, has been to drive many of the dealers in such articles to shut up their shops and refuse to sell the articles at all. Such has been the fact, especially among the shop-keepers of neutral nations doing business here, though the smaller native dealers profess to comply with the decree, and in many cases do, but many of them continue to supply inferior articles for the same price at which a superior article was sold before.

It must be acknowledged that this decree is an extreme measure.* * * But it was expected to have a temporary effect in keeping up the value of the paper currency, and I think it has had and still has this effect to some extent.

There being no other currency to be had, the people must use this or nothing, and I fear the latter alternative will soon occur. What, then, is to happen I cannot foresee, as Peru does not appear to have any present available resources on which she can contract loans or obtain a coin currency.

I am, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

No. 537. Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts. No. 537.
Mr. Christiancy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lima, Peru, June 20, 1880. (Received July 29.) No. 179.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 177,* upon the progress of the war and the question of peace, I have now to inform you that on the 14th instant (the day after the dean of the diplomatic corps and the French minister had called upon the Supreme Chief in the name of the corps, as stated at the close of my dispatch No. 177), there appeared in the Patria and in El Peruano the address or proclamation of the Supreme Chief to the nation, a copy of which I here inclose, marked, with a translation from the South Pacific Times.

On the 16th instant appeared in the Patria (official paper) the “Protocol of the preliminary bases of the federal union of Peru and Bolivia,” a copy of which, with the translation, I here inclose. Also the “Supplementary protocol of the preliminary basis of the union of Peru and Bolivia,” of which I inclose copy, with translation.

The proclamation is substantially in accord with the answer given by the Supreme Chief in person to the dean of the diplomatic corps and the French minister the day before.

* * * * * * *

It is the general opinion among the best informed Peruvians and foreigners here that such federal union, if carried into effect, will be highly and permanently beneficial to both Peru and Bolivia, though, in the meantime, revolutions may take place in Peru, and especially in Bolivia, which may prevent the union, but it is believed the general public opinion in Bolivia and Peru is and will remain in favor of the union, and such is my impression from the best information I can obtain.

The effect of the publication of these protocols has been to raise the market value of the paper currency here, which had fallen to 5 pence per sol, in exchange on London, and which is now freely granted by English houses here at the rate of 6¼ pence per sol.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

I. P. CHRISTIANCY.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 179.]

[From The South Pacific Times, June 15, 1880.]

The Supreme Chief to the Nation:

Fellow Citizens: Our patriotism has just received a rude shock. The unexpected check sustained by our first army of the south, brought about by a series of errors, and which can only be explained by the impatience of our army to meet the enemy, has given to the latter, at great cost, the useless occupation of Tacna and Arica, after a most heroic and memorable resistance.

A people bold and firm, who feel that they deserve to triumph, receive with pride, as does Peru, those checks, which only dishearten the weak.

It is well! By the pain with which we count our victims will be forged the sword of justice with which we shall repel our invaders. The blood shed claims vengeance; and shall have it, ample and complete. The example of our martyrs makes soldiers spring up by thousands, and there is not in Peru one who does not feel proud of them. Chili, conqueror, will find its conquests very dear. Peru to-day is to be feared a hundred times more by Chili than at the commencement of the campaign, and recovers in misfortune the strength forgotten in the days of confidence and tranquility.

Chili does not understand, cannot understand, what to a generous and high-spirited people means hearths trampled under foot, the blood of its sons shed, and the majesty of the nation outraged by those who should tremble at its anger; and judging us by themselves, they have dreamt that they could obtain the peace they covet, in order not to succumb to our inevitable and legitimate triumph.

Yesterday Chili dreamt also in our intestine struggles, but Peru and Bolivia have to-day only one voice, one thought. Chili sought to destroy the alliance, and all that she has reaped is the making of two peoples one only. She attempts to hem us in by a blockade, but will only hasten the solution of our internal questions, and by so doing enable us to recover that strength which to-morrow she will look upon affrighted.

Chili is building up day by day with her ephemeral successes her own ruin, and by each of her costly blows wastes the strength which might be able to resist us at a future time. Our resources are untouched, but theirs are coming to an end. They are living on what they borrow, to their own ruin and to the undeceiving of the deluded persons who discount their barren triumphs. They have played in Tacna a stroke of fortune which is utterly useless to them, which prostrates them and makes, us, arise more vigorous and determined than before.

Let them burn, let them efface our undefended towns on the coast; let them lay waste our fields, if they can. We are determined to all, save the renouncing the vindication of our right, the ceding one inch of our soil, the asking from us, to save themselves, a peace which they will never be able to force upon us.

Fellow countrymen, you have confided to me the recovery of our national rights trampled under foot without even a pretext. My task, therefore, is to seek the recovery of our rights without rest, and seek it at any cost, seek it until it be obtained. Behind me stand six million men. And when I fall, fortune, which may deny to me the being present at the triumph of my country, will not deny me, I trust, the right to die in its defense, secure of victory.

Justice is with us. Victory has never been denied to those who fighting for their home and country become worthy of them by their determination and self-sacrifice.

Lima, June 13, 1880.
N. de PIÉROLA.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 179.—Translation.]

Protocol of the preliminary bases of the federal union of Peru and Bolivia

In Lima, capital of the Republic of Peru, on the 11th day of June, in the year 1880, the undersigned plenipotentiaries of Peru and Bolivia, having met in the hall of public audience of the secretary of foreign relations and worship, and after having exhibited to one another their respective powers and found the same to be sufficient and in due form to proceed to stipulate and agree upon that which may the better tend toward the object of drawing closer the bonds of fraternity which nature and historical events have created between the two republics; of consolidating their domestic peace and providing for their security abroad; of assuring the general welfare of their inhabitants and extending the blessings of independence and liberty to the present and future generations; of promoting, likewise, that prosperity and greatness to which by a common destiny the rich and beautiful regions embraced in their vast territories are called, in conformity to the aspirations generally manifested by public opinion in the two countries, respecting the necessities of adopting a new political organization which, modifying their present internal constitution and uniting at the same time their power and resources in one sale nationality, may fully and efficiently bring about these ends; agreed in the name of their governments, and in order that they may previously be submitted to the approval of the people of Peru and of Bolivia, upon the following bases of union of the two countries.

I. Peru and Bolivia shall become a single nation called the Peru-Bolivian United States. This union is based upon American public law, and is formed to confirm the independence, the inviolability, the internal tranquility, and external security of the States embraced therein, and to promote their development and prosperity.

II. The present departments of each of the two republics, saving such modifications as may be sanctioned by the constitutional assembly, shall be formed into independent states, having their own institutions and laws, not to conflict, however, with the constitution or laws of the union. Nevertheless, the departments of Tacna and of Oruro, of Potosi and Tarapacá shall form the States denominated Tacna of Oruro and Potosi of Tarapacá. The regions of the “Chaco” and of the “Beni” in Bolivia, and that called the “Montania” in Peru, as well as other territories which may exist in analogous conditions, shall form federal districts, subject to special legislation, and to the direct control of the government of the union.

III. The States shall constitute their sovereignty according to the principles of the republican representative system, to the declarations and guarantees of the national constitution, and to those laws of the union which assume to them the administration of justice, the municipal organization, primary education, and material progress, all to be supported out of their own resources.

IV. The union of the States is indissoluble, consequently no State can separate itself therefrom.

V. The States are equal in rights. That of citizenship is common to them.

VI. No new State can be formed within the territory of another or others, nor can one be formed of two or more, without the vote of the legislatures of each of the States interested, and the sanction of the national Congress, given in two sessions, with entirely renewed personality of voters.

VII. The States cannot make treaties, one with another, save for the furthering of the administration of justice, of economic interests or works of common utility, with the consent of the national Congress. They do not enjoy the right of asylum with respect to one another.

VIII. The States do not exercise the power delegated to the nation. Consequently they cannot represent it before other powers. Nor can they make laws concerning foreign commerce or navigation, nor establish custom-houses; nor coin money; nor charter banks of issue without the permission of the general government; nor alter the codes which Congress may sanction for the union; nor make laws regarding citizenship or naturalization, nor fit out ships of war or raise armies, save in case of invasion or imminent danger from abroad, giving in such case immediate notice to the national government.

IX. No State can declare or make war on another. Their complaints shall be submitted to the judgment and decision of the supreme federal court. Any act of hostility shall be deemed an act of civil war, which it is the duty of the national government to quell and suppress in the exercise of its attributes.

X. The governors of the States are the natural agents of the national government, to exact compliance with the constitution and laws of the union.

XI. It is obligatory upon the States to furnish the quota of troops corresponding to them, to form the national army in time of peace or war.

XII. The national government shall be vested in the legislative, executive, and judicial powers of the union.

XIII. A Congress, composed of two chambers, one of National Deputies, and the other of State senators, shall exercise the national legislative authority.

XIV. The Chamber of Deputies shall be composed of representatives elected directly by the citizens of the States, which shall be considered, for this purpose, as electoral districts, the number of such representatives being determined in proportion to the population. Their term of office shall be four years.

XV. The Senate shall be composed of two senators from each State, elected by their several legislatures. Each senator shall have a vote and their term of office shall be six years. The functions of the Senate shall be permanent.

XVI. The national Congress shall meet, ordinarily, each year. Nevertheless, it may be convoked, extraordinarily, by the executive, and for determined objects.

XVII. The national executive authority shall be vested in a citizen, with the title of President of the Peru-Bolivian United States, assisted by ministers of state, and in case of the absence or impediment of the former, by a Vice-President, who shall be the president of the Senate, and who shall have no vote save in case of a tie. The term of office for the President shall be for five years, and he shall not be eligible for re-election until after the lapse of a like period. The ministry shall be formed of citizens of the two united republics, at least during two presidential terms, consulting, as far as may be possible, equality of representation.

XVIII. The President of the union shall be elected by direct voting by the citizens of the States, according to their several laws; but each one shall vote for two citizens, one of whom shall be of the State and the other not. Should no citizen obtain an absolute majority of votes, the federal Congress shall choose from among the three who may have obtained the relative majority.

XIX. The judicial authority of the union shall be exercised by a supreme court of justice and by such special tribunals as Congress may establish for the nation.

XX. The duties and their limitations of the high powers of the union shall be fixed by the national constitution, according to the principles of this system of government, consecrated by the practice of those nations which have already adopted it.

XXI. The constitutional assembly shall designate the place within the territory which is to be the capital of the union, and which shall be under the immediate authority of the President of the United States.

XXII. The national government shall provide for the expenses of the union from the funds in the treasury, which shall be formed by the product of import and export duties, of the sale or rental of government lands, of the natural products of the sale, of the post-office department, of general indirect tax, and of such other resources as may be voted by the federal Congress. The tax upon incomes and local contributions belong to the treasuries of the States or municipalities.

XXIII. The national government shall not intervene in the territory of the States, except to cause the constitution and federal laws to be respected, and at the request of their constituted authorities, to sustain or re-establish them, should they be threatened by invasion from another State, or deposed by sedition.

XXIV. Within the republic the circulation of merchandise produced or manufactured in the country, as well as that of the goods or merchandise which may have been dispatched through the custom-houses of the union, shall be free of duty. In this exemption are not included municipal taxes, the creation of which, however, must be submitted to the legislature of the State.

XXV. The vehicles, vessels, or animals carrying the articles mentioned in the preceding section, tools and materials for the construction of roads, river or telegraphic communication between the States, as well as the herds passing from the territory of one state to another, enjoy the exemption.

XXVI. The representation abroad of the union belongs exclusively to the federal executive, who will invite friendly nations to a revision of such treaties as they respectively may have celebrated with Peru and with Bolivia, in order to renew and unify the same.

XXVII. Peru and Bolivia owe nothing whatever to one another for account of the expenses which the war of both countries against Chili may have caused them up to the date of the union.

In witness whereof the undersigned plenipotentiaries, authorized ad hoc by their respective governments, signed and sealed the present protocol the day and date above written.

(In duplicate.)

PEDRO JOSÉ CALDERON,
Secretary of Foreign Affairs and Worship.
Authorized ad hoc. [l. s.]MELCHOR TERRAZAS,
Minister Plenipotentiary of Bolivia.
Authorized ad hoc.

A true copy.

CALDERON.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 179.]

Protocol complementary of the preliminary bases of the federal union of Peru and Bolivia

In Lima, capital of the Republic of Peru, the 11th day of June, in the year 1880, the undersigned plenipotentiaries having met in the hall of public audience of the department of foreign affairs and worship, with the object of completing the bases of the federal union of Peru and Bolivia, which they have stipulated and agreed upon under this same date, with other points of accessory or transient character, in order thus to obviate the obstacles which might arise to the more prompt and effectual realization of an act so important to both republics, agree upon the following: I. The preliminary bases of union shall be submitted to the acceptance of the people of Peru and of Bolivia, without which they shall be of no effect.

II. This acceptance, expressed in such form as circumstances may permit, shall moreover contain the declaration whether the establishing of the federal system shall be at once proceeded with or not.

III. In the affirmative event, and until the constitution and federal institutions by the constitutional assembly, which shall meet in the city of Arequipa on the 9th of December, 1881 (unless events arising from the war shall compel an anticipation or further delay, which shall be determined by a vote of the provisional Senate), there shall be a provisional federal system established upon the following bases: First. The federal government shall be formed of the Supreme Chief of the two nations, one being the President and the other the Vice-President of the union.

A popular election of the said magistrates being impossible in the initial condition of the union, and in view of the motives of availability, the first named office is assigned to the Supreme Chief of Peru, and the second to that of Bolivia.

Second. A. provisional Senate, composed of ten representatives designated by Peru and an equal number by Bolivia, shall undertake the drawing up of the constitution and organic laws of the union, especially the electoral law for deputies to the constitutional assembly, and shall act, likewise, as a consulting body for the central government.

Third. From this moment the custom-houses between Peru and Bolivia are abolished, and the political and economic union of both republics fully established.

Fourth. The provisional Senate shall prepare drafts of federal laws upon post-offices and telegraphs, upon custom-houses, upon money and banking institution, upon the railroads of the union, upon the appropriations for the same, upon literary and artistic copyright, obligatory military service, and other matters of general interest.

Fifth. The federal constitution shall be in force provisionally during five years from its promulgation, within which time such amendments and reforms as experience may suggest shall be made. The last legislature of this period of five years shall put it definitely in force, and no alterations can thereafter be made in it, save by virtue of the provisions established therein for the purpose.

Sixth. The States shall be governed and administered provisionally until the federal and their own individual constitution be sanctioned by governors appointed by the supreme chiefs of Peru and Bolivia, respectively, for those departments which are to become States in either country, and by common consent for those of Tacna de Oruro and Potosi de Tarapacá.

These governors shall be subject to the laws at present in force in their respective departments, and to the instructions issued by the provisional government of the union.

In the States of Tacna de Oruro and Potosi de Tarapacá, the government of the union, with the vote of the Senate, will decide as may be necessary such conflicting cases as may arise from the different legislations of the two countries to which the departments forming the said States originally belonged.

The removal and substitution of governors once appointed shall be made by the provisional Senate.

Seventh. A mixed commission shall undertake the fixing of the public debt of Peru and Bolivia in its different forms.

Eighth. Another commission, likewise mixed, shall study and suggest the most proper territorial demarcation of the States, that the same may be submitted for the approbation of Congress within the period of provisional constitutionality.

Ninth. The coat-of-arms of the Peru Bolivian United States shall be of Germanic form; it shall have in the center a sun of the color of gold, surrounded by stars of the same color, upon a purple ground, and in the upper part a condor resting upon and seizing it with his talons.

The war flag of the said States shall be of rectangular form, the contiguous sides of which shall be in the proportion of one to two-thirds, and it shall bear in the center the same sun and the same stars as the shield upon a similar ground.

Tenth. In case of vacancy of the office of the provisional President or Vice-President, it shall be filled by election by the Senate, to be made—each member thereof voting for two citizens—one Peruvian and one Bolivian.

The models of the coat of arms and flags are annexed to this protocol.

In witness whereof the undersigned plenipotentiaries signed and sealed the same on the day and date above set forth.

(In duplicate.)

PEDRO JOSÉ CALDERON.

MELCHOR TERRAZAS.

* Published with the peace conference correspondence, Senate Ex. Doc., No. 26, Forty-sixth Congress, third session.

Correspondence with the Peruvian Legation in the United States.Correspondence with the Peruvian Legation in the United States.

[538] . Mr. Tracy to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Peru, New York, November 5, 1879. (Received November 7.)

No. 538. Mr. Tracy to Mr. Evarts. No. 538.
Mr. Tracy to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of Peru,
New York, November 5, 1879. (Received November 7.)

Sir: Under date of the 6th of October last, the minister of foreign affairs of Peru informs me that on the 14th of August last was signed in Paris, between the plenipotentiary of the republic, Señor Goyeneche, and the Marquis of Molins, the Spanish ambassador in France, a treaty of peace and friendship between Peru and Spain, which treaty, after being approved by the national Congress, which was voted unanimously, was ratified on the 2d October by his excellency the first vice-president in charge of the executive power.

For a long time past there had been noticed in both countries a general aspiration for a definite and perfect peace, and that result would have been attained, so far as Peru was concerned, in 1872, in the conference held in Washington on the 24th of January of that year, at the invitation and under the worthy and friendly mediation of the Government of the United States, if the plenipotentiary of Chili had not demanded of Spain “reparations for the offense and injuries inflicted on his country in the bombardment of Valparaiso.”

Since that date, and notwithstanding that on different occasions Peru might, with perfect propriety, have signed the peace, and that a collective arrangement was, as she was convinced, almost impossible; she took no action in favor of any arrangement, even sacrificing her aspirations and interest, through an excessive consideration for her former ally, the Republic of Chili. Lately, and severed as Peru now is from that republic, by reason of the perfidious and iniquitous war which she had declared against her, and after reaching an accord with the Governments of Bolivia and Ecuador, she has been able to act, as she has done, for herself alone, and in terms highly honorable for both nations.

The Government of Peru being assured that that of the United States will receive with lively satisfaction the intelligence of so fortunate an event, the minister of foreign affairs charges me to communicate it to the cabinet of Washington, through your excellency’s worthy channel, in testimony of the grateful and imperishable remembrance which the Peruvian people hold of the efforts which the government of your excellency was pleased to make in favor of peace between the republics of the Pacific and the Kingdom of Spain. In informing your excellency, therefore, that the unhappy dissensions which, for so many years, have separated Peru and Spain, are in consequence consigned to complete oblivion, as should be the case with two states united by imperishable ties of blood, religion, and customs, I comply with the orders received from the ministry of foreign affairs, and honor myself at the same time in offering anew to your excellency the assurances, &c.

JOSÉ CARLOS TRACY.

PortugalPortugal

[539] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, September 19, 1879. (Received October 8.)

[540] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Moran.

Department of State, Washington, October 29, 1879.

[541] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, November 21, 1879. (Received December 10.)

[542] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, December 23, 1879. (Received January 12, 1880.)

[543] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, January 7, 1880.

[544] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, March 15, 1880. (Received April 5.)

[545] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, May 22, 1880. (Received June 9.)

[546] . Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Lisbon, June 12, 1880. (Received July 8.)

No. 539. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. No. 539.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, September 19, 1879. (Received October 8.) No. 277.]

Sir: Referring to my Nos. 254, 255, 256, 257, and numerous prior dispatches, relating to the United States Naval Cemetery at Porto Grande, St. Vincent, Cape Verd Islands, I have now the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a letter from Mr. Terry, dated the 28th ultimo, announcing the transfer of the remains of the dead from the old to the new cemetery lately formed by the Portuguese authorities at that island. It seems that the ceremony of the transfer was conducted with great respect by the Portuguese civil, military, and naval authorities.

I have thanked Mr. Terry for the part he has taken in this long and tedious business, and I inclose a copy of my letter of thanks to him.

* * * * * * *

Mr. Terry deserves great praise for his share in causing the formation of the new cemetery, and the transfer of the dead to it, and he suggests that a suitable monument to mark the last resting place of the officers and seamen buried in St. Vincent be forward from the United States. This suggestion meets with my approval, and I trust that the Department will also see it in a favorable light.

This has been a perplexing negotiation, and I congratulate the government on its satisfactory termination.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 277.]

Mr. Terry to Mr. Moran

Consulate of the United States,
Santiago, Cape Verd Islands, August 28, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that I have lately returned from the island o St. Vincent, to which place I went in order to witness the transfer of the remains of the buried dead from the old to the new American cemetery lately erected by the Portuguese authorities for the United States of America.

It was very necessary, on account of the low, marshy ground on which the old cemetery was located, to wait until what is called the dry season, or about the 1st of August, which I did. It occupied six days for exhuming and transferring the remains.

The Portuguese authorities did all in their power to show respect, including civil, military, and naval.

It was utterly impossible to know the names of those removed, consequently the remains were placed in two coffins and buried side by side. There is no monument or head-stone to mark their last resting place, and I would suggest that a suitable one be forwarded from the United States. The new cemetery is all that could be desired.

Hoping to hear from you soon, as I have received no answer of late, remaining always at your service,

I am, &c.,

THOMAS W. TERRY,
Consul.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 277.]

Mr. Moran to Mr. Terry

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, September 17, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 28th ultimo informing me of your return from the island of St. Vincent, where you have lately been to witness and superintend the transfer of the remains of the dead from the old to the new American cemetery, lately erected by the Portuguese authorities for the United States, at that place.

I am gratified to learn that the transfer was made so successfully and with so much respect for the dead, and I thank you for the effective service you rendered in the performance of this duty to the remains of our countrymen. I think that our government may be congratulated on the conclusion of this long and tedious negotiation, in which your part was most honorable and effective.

I notice your suggestion that a suitable monument should be erected over the graves in the new cemetery, and I shall not fail to forward a copy of your letter to our government, and invite attention to that proposal.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

No. 540. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Moran. No. 540.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Moran.

Department of State,
Washington, October 29, 1879. No. 168.]

Sir: A dispatch from Mr. Consul Dabney (No. 202) of the 11th ultimo has again drawn attention to the terms of your No. 86, relating to the acquirement for the United States, through proper application to the Portuguese Government, of the tariff privileges of Annex B, of the Franco-Portuguese treaty of 1866. You say that by the law of the Cortes of January 26, 1876, the Government of His Majesty “is authorized to extend to Great Britain and all other countries where Portuguese products enjoy the benefits of the most-favored-nations clause, the benefit of the said Annex B.”

Referring to the conclusions of your No. 122 on this subject, it would seem that the Department has not heretofore felt it of sufficient importance to make special application to be admitted to the above privileges, to which, by the terms of the treaty with Portugal of 1840, it is evident that the United States is entitled, but it has now been determined, more particularly in view of the increasing trade of this country, that so long as such an application appears to be held by that government, as a necessary preliminary to an extension to the United States of the rights claimed under the treaty of 1840, the proper action need not be longer delayed.

In connection with this instruction, I append hereto a copy of a letter on the subject from the Secretary of the Treasury.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

[Inclosure in Mr. Evarts’s No. 168.]

Mr. Sherman to Mr. Evarts

Washington, October 23, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter dated the 17th instant, inquiring whether discriminating duties are levied on merchandise or vessels coming from Portugal, and also whether this department considers it advisable that the Government of Portugal should be requested to extend the scope of its existing commercial treaty of 1866 with France to this country.

You state that under said treaty France was apparently placed on a more favorable footing as regards the importation of numerous articles into Portugal than any other country, and that under the provisions of the treaty between Portugal and the United States, made in 1840, as well as under a law of the Cortes of Portugal extending the benefits of the treaty with France to all countries which do not impose differentia duties upon importations from Portugal, this country is entitled to participate in the benefits conferred upon France.

It appears, however, that this privilege has not been claimed, and that the question is under consideration by you whether the representative of the United States at Lisbon shall be instructed to address the Portuguese Government upon the subject and claim such privilege.

In reply, I beg leave to state that section 2501 of the Revised Statutes requires that there shall be levied on all goods, wares, and merchandise of the growth or produce of the countries east of the Cape of Good Hope (except wool, raw cotton, and raw silk as reeled from the cocoon, or not further advanced than tram, thrown, or organzine), when imported from places west of said cape, a duty of ten per centum ad valorem in addition to the duties imposed on any such article when imported directly from the place or places of its growth or production.

With the exception of the duties which might be levied under this provision of law on importations of the character mentioned, from Portugal, no discriminating duties are levied in the United States, either on vessels or their cargoes coming from that country, and as you state that importations into Portugal from this country ought to pay from one-third to one-half less in the way of dues to that country than they do, this department is of opinion that measures should be taken to obtain from the Portuguese Government the benefits to which the United States seems to be entitled.

Very respectfully,

JOHN SHERMAN,
Secretary of the Treasury.

No. 541. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. No. 541.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, November 21, 1879. (Received December 10.) No. 293.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you, in reference to your 167, that I addressed a note to Mr. Braamcamp on the 17th instant, expressing the feelings of the Secretary of the Navy on hearing of the great respect observed by the civil, military, and naval authorities at Porto Grande in making the transfer of the remains of the dead from the old to the new American naval cemetery at that place; and at the same time I expressed to the Government of Portugal, as instructed, the thanks of the United States Government to that of the King for its courtesy and action in constructing the new cemetery and causing the respectful transfer to it of the remains of the American officers and seamen who were interred in the old one. I inclose a copy of the above-described note for the information of the Department.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure in No. 293.]

Mr. Moran to Mr. Braamcamp

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, November 17, 1880.

Monsieur le Ministre: In connection with the note which I had the honor to address to your excellency on the 12th instant, informing you that I had reported the final transfer of the dead from the old to the new American cemetery at Porto Grande, Cape Verde Islands, to my government, as well as the respectful participation of the civil, military, and naval authorities of Portugal in the solemnities of the occasion, I have now the honor to state that my report was duly communicated by the Department of State to the Secretary of the Navy, and I am instructed to say to your excellency that the satisfaction felt by my government in the action of the Portuguese officials on the occasion referred to can receive no stronger expression than is given in 1he words of the Secretary of the Navy, who remarks as follows: “The great respect observed by the civil, military, and naval authorities of Portugal in making the transfers, is but characteristic of the nation of which they are representatives, and is warmly appreciated by the Navy Department.”

In conclusion, I am instructed to express to the Government of Portugal the extreme satisfaction of my government in learning the marked courtesies extended by the local authorities of St. Vincent in connection with the removal of the remains from the old to the new cemetery, and to thank the Government of His Most Faithful Majesty for its action, in the name of the Government of the United States, a duty which I now most cheerfully perform.

Renewing the assurance of my highest consideration, I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

No. 542. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. No. 542.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, December 23, 1879. (Received January 12, 1880.) Unofficial.]

Sir: Mr. George S. J. Olliveir, a highly respectable American citizen, resident at Fayal, Azores, has sent me the inclosed original letter, dated the 2d instant, giving a detailed and graphic account of the gallant conduct of Mr. Samuel W. Dabney, consul at Fayal, and his son Herbert, in rescuing, at the risk of their own lives, four seamen of the French bark Jacques Cœur, wrecked at that place on the night of the 30th of November. I also inclose a copy of the Gazeta Judicial, of the 2d of December, published at Fayal, containing an article describing the heroic conduct of Mr. Dabney and of his son on this occasion, which says: At daylight yesterday morning, with a violent wind from the southwest, the French bark Jacques Cœur and the small steamer Fayal were driven on the coast. The British bark Northern Queen also came in the same day, but was saved from wreck by cutting away her masts.

Of the crew of the French vessel eight men were drowned, and five were rescued by Mr. S. Dabney, American consul in these islands, and his son, Herbert Dabney, who, with ropes, went out to the vessel to bring in the wrecked men. But for these brave and courageous gentlemen the whole of the crew would have perished. This is not the first time Mr. Dabney has performed acts of this nature, risking his life on similar occasions—services which can never be forgotten. Deeds such as these remain forever in our memory.

I have thought it no more than an act of justice to Mr. Dabney to forward this letter and article unofficially to the Department for its information. Mr. Dabney’s heroic and humane conduct must meet with applause wherever it is known, and I am sure that the Department will have as much pleasure in learning, as I have in communicating it. He is not aware of this proceeding on my part, as I have thought it best to write you on the matter without in any way leading him to suppose that his gallant behavior has been the subject of a dispatch to you, and for obvious reasons I make it unofficial.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure.—Unofficial.]

Fayal, December 2, 1879.

Dear Sir: As I had the honor of but a presentation to you in 1875, I feel that some apology may be requisite for my venturing to address you, although the invariable tenor of the remarks of our countrymen upon your urbanity and kindness during your long official residence at London would encourage me to speak on the subject of this letter, even had I never met you.

I beg to premise that I write now purely in the enthusiasm of an American who feels proud of the exhibition of marked gallantry on the part of an official representative of his country, and not, I conscientiously believe, through any bias occasioned by my connection with Mr. Dabney; and I think that I am safe in believing that you will be gratified to learn of the heroism of any of your countrymen, especially of that of an official in your diplomatic jurisdiction, directly and without having to gather information from newspaper reports.

Mr. Dabney is not called upon as American consul, to report the occurrences which I am about to relate, and modesty will seal the lips of himself and his son. As I am the only other male American here, I take upon myself to give you a statement of the facts, and I beg to say most explicitly that I do so without Mr. Dabney’s knowledge or suspicion of my intention.

On Sunday, the 30th of November ultimo, the French bark Jacques Cœur, of Brest, entered this port in ballast, coming to fetch the cargo of another French vessel condemned here some months ago. A strong easterly wind became a gale from the southeast soon after she anchored, and by nightfall, was fearfully violent, blowing directly on shore, with driving torrents of rain and a rapidly rising sea.

I will not weary you with descriptions of localities, of necessities of moorings, of the other vessels in the bay, &c., but will only say that this French bark and an English one, which entered the same day, had, perforce, merely their own chains and anchors to depend upon, and had taken their positions too near the shore for vessels without moorings during an easterly wind. The consequence was that they dragged during the gale; the Englishman cut away his masts and was saved, the Frenchman hopefully kept his taut spars and was driven ashore.

This occurred at about 1 a.m., and the storm was then truly terrific, while the surf upon the beach was of fearful and most unusual force, as the great damage done to the breakwater, which is in process of construction here, testifies.

Unfortunately, neither the Portuguese Government nor the local authorities have created an organization or provided appliances for saving life in cases of shipwreck here. Some years ago an English life-boat was sent hither, but as it is too heavy for launching at such times when it might be of service, and is not really what is required at this locality, it has never been used. In all the cases of wreck, the Dabneys have provided Sftpes, grappling-hooks, tar barrels for giving light, &c., from their own stores, and Mr. Samuel Dabney, during the past 35 years, has ever been on the spot in an emergency, directing action and setting the example of saving life. Many a mariner has owed his life to him.

On this occasion no professional duty or national feeling summoned Mr. Dabney from his bed to the storm-riven shore. But noting, by the vessels’ lights, that some were dragging, he and his son Herbert, a young gentlemen of twenty-six years of age, hurried to the beach at midnight. A small steamer of some 20 tons, belonging to the place, had already parted her chains and was beiug knocked to pieces against the sea-wall by the surf. The French vice-consul, the director of the custom-house, and some other Portuguese gentlemen, were there; and a knot of boatmen, custom-house guards, &c., were also gathered in an expectant group near by as the French bark gradually approached her doom.

The full moon gave light, in spite of the clouds, so that tar barrels were not needed; but, finding that there were no ropes or any other provision for saving life on the spot, Mr. Herbert Dabney hurried back, roused some of his employés and speedily returned with a coil of new manila rope from the Dabney stores. From this, pieces of sufficient length were cut, to admit of holding, on the shore, any persons who might venture in the surf to rescue the crew of the bark.

As the Frenchmen did not (perhaps could not) slip their chains when the vessel struck, she remained anchored at some distance from dry land with the enormous waves breaking over her. Could she have been freed from her chains she, light as she was, would doubtless have been driven up on the beach and all on board might have been saved. As it was, she soon broke in pieces, being an old vessel, and all her ship’s company—thirteen in number—were struggling for their lives in the raging surf among fragments of the wreck. The débris of the little steamer was also being whirled to and fro in the breakers at that spot and greatly enhanced the danger to any one who should enter the water.

None of the brave old boatmen, who, in former years, were ready to risk their lives to save others, were there present. The Portuguese gentlemen were unfitted by their want of athletic development and of familiarity with danger of that kind, to lend physical aid. Among the rollers, and the fragments of wreck, hurled madly here and there, could be seen the heads and arms of the unhappy men who were struggling for their lives, while amid the howling of the wind and the roar of the surf arose the shrieks of the drowning and the excited cries of the spectators. It seemed like suicide to venture into the surf, and those who felt too weak to cope with such fearful forces are not to be blamed for not attempting rescue. But Herbert Dabney, fastening a rope around his waist, gallantly dashed in, and, after two ineffectual attempts, by a third daring rash grappled with a Frenchman and dragged him within reach of other hands. The poor sailor was so utterly exhausted that he had to be carried bodily to a place of shelter. Scarcely behind his son, Mr. Samuel Dabney rushed into the surf and rescued another man.

And here, I would call attention to the facts that Mr. Samuel Dabney is fifty-five years of age, that he has a large family dependent on him, and that he is the head of an important commercial house to which his loss would be most disastrous. If any man had cause to hesitate in risking his life, he had. And risk there was, gravely perilous risk. Apart from the usual danger of the violent surf, the great quantity of floating spars and pieces of timber offered fearful danger not only through blows, but by becoming entangled in the ropes, which, intended to be means of safety, thus became means of dragging the men to whom they were fastened under water. Both of the Messrs. Dabney at times had to cast loose the ropes which were around their waists and then work gallantly, dependent solely on their own strength and bravery. At one time Mr. Samuel Dabney was pinioned by a mass of timber on his leg, so that he was severely bruised and his life was nearly lost.*

Of the five Frenchmen who were the only ones saved, four were rescued by the Messrs. Dabney. The other eight poor fellows of the crew disappeared, and, at the time I write, only one of their bodies has been washed ashore.

It seems to me that the fact that Mr. Dabney is my wife’s brother should not debar me from expressing my admiration of his and his son’s great gallantry. I think that the Victoria Cross has been meritedly bestowed in many cases not so meritorious as this; for in those the soldier’s duty, esprit du corps, and comradeship were powerful incentives, while here there was nothing but humanity. Among Americans there are no decorations, but public respect may take their place. You, sir, will know, better than I, whether Mr. Dabney’s conduct should be brought to the notice of our Department of State, and, should you consider it well to do so, a report from you will come more fittingly than from a private citizen.

I can assure you that I have under rather than over painted the perils of the occasion, and that I have endeavored to be exact in my statements.

In view of my relationship to Mr. Dabney and his sensitive modesty I beg to insure, by reiteration, your notice of my statement that Mr. Dabney has not the faintest idea of my thus writing to your excellency.

I have the honor to remain, with the greatest respect and consideration, your most obedient servant,

GEORGE S. J. OLIVER.

To His Excellency Benjamin Moran,
United States Minister at the Court of Portugal, Lisbon.

* Wreckage to the extent of some 14 feet, was between him and the shore.

No. 543. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. No. 543.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, January 7, 1880. No. 297.]

Sir: The Cortes were opened by the King, in person on the 2d instant, and His Majesty delivered a speech, a printed copy and a translation of which accompany this dispatch. This speech is remarkable for the gloomy picture it gives of the national finances, and its insinuations that past administrations have not applied the funds of the government to legitimate purposes.

His Majesty promises the introduction of various measures for the benefit of the country and colonial possessions, the most important being a bill enunciating ministerial responsibility; a bill regulating the employment of children in factories; one for reforms in the national laws; and a bill insuring the freedom of elections and the due representation of minorities.

There is also reference to a bill for decentralizing in a large measure the administration of the Portuguese colonial possessions. But as the speech, itself clearly sets forth the whole of the proposed measures, I will not trouble you with a further abstract The speech more than confirms all my previous statements about the finances of the country, which are in a very bad way indeed.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure in No. 297.—Translation.]

The King’s speech on opening the Cortes, January 2, 1880.

Noble Peers and Worthy Deputies of the Portuguese Nation: On opening the present legislative session in fulfillment of the most grateful duty of royalty, I congratulate myself I am again surrounded by the representatives of the country.

Our intercourse with foreign nations continues without change, the bonds of loyal friendship being maintained which assure us of their esteem and respect for our independence.

Fortunately internal quiet has not been disturbed. The election of deputies which took place in consequence of the dissolution of the elective chamber, as well as that for the renewal of the administrative councils, held in compliance with the new code, were carried out without disorder.

Availing itself of legal authority the government effected a loan destined to meet the cost of public works and improvements in the kingdom and in the ultramarine provinces, the greater portion of which is now represented by a floating debt. Of the result of this operation, and the application of its product, an account will in due time be presented to you by the competent ministers.

In the interval of a little more than six months since the close of the last legislative session my government has taken the measures which it considered consistent with good administration of public service to reduce expenses and to carry out its intentions of economy and upright administration.

The particular attention of the national representatives should be directed to the situation of the public finances. Without exaggerating the gravity of the dangers which may threaten us, or concealing the existence of the difficulties which require prompt and energetic action on your part, it ought not to be overlooked that to maintain firmly the public credit, and the prudent and economical development of the material and moral progress of the nation, it is indispensable not to aggravate by fatal delays the great inequality existing between the receipts and expenditures of the treasury, and to appeal confidently to the country, laying before it with loyal frankness the state of its administration and of its imperative necessities.

With discreet outlay of the public moneys, and a firm determination to renounce all expenditures without a vote authorizing the application, and availing ourselves of the existing imposts, and with an equal distribution of new sacrifices upon all classes of citizens, and confiding in the patriotic co-operation of the whole country and its representatives, my government hopes that, without disturbing the condition of the public finances, it will accomplish a progressive improvement and the indispensable restoration of the national finances.

Besides the general budget of the state, suitable propositions for organizing a system of public accounts and a tribunal of audit will be presented to you in such a shape that the receipts of the treasury cannot be diverted from their legitimate purposes, and that their administration may be easily understood.

My government considers these reforms as the fundamental principles of a hopeful financial reorganization, not only by essentially modifying the system of the public accounts, but still more by the powers conferred upon the tribunal of accounts as relates to past expenditures and the legality of expenses authorized by various ministries. This provision, when it becomes law, ought to secure to the country an honest application of the revenues, and the unavoidable responsibility of the government for the violation of legal appropriations.

Other propositions will also be submitted for your consideration for the reduction of expenses, the alteration of existing taxes, improving the manner of their collection, and increasing their receipts.

With the object of facilitating the material improvement of the kingdom, the government has made a provisional contract for the construction of a railway from Pampilhosa to Figueira without charge to the treasury, and hopes to propose to you the methods of rapid communication, and to complete, in a few years, a network of public roads, and to perfect the economic and maritime condition of ports.

The affairs of the colonial administration justly occupy the attention of the country, and the government, sympathizing in this patriotic sentiment, will submit for your consideration various proposals for the reform of the administration of our ultramarine possessions on the principle of thorough decentralization, and for the promotion of economic progress.

To supply the requirements of the various administrations and of public order, proposals will be laid before you to establish ministerial responsibility; a civil register; electoral reform; that of the civil administration; of primary and secondary instruction; reorganization of the army and reserve; reorganization of the technical personnel of the department of public works; anonymous societies; the national economic fund for retired public employés; alteration of the judicial system; regulating the working of minors in factories, and other subjects which may usefully employ your attention.

Among the reforms which will be proposed to you are those which are intended to improve popular instruction and secure freedom of elections—the basis of the representative system; the diminishing the powers of government agents, excluding them from the collection of taxes, and annulling their influence in the recruiting service; abolishing the issue of executions for non-payment of taxes; allowing minorities their share in the national representation.

If these proposed ameliorations meet your approbation we shall have made a great step forward on the road of liberal conquests, and the political institutions which govern us will have received notable improvements.

Calling your attention to so many and such serious subjects, you will comprehend the noble and arduous mission that you have to fulfill. Your devotion and dedication to the national interests are to me sure pledges that you will respond to the votes of the country, assuring to it the wisdom and ability of your deliberations, an auspicious period of useful works and wise reforms, co-operating effectually with the other powers of the state in the patriotic labor of restoring the finances, reorganizing the various administrations, and preparing the elements for future prosperity.

The session is opened.

No. 544. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. No. 544.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, March 15, 1880. (Received April 5.) No. 308.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 168 and my No. 86 and other dispatches on the same subject, I have now the honor to state that I made application by note to the Portuguese Government on the 27th of November last, copy of which I inclose, asking that the United States might be admitted to the benefits of Annex B, of the Portuguese-French treaty of 1866. On the 26th of February Mr. Braamcamp replied that the Government of His Majesty had great satisfaction in being enabled to extend the benefits alluded to to a nation with which it desires to strengthen its commercial relations; and adding, that upon himself personally devolved the honor to inform me that very shortly the necessary measures would be taken on the subject. I inclose copy and translation of this note.

That same evening, viz, the 26th of February, I briefly telegraphed you that the United States had been admitted to the benefits of Annex to B of the Portuguese-French treaty of 1866, and 1 now inclose a copy thereof.

I acknowledged Mr. Braamcamp’s note of the 26th February the next day, and herewith forward a copy.

The King’s decree announcing that the United States had been admitted to the benefits of the said Annex B of the Portuguese-French treaty of 1866, appeared in the Diario do Governo of the 9th instant, and I inclose copy and translation of the same.

On the 12th instant Mr. Braamcamp informed me by note of the publication of the decree in question, a copy and translation of which I inclose; and on the 13th I acknowledged the receipt of that note, thus closing for the present the correspondence on the subject.

I likewise transmit herewith two printed Portuguese and French official copies of the treaty; and two copies of an English blue-book, “Portugal No. 1, 1872,” with translation on page 3, of Annex B, showing the principal differences in sterling between the general Portuguese tariff, and the Portuguese tariff given to France. I have added to one of these copies a translation of the two omitted classes, for the sake of completeness.

It will be seen by this translation of Annex B that the reduction in the, duties fixed by it vary from 10 to 25 per cent. and upwards; but it is stipulated by Article 3 of the treaty itself that— Goods of French origin or manufacture mentioned in Tariff B, contained in the present treaty, and imported direct by sea from France, Algeria, or any French colonies under French or Portuguese flags, will be admitted into Portugal subject to duty fixed in the above-mentioned tariff, all additional duties included, except the duty called “emolument duty,” being 3 per cent. on the principal duty, which shall be continued to be levied.

That is to say that a further duty of 3 per cent. is levied on the gross amount of duty as fixed by Annex B.

I forward also a printed copy of the general tariff of Portugal issued in 1877, which may interest the Department.

These papers give the history of the negotiation by which the United States have been admitted from the 4th of March, 1880, to the enjoyment of the privileges of Annex B of the Portuguese-French treaty of 1866; and I trust that my course in carrying out your instructions on the subject will meet with the approval of the President and yourself.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 308.]

Mr. Moran to Senhor Braamcamp.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, November 27, 1879.

Monsieur le Ministre: In the month of June, 1376, I had an informal interview with Mr. Monteverde at the foreign office, in the absence of Mr. Corvo, who was ill, and asked him what steps would be necessary on the part of the United States Government to be admitted to the benefits of Annex B of the Franco-Portuguese treaty of the 11th of July, 1866. He replied that if the United States treated Portuguese goods and products on the same footing as France, that is, under the most favored nation clause, he saw no difficulty in extending the law of 28th of January, 1876, and benefits of the treaty of 1866 to the United States. He said that by law the Government of His Most Faithful Majesty was authorized to extend to Great Britain and all other countries where Portuguese goods and products enjoy the benefits of the most-favored nation clause, the benefit of the said Annex B. But Mr. Monteverde added that it would be necessary for me to apply to His Majesty’s Government by note asking that the United States might be admitted to the privileges of Annex B, and placing the request for such benefits upon the treaty between the United States and Portugal of 1840, and the law of the Cortes of the 26th of January, 1876. The government would then consider the subject, and reply, he had no doubt, in a satisfactory manner.

I accordingly reported this conversation to my government, but the Department of State has not until recently instructed me to make application for the United States to be admitted to the privileges of said Annex B; to which annex, by the terms of the treaty with Portugal of 1840, it is evident that the United States is entitled, and it has now determined, in view of the increasing trade between the two countries, that so long as such an application appears to be held by the Portuguese Government as a necessary preliminary to an extension to the United States of the rights claimed under the treaty of 1840, the proper application be no longer delayed, and I have accordingly the honor to make it now.

There are now no differential duties imposed in the United States on importations from Portugal of goads and products of that country. But I beg to state that section 2501 of the Revised Statutes of the United States requires that there shall be levied on all goods, wares, and merchandise of the growth or produce of the countries east of the Cape of Good Hope (except wool, raw cotton, and raw silk as reeled from the cocoon, or not further advanced than tram, thrown, or organzine, when imported from places west of said cape) a duty of 10 per centum ad valorem in addition to the duty imposed on any such article when imported directly from the place or places of its growth or production.

This law applies to such importations in vessels of all nations, and with the exception of the duties which might be so levied under this provision of law on importations of the character mentioned from Portugal, no discriminating duties whatever are levied in the United States either on vessels or their cargoes coming from Portugal, and consequently importations from the United States into Portugal such as are described in Annex B of the French-Portuguese treaty of July 11, 1866, ought not to pay higher duties than French goods and products of a similar character.

Having thus submitted the application on behalf of my government to be admitted to the privileges and benefits of the said Annex B, I have to express the hope that I may be honored with an early and favorable reply from His Most Faithful Majesty’s Government.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 308.]

Senhor Braamcamp to Mr. Moran

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Direction of Commercial Affairs.

Señor Benjamin Moran, &c., &c., &c.,:

I have to acknowledge the note which your excellency did me the honor to address to me on the 27th of November last, asking that the benefit of Annex B, of the treaty of the 11th of July, 1866, between Portugal and France, should be extended to the United States.

In view of the declaration made by your excellency, that the productions of the soil and of the industry of Portugal are treated by the United States as are those of the most favored nations, the Government of His Majesty has much satisfaction in being enabled to extend the benefits alluded to to a nation with which it desires to strengthen its commercial relations, and upon me personally devolves the honor to inform your excellency that very shortly the necessary measures will be taken on the subject.

I avail, &c.,

ANSELMO JOSÉ BRAAMCAMP.
Department of Foreign Affairs,
February 26, 1880.

[Inclosure 4 in No. 308.—Telegram.]

Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts

Lisbon, February 26, 1880—7½ p.m.

Evarts, Secretary, Washington:

United States admitted to benefits of Annex B, Portuguese-French treaty of 1866.

MORAN.

[Inclosure 5 in No. 308.]

Mr. Moran to Senhor Braamcamp

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, February 27, 1880.

Monsieur le Ministre: I have great pleasure in acknowledging the receipt of the note which your excellency did me the honor to address to me under date of the 26th instant, informing me, in reply to my note of the 27th of November last, that the Government of His Most Faithful Majesty has much satisfaction in being enabled to extend the benefits of Annex B, of the treaty of 11th July, 1866, between Portugal and France, to the United States, with which nation it greatly desires to strengthen its commercial relations; and adding that upon your excellency personally devolves the honor to inform me that very shortly the necessary measures will be taken on the subject.

I have to express to your excellency my personal satisfaction with this determination of His Majesty’s Government, which I am sure will tend to strengthen and increase the commercial relations between the two countries, and I shall look with the liveliest interest for the public announcement which your excellency informs me will be shortly made of the completion of the necessary steps on the subject.

Renewing the assurances, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 7 in No. 308.—Translation.]

Decree admitting United States to benefits of Annex B of Franco-Portuguese treaty

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Direction of Consulates and Commercial Relations.

In view of Article 3, of the treaty of commerce and navigation, concluded on the 26th of August, 1840, between Portugal and the United States, and being desirous of strengthening the commercial relations between the two countries, it has been decided that the benefits of Tariff B, annexed to the treaty of the 11th of July, 1866, between Portugal and France, shall be extended to the productions of the soil and industry of the United States.

The ministers and secretaries of state for foreign affairs and of the treasury are charged with the duty of carrying out the present.

Palace, March 4, 1880.
The KING.

Anselmo José Braamcamp.

Henrique de Barros Gomez.

[Inclosure 9 in No. 308.—Translation.]

Senhor Braamcamp to Mr. Moran.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Direction of Commercial Affairs.

Senhor Benjamin Moran, &c., &c., &c.:

In addition to my note of the 6th instant, I have the honor to make known to your excellency that the decree applying to the United States the benefits of Tariff B, annexed to the treaty of the 11th of July, 1866, between Portugal and France, was made public in the Diario do Governo of the 9th of the present month of March.

Availing myself, &c.,

ANSELMO JOSÉ BRAAMCAMP.
Department of State for Foreign Affairs,
March 12, 1880.

[Inclosure 10 in No. 308.]

Mr. Moran to Senhor Braamcamp

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, March 13, 1880.

Monsieur le Ministre: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of the 12th instant, informing me that the royal decree admitting the United States to the benefits of Annex B, of the treaty between Portugal and France’ was published in the Diario do Governo, No. 54, of the 9th instant. I have already procured copies of this publication and shall forward them at an early date to my government, with full information as to the readiness with which His Majesty’s Government admitted the United States to the benefits named, and I have no doubt that in due time, I shall receive instructions to convey the thanks of the Government of the United States to that of His Majesty for its prompt compliance with the request on the subject of the treaty contained in my note of the 27th November last.

I avail myself, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

No. 545. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. No. 545.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, May 22, 1880. (Received June 9.) No. 320.]

Sir: As the financial estimate of the receipts and expenditures of this kingdom for the year 1880–’81 shows a deficit of £1,145,000, the government has resorted to extraordinary measures to reduce that sum, and on the 23d ultimo published an official decree, copy and translation of which I inclose, imposing an export duty on cork, and import duty on coal, coke, cotton-seed oil, and coffee; and also increasing a tax, called the “additional tax,” imposed by decree of March 18, 1873, upon the value of all merchandise imported, to 2 per cent. (coke and coal alone excepted).

This export duty on cork has given great offense to the cork producers and dealers, and is likely to drive much of this industry from Portugal to Spain and Algeria; and thus result in injury rather than benefit to this kingdom.

Other measures of taxation are under consideration by the Cortes, particularly a new income tax, the imposition of which is strongly resisted, especially by the commercial classes and the landed proprietors, whose opposition is likely to result in the defeat of the ministry if the measure be pressed to a vote. I will, however, not speculate on probabilities, but reserve farther remarks until the Cortes close their session, an event which cannot be far distant.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 320.—Translation.]

Decree of April 23, 1880.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Office of the Minister.

We, Dom Luis, by the grace of God King of Portugal and the Algarves, &c., mak known to all of our subjects, that the general Cortes have decreed the following law

Article 1. All cork exported for foreign countries or the Portuguese possessions, o the adjacent islands, will pay the following duties:

In the rough or sheets, 30 reis each 15 kilograms; cork manufactured into squares, 100 reis each 15 kilograms; cork in shavings, and virgin cork. 5 reis each 15 kilograms.

§ Solus. Cork wood manufactured into corks for bottles to be free of all export duty.

Art. 2. Coal imported into the continent of the kingdom, or the adjacent islands will pay a duty of 300 reis per ton. The duty will be levied on the weight as declared in the manifest and bill of lading, dispensing with reweighing. When, however, the fiscal authority has reason to doubt the accuracy of the weight declared, it shall proceed as present custom-house regulations require.

§ 2. For every ton of coal embarked for use by foreign or international steamers, 150 reis a ton will be returned.

Art. 3. Coke imported into the continent of the kingdom or the adjacent islands, will pay a duty of 600 reis a ton, subject to the provisions of section 1 of article 2.

Art. 4. Cotton-seed oil imported into the continent or adjacent islands, will pay a duty of 700 reis a decalitre.

Art. 5. Coffee imported into the continent or adjacent islands, will pay 120 reis a kilogram, shelled or uushelled. When burnt and ground, and all imitations thereof, including chicory, will pay 140 reis a kilogram.

§ Solus. Provided, that coffee of the production of the Portuguese colonies imported in Portuguese vessels, shall pay in the custom-houses of the continent and adjacent island one-half the duty imposed by this article.

Art. 6. Until the 30th June, 1881, the “additional tax” imposed by the law of the 18th March, 1873, will be raised to 2 per cent., but only upon articles imported and entered for consumption. § 1. The increase of the “additional tax” on merchandise of March 18, 1873, referred to in the only section of article 1 is excepted, as well as the whole tax on coal and coke.

§ 2. On this increase of “additional tax” the 3 per cent. of emoluments will not be collected.

Art. 7. All legislation to the contrary is hereby repealed.

Dated at the Palace of the Ajuda, this April 23, 1880.
The KING.

Henrique de Barros Gomez.

Text of the law by which Your Majesty having sanctioned the decree of the general Cortes of the 19th April, 1880, which fixes the export duty on cork, and those of import on coal, coke, cotton-seed oil, and coffee, and also temporarily increasing the additional tax of March 18, 1873, to 2 per cent. upon the value of merchandise imported and entered for consumption; coke and coal excepted, being merchandise exempted from all taxes.

By Your Majesty.

Verified:

LUIZ FREDERICO MARTINS.

No. 546. Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts. No. 546.
Mr. Moran to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Lisbon, June 12, 1880. (Received July 8.) No. 32.]

Sir: The session of the Portuguese Cortes of 1880 was closed on the 7th instant. It was unusually prolonged and exciting. Of the twenty financial measures brought forward by Senhor de Barros Gomez, early in the session, the majority were passed, including, in a modified form, the law enacting and extending the income tax. But there was no important legislation affecting foreign nations, except the changes in import and export duties reported to you by me in my No. 320.

Owing to the extraordinary deficit of the year and with a view to extinguish the floating debt which has risen, up to the present time, to over £3,500,000 sterling, the Cortes have authorized the government to raise a new loan of about £4,000,000 as an addition to the funded debt, which already amounts to nearly £90,000,000.

The chamber of deputies, a day or so before the close of the session, adjourned the debate upon the Anglo-Portuguese treaty respecting the Transvaal and Delagoa Bay, by 73 to 19. This may be considered as a practical rejection of the convention, although it has been referred to the parliamentary committee upon civil legislation and foreign affairs, in order that they examine into the question whether the ordinary elective chamber has the power to sanction the treaty. A copy of it will be found in the Portuguese white book, which accompanied my dispatch No. 319 of the 21st of May. This convention was signed by Mr. Corvo and Mr. Morier, the British minister at this post, about a year ago, and its rejection by the deputies has given the latter great offense, he regarding the step as a want of faith on the part of one of the legislative branches of the Portuguese Government.

I have, &c.,

BENJAMIN MORAN.

RussiaRussia

[547] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, December 4, 1879. (Received December 22.)

[548] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, December 5, 1879. (Received December 22.)

[549] .

St. Petersburg, December 5, 1879.

[550] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State, Washington, December 8, 1879.

[551] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, December 9, 1879. (Received December 27.)

[552] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, February 19, 1880. (Received March 8.)

[553] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State, Washington, February 24, 1880.

[554] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, February 24, 1880. (Received March 13.)

[555] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, February 27, 1880. (Received March 16.)

[556] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, March 2, 1880. (Received March 22.)

[557] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, April 14, 1880.

[558] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, May 7, 1880. (Received May 24.)

[559] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, May 17, 1880. (Received June 5.)

[560] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, June 7, 1880. (Received June 22.)

[561] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, June 28, 1880.

[562] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, July 15, 1880. (Received July 31.)

[563] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, July 16, 1880. (Received July 31.)

[564] . Mr. Hoffmam to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, July 21, 1880. (Received August 9.)

[565] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State, Washington, August 10, 1880.

[566] . Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, August 11, 1880. (Received August 30.)

[567] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State, Washington, September 4, 1880.

[568] . Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, St. Petersburg, September 16, 1880. (Received October 6.)

Contents

Correspondence with the Russian Legation in Washington. (Documents 569-572)

No. 547. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 547.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, December 4, 1879. (Received December 22.) No. 159]

Sir: One of the imperial trains was blown up in the suburbs of Moscow day before yesterday. It is generally supposed that this was an attempt on the life of the Emperor, although he was not in the train that was injured. It contained only his escort, servants, and baggage returning from Livadia. Two or three cars were upset and damaged, but no one was injured.

* * * * * * *

It appears to me to be doubtful whether the Emperor’s life was really attempted, or whether the design was to further the Nihilist cause by adding to the uneasiness and distrust already existing in the government and among the people. This incident will probably lead to further and stricter repressive measures, and thus add to the discontent of the middle classes.

Whatever their motives, it is to be hoped that the perpetrators of this cruel outrage will soon be arrested.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 548. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 548.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, December 5, 1879. (Received December 22.) No. 161.]

Sir: I had the honor to write you yesterday a short dispatch in reference to a reported attempt upon the Emperor’s life. I then stated that * * * the Emperor was not in the wrecked train, and no one in it was hurt; and that I thought it not improbable that this was an attempt on the part of the Nihilists to add to the apprehension and distrust in the government, and thus give rise to further and severer repressive measures, leading to additional discontent among the middle classes.

I find to-day that the government itself regards the explosion as an attempt upon the Emperor’s life, and that Te Deums for his preservation are being celebrated throughout the capital. I have, therefore, thought it well to send you a telegram, a copy of which will be found below.

The particulars of the affair are as follows: On his way from the Crimea to Moscow His Majesty traveled with two trains, he occupying the second, and part of his suite, with his baggage, occupying the first. Arriving at Sympheropol and finding the advance train still there, he gave orders for his own train to proceed first. This was done. The Emperor arrived at Moscow and was safely lodged in the palace of the Kremlin, when the second train, on entering the suburbs of the city, was partially wrecked. Two or three baggage cars were destroyed, but none of the passengers were injured.

The first impression, as related by one of the suite, was that it was an ordinary railroad accident. Upon removing the snow, however, electric wires were discovered, which, being followed, led to an unoccupied house near the line. Inquiry showed that this house had been hired some months before by a man and his wife, who had apparently been digging a cellar beneath it, but in reality were constructing a subterranean passage leading to the line at a distance of one hundred and fifty feet. The wires were concealed behind the wall paper, and the batteries were inclosed in common wooden boxes.

The criminals have not yet been arrested. They are, however, known by sight to so many people that it is thought that they cannot escape.

I have, &c.

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 549. No. 549.

[Telegram.]

St. Petersburg, December 5, 1879.

Evarts, Washington, District of Columbia:

Train containing Emperor’s baggage and part of suite blown up—partially wrecked—near Moscow. No one hurt. Generally considered attempt on Emperor’s life.

HOFFMAN.

No. 550. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman. No. 550.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State,
Washington, December 8, 1879. No. 83.]

Sir: Your telegram of the 5th instant, respecting the presumed attempt upon the life of the Emperor by the explosion on the railway near Moscow, was duly received, and on that day I transmitted to you the following telegraphic message: The President sends to the Emperor the congratulations of the Government and people of the United States upon his providential protection against imminent peril.

It seems apparent that in case there shall be shown to have existed a deliberate design against the Emperor’s life, the cruel inhumanity of an attempt so appalling in its possible consequences will strongly tend to bring the perpetrators of such crimes into more universal reprobation throughout the world. This result would be a subject for congratulation among the lovers of order and enlightened progress everywhere.

You will assure His Majesty’s Government that the good people of the United States fully appreciate the exalted character and faithful conduct of the Emperor; that they can never forget the great act of liberation which distinguished the early portion of his reign, and believe that the good citizens of Russia would feel in His Majesty’s demise the loss of their greatest benefactor. Their heartfelt congratulations, therefore, attend the Emperor’s providential escape from great peril.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 551. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 551.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, December 9, 1879. (Received December 27.) No. 162.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your telegram of the 5th instant in reference to the recent attempt upon the Emperor’s life, and to inclose a copy of a note I wrote to Prince Gortchakoff, in accordance with your instructions, and a copy of Mr. de Giers’ note, with a translation of the same, in reply.

Your telegram will be found embodied in ray note.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 162.]

Mr. Hoffman to Prince Gortchakoff

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, December 6, 1879.

Prince: I have the honor to inform your excellency that having telegraphed to Mr. Evarts the news of the attempt upon His Majesty the Emperor’s life, on the evening of November 20 (December 2), I am now in receipt of his reply.

Mr. Evarts instructs me to say to your excellency that the President sends to the Emperor the congratulations of the Government and the people of the United States upon his providential protection against imminent peril.

I beg to add my own congratulations to those of my government upon His Majesty’s escape from the infamous plot against his life.

I take this opportunity, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 162.—Translation.]

Mr. de Giers to Mr. Hoffman

St. Petersburg, November 25—December 7, 1879.

Sir: The letter in which you transmitted to the chancellor the congratulations of the President of the Republic of the United States on the occasion of the attempt of the 20th November, and on the providential manner in which His Majesty the Emperor escaped, has been submitted to His Imperial Majesty.

His Majesty the Emperor requests you to convey to the President his sincere thanks for the sentiments of sympathy and the good wishes which he expresses in his own name and in that of the people of the United States. He thanks you also for the congratulations you added on your own part.

Receive, sir, &c.,

GIERS.

No. 552. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 552.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, February 19, 1880. (Received March 8.) No. 184.]

Sir: It becomes my duty for the third time within ten months to report to you a fresh attack on the life of the Emperor, accompanied by circumstances of unusual cold-blooded cruelty, for not only the life of the Emperor but the lives of his daughter and other members of his family were endangered.

In a room of the lower story at the west end of the winter palace are lodged a part of the soldiers on duty there. On Tuesday last a company of the Finnish regiment of guards occupied this room. Underneath the guard-room is a finished cellar-room, and above it on the second floor the small family dining-room of the Emperor. His usual dinner hour is six o’clock. On the evening of the 5th instant, at a few minutes past six o’clock, an explosion took place in the cellar, completely wrecking the guard-room, and killing or wounding every one in it (from 50 to 00 soldiers), and blowing in the floor of the dining-room, where all the 3hina and glass on the dining-table were shattered, and the silver plate twisted. No one was in this room.

Prince Alexander, of Hesse, being expected by the train arriving at six o’clock, dinner had been postponed on his account to a later hour.

The cause of the explosion is yet unknown. Everything is so completely wrecked in the cellar and guard-room that it is difficult to find any clew. It is evident, however, that there were no electric wires used, as at Moscow. The general impression is that one of the infernal machines invented by Thomas, a box with dynamite and clockworks, had been placed in the cellar. Little doubt at all events exists that dynamite was the agent employed.

Great excitement of course prevailed in the city yesterday. The palace was surrounded by a large crowd, and flags were hung out. In the evening there was an illumination.

* * * * * * *

The Empress, who is confined to her room, knew nothing of the attempt till the next day, when she was told of it by the Emperor. Her health is gradually failing. The bulletin of this morning states that the disease is more pronounced, and that the cough, palpitations, and fever have increased during the week. The shock of the attempt on Tuesday evening must hasten the end, which under any circumstances cannot be far off.

I have heard from authority I believe to be good that an explosion took place yesterday afternoon at the headquarters of the “third section” or secret police. Three or four gendarmes were killed or wounded. No mention of this appears in the morning papers, and no allusion is made by them to the attempt of Tuesday evening. It is evident that the police has forbidden all allusion to it.

I had the honor to send you yesterday morning a telegram in the following words St. Petersburg, February 18, 1880.

Evarts, Washington, District Columbia:

Explosion in winter palace, in cellar under Emperor’s dining-room, at dinner time last evening. Dinner fortunately delayed. Floor broken up. At least eight soldiers killed, fifty wounded.

HOFFMAN.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 553. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman. No. 553.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State,
Washington, February 24, 1880. No. 95.]

Sir: Your telegram of the 21st instant, concerning the late attempt on the life of the Emperor, has been received.

On the 20th instant I telegraphed you as follows: Communicate to Russian Government the President’s hearty congratulations and joy upon the providential escape of the Emperor and imperial family, and his horror at the sacrifice of life which the wicked attempt has caused.

The Emperor is well aware that the sentiments of the President and of the good people of the United States are always strongly enlisted in favor of the peace and well-being of Russia. Such a plot as this, to which your telegram refers, will never fail to excite horror in the minds of this people, and draw upon the heads of all who participate in such counsels or approve such methods the severest condemnation of public opinion throughout this country and among all classes of our population.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 554. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 554.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, February 24, 1880. (Received March 13.) No. 186.]

Sir: I had the honor to receive from you on the 21st instant a telegram in the following words: Washington, February 20, 1880.

Communicate to Russian Government the President’s hearty congratulations and joy upon the providential escape of the Emperor and imperial family, and his horror at the sacrifice of life which the wicked attempt has caused.

On the same day I telegraphed as follows: Hon. Wm. M. Evarts,
Secretary of State:

Telegram received; congratulations communicated.

In accordance with your instructions, I addressed a note to Prince Gortchakoff on the 21st instant, a copy of which I have the honor to inclose.

On the 23d instant I received his reply, a copy and translation or which I also inclose.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 186.]

Mr. Hoffman to Prince Gortchakoff

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, February 9–21, 1880.

Prince: I did not fail to communicate to my government the news of the infamous attempt of the 5th-17th instant upon the life His Majesty the Emperor. I am now in receipt of Mr. Evarts’ reply. He instructs me to convey to His Majesty, through your highness, the President’s hearty congratulations and joy upon the providential escape of His Majesty and the imperial family, and his horror at the sacrifice of life which the wicked attempt has caused.

I beg to join my own hearty congratulations to those of the President.

I take, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 186.—Translation.]

Mr. de Giers to Mr. Hoffman

St. Petersburg, February 11–23, 1880.

Sir: The chancellor of the empire did not fail to bring to the knowledge of the Emperor the contents of the note you were kind enough to address to him on the 9th-21st February instant.

His Majesty was much touched by the sentiments expressed by the President of the United States on the occasion of the happy preservation of his days, and appreciated also the congratulations which you added on your own behalf.

Receive, sir, &c.,

GIERS.

No. 555. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 555.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, February 27, 1880. (Received March 16.) No. 187.]

Sir: In my dispatch No. 136 of September 13th last I had the honor to inform you that certain changes among the high officers of Russia had been determined upon, and that among others General Loris Melikoff was to succeed General Gourko as military governor of this city. This change was announced yesterday. General Melikoff is set not only over St. Petersburg, but over the whole empire, as regards crimes against the state. Every one is made subordinate to him, even the minister of war. He is to report to and receive orders from the Emperor alone, and he is empowered to associate with himself, as a commission, such persons as he may see fit. His title is “Chief of the Supreme Executive Commission.”

As you have probably learned from telegrams in the public journals a printing press was lately seized in a house on Vassily Ostroff, and the persons connected with it arrested. It appears that the “dvornik,” or porter of the house, having observed suspicious circumstances, gave notice to the police, who thereupon made their descent. The “dvornik” received a hundred roubles for his services. Two days ago he was found murdered.

Great excitement prevails at present in this city. Many persons are leaving town, going to their country places, or to neighboring cities. Others have telegraphed to their families not to return at present. The police is visiting every house, inspecting the cellars and attics, and giving instructions to keep the gas burning all night, to look well to the water and gas pipes, and to have tubs of water ready for instant use. In short, every precaution is being taken against an outbreak, which the Nihilists threaten for Tuesday next.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 556. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 556.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, March 2, 1880. (Received March 22.) No. 188.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 90, of February 12 last, inclosing an autograph letter from the President to the Emperor on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of his accession to the throne, and instructing me to take the first occasion to give expression to the sentiments of regard and esteem towards His Majesty entertained by the Government and people of the United States.

This dispatch reached me on the evening of the 27th instant.

On the 28th I forwarded the President’s letter to Prince Gortchakoff with a congratulatory note, a copy of which I have the honor to inclose.

Yesterday the Emperor received the diplomatic corps. On recognizing me he said that he had seen the President’s letter, and thanked him for it. I took the opportunity, under your instructions, to convey to him verbally the congratulations of the President, and to assure him of the regard and esteem entertained towards him by the Government and people of the United States. He listened attentively and replied that he thanked me.

The Emperor is said to be poorly. He appeared to me, however, to be as well as he has been for the last two years. The Empress did not receive. She is confined to her room.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 188.]

Mr. Hoffman to Prince Gortchakoff

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, February 16–28, 1880.

Prince: I have the honor to forward to your highness, herewith, an autograph letter from the President of the United States to His Majesty the Emperor, on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of his accession to the throne, together with an office copy of the same.

I am instructed by Mr. Evarts to take the first proper occasion to give expression to the sentiments of regard and esteem towards His Majesty entertained by the Government and people of the United States, and the interest felt there in the important and memorable anniversary which is about to be celebrated in Russia.

Will your highness kindly convey the expression of these sentiments to His Majesty the Emperor.

I take, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 557. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. No. 557.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, April 14, 1880. No. 2.]

Sir: I have received a letter from Messrs. S. Wolf and A. S. Solomons, of this city, representing the “Union of American-Hebrew Congregations,” in which they refer to newspaper statements indicating that the Jews in Russia have recently been subjected by the government there to extraordinary hardships, and expressing a desire that the minister of the United States to St. Petersburg may be instructed “to make such representations to the Czar’s government, in the interest of religious freedom and suffering humanity, as will best accord with the most emphasized liberal sentiments of the American people.” The writers of the letter observe at the same time that they are well “aware of the impropriety of one nation interfering with the internal affairs of another in matters of a purely local character.”

You are sufficiently well informed of the liberal sentiments of this government to perceive that whenever any pertinent occasion may arise its attitude must always be in complete harmony with the principle of extending all rights and privileges, without distinction on account of creed, and cannot fail, therefore, to conduct any affair of business or negotiation with the government to which you are accredited, which may involve any expression of the views of this government on the subject, in a manner which will subserve the interests of religious freedom. It would, of course, be inadmissible for the Government of the United States to approach the Government of Russia in criticism of its laws and regulations, except so far as such laws and regulations may injuriously affect citizens of this country, in violation of natural rights, treaty obligations, or the provisions of international law, but it is desired that the attitude of the minister, as regards questions of diplomatic controversy, which involve an expression of view on this subject, may be wholly consistent with the theory on which this government was founded.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 558. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 558.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, May 7, 1880. (Received May 24.) No. 205.]

Sir: I have the honor to report to you the case of Henry Pinkos, an Israelite and citizen of the United States.

About a fortnight ago this man was brought to me by Mr. Edwards, who informed me that Pinkos had been ordered to leave St. Petersburg. The latter told me that all foreign Jews had been ordered to leave this city at once.

I wrote immediately to Mr. de Giers and Mr. Edwards saw General Zouroff, the prefect of the city, and obtained from him a delay of three days.

As I did not hear from Mr. de Giers, I went to see him and suggested that this man might at least have a delay of some weeks in order that he might dispose of his property or embark with it for England on the opening of navigation. When the three days had expired I applied to General Zouroff for a further extension, and obtained a week. As no vessel had in the meantime arrived, I applied at its expiration for still further delay and obtained three days more, with an intimation that General Zouroff regretted that it would be impossible for him to accord any further delay.

The extended time expires to-day. English steamers have in the meantime arrived, and Pinkos will be able to embark at once with his family and property.

I have heard nothing whatever from Mr. de Giers, from which I infer that he in unable to interfere with General Melikoff’s order. Upon calling at the foreign office yesterday I was unable to see him on account of the Easter holidays.

I understand that, since it has appeared, many Jews have been engaged in the plots against the Emperor, and that foreign Jews have been ordered to leave not only St. Petersburg, but Moscow, and some other large towns, where they have hitherto been permitted to reside.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 559. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 559.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, May 17, 1880. (Received June 5.) No. 208.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 205, in relation to the case of Henry Pinkos, an American citizen and an Israelite, I have the honor to inform you that I am at length in receipt of a note from Mr. de Giers, in answer to mine of the 20th April.

The Russian Government grants to Pinkos a delay of three months in order to wind up his business.

On sending to notify him I found that he was still at St Petersburg, the police superintendent of his district having permitted him to remain from day to day since the expiration of the time allowed him by General Zouroff to await the answer of the Russian Government.

I have, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 560. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 560.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, June 7, 1880. (Received June 22.) No. 5.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that Her Majesty, the Empress, died on Thursday, the 3d instant. I telegraphed the news of this sad event on that date, and upon the 5th I received your reply expressing the sympathy of the President with the Emperor in his great affliction. On the same day Mr. Hoffman communicated the substance of your telegram to Mr. de Giers, with the request that the sentiments of the President might be made known to His Majesty, and yesterday he received Mr. de Geirs’s reply. I have the honor to inclose a copy of Mr. Hoffman’s note, and a translation of Mr. de Giers’s reply. I have added copies of the two telegrams above referred to the death of the Empress has necessarily postponed for a few days my reception by the Emperor, which had been fixed for the 5th instant.

I have, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 5.]

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, June 5, 1880.

Excellency: Mr. Foster did not fail to telegraph to Mr. Evarts the sad news of the death of Her Majesty the Empress.

I have now the honor to inform your excellency that he is to-day in receipt of a telegraphic reply.

Mr. Evarts instructs him to say to your excellency that the President of the United States deeply sympathizes with His Majesty the Emperor in the great loss which he-sustains in the death of Her Majesty the Empress.

Will your excellency kindly communicate the expression of the President’s sympathy to the Emperor, and permit Mr. Foster and myself to add the expression of our own deep sympathy and condolence with His Majesty in his irreparable loss.

I take, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 5.—Translation.]

St. Petersburg, May 25–June 6, 1880.

Sir: I made it my duty to place before His Majesty the Emperor the letter in which you informed me that instructions had been given by Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster to express to His Majesty the sentiments of the sympathy of the President of the United States, on the occasion of the sad loss the Imperial family has suffered. His Majesty the Emperor was much touched by them, and has ordered me to express to you all his thanks, begging Mr. Foster to have the kindness to transmit them to the President of the United States.

Receive, sir, &c.,

GIERS.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 5.—Telegrams.]

Evarts, Washington, District of Columbia:

St. Petersburg, June 3, 1880.

Empress died this morning.

FOSTER.

Foster, Minister, St. Petersburg:

Washington, June 4, 1880.

The President deeply sympathizes with His Majesty in the great loss which he sustains by the death of the Empress.

EVARTS, Secretary.

No. 561. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. No. 561.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, June 28, 1880. No. 14.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Hoffman’s No. 205 and 208, in relation to the expulsion of foreign Jews from certain large towns and cities of Russia, and the expulsion of Mr. Henry Pinkos, a Jew and an American citizen from St. Petersburg in particular. It appears from the latter dispatch that Pinkos has been allowed tore-main three months. Mr. Hoffman does not specifically state that Mr. Pinkos, or the other Jews referred to, have been ordered to leave Russia, as well as St. Petersburg, but that is the implication of the dispatches.

In reply I have to observe that in the presence of this fact, that an American citizen has been ordered to leave Russia on no other ground than that he is the professor of a particular creed, or the holder of certain religious views, it becomes the duty of the Government of the United States, which impartially seeks to protect all its citizens of whatever origin or faith, solemnly, but with all respect to the Government of His Majesty, to protest. As this order of expulsion applies to all foreign Jews, in certain towns or localities, at least, of Russia, it is of course apparent that the same is not directed especially against the government of which Mr. Pinkos is a citizen, and, indeed, the longstanding amity which has united the interests of Russia with those of this government would of itself forbid a remote supposition that such might be the case. Notwithstanding this aspect of the matter, the United States could not fail to look upon the expulsion of one of its citizens from Russia, on the simple ground of his religious ideas or convictions, except as a grievance, akin to that which Russia would doubtless find in the expulsion of one of her own citizens from the United States on the ground of his attachment to the faith of his fathers.

It is intimated in Mr. Hoffman’s No. 205 that the reason of this order may be found in the supposed implication of Jews in the plots formed against the life of the Emperor, and in so far as this may be true the Government of Russia has the entire sympathy of the Government of the United States in all just preventive efforts; and if there exists good evidence that Mr. Pinkos has been connected with any of these attempts the Government of the United States cannot object to his expulsion on that ground. But such a charge does not appear to have been brought against Mr. Pinkos; and it is confidently submitted to His Majesty’s Government whether in the event Mr. Pinkos should finally be expelled from Russia, or be otherwise interrupted in his peaceful occupations, on the sole ground that his religious views are of one kind rather than another, he would not be justly entitled to make reclamation for the damage and loss to which he might thereby be subjected.

You will present these views at the foreign office in the courteous spirit in which they are made.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 562. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 562.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, July 15, 1880. (Received July 31.) No. 18.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch Bo. 14, addressed to Mr. Foster, in which you instruct him to make certain representations to the Imperial Government in relation to the expulsion of American Jews from Russia, and especially in reference to the case of Mr. Henry Pinkos.

* * * * * * *

In relation to this particular case, I have unofficial reasons for believing that at the expiration of the three months granted him, if he wishes to remain, he will not be disturbed. He tells me, however, that he has had enough of Russia and wishes to return to the United States.

I may be permitted to add that I did not intend to imply in my No. 205 that Mr. Pinkos had been ordered to leave Russia. I stated that “he had been ordered to leave St. Petersburg.” I carefully examined and had a translation made of the police indorsement upon his passport, and called his attention to the fact that he was to leave St. Petersburg only. He answered, however, and justly, that with a business established here, to be ordered to leave St. Petersburg was equivalent, in his case, to being ordered to leave Russia.

I do not understand that foreign Jews have been ordered to leave Russia. As I had the honor to state in my No. 205, “foreign Jews have been ordered to leave not only St. Petersburg, but Moscow and some other large towns, where they have hitherto been permitted to reside.” These cities, it will be recollected, are under martial law, as I had the honor to report in my No. 94, of April 23, 1879, and the harsh measures of the expulsion of foreign Jews from them must be looked upon, I fear, as within the legal power and authority of the military governor.

With these explanations before you, should you still think that representations should be promptly made to the Imperial Government in regard to the case of Mr. Pinkos, it will give me pleasure to make them in the language of your dispatch.

I am, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 563. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 563.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, July 16, 1880. (Received July 31.) No. 19.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch No. 10, addressed to Mr. Foster, in relation to printed matter coming to Mr. Edwards, consul-general of the United States at this port, through the Russian post-office.

A few further observations upon this subject may perhaps be of interest to the Department.

In my interview with Mr. de Giers he stated that he was confident that there would be no difficulty in putting Mr. Edwards upon the footing of any other consul at St. Petersburg, and permitting him to receive any printed matter received by them. The difficulty in his case was, that he wished to receive printed matter not admitted into Russia at all, that is to say, a number of newspapers published in the United States. The Department will understand that these newspapers are not excluded as American or on account of the views they hold and inculcate, but simply because their publishers, in the absence of subscribers here, have not thought it worth their while to comply with the Russian law in reference to caution money or other security. The Imperial Government, however, waived this rule in the ease of the United States consul-general, and permits him now to receive unopened all printed matter addressed to him.

Mr. Edwards informs me that one of the censors has called upon him and stated that all his printed matter will hereafter be delivered to him unopened. That if by chance anything should be opened, he must look upon it as an accident arising from the immense amount of matter submitted to them. But should such an accident be repeated, he is requested to call the attention of the censors to it.

I have expressed to Mr. de Giers the satisfaction with which you have heard of the courteous action of the Imperial Government in this matter.

I have the honor to inclose a copy of my note.

I am, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 19.]

Mr. Hoffman to Mr. de Giers

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, July 3–15, 1880.

Excellency: Referring to your excellency’s note of the 5th–17th May, in relation to mail matter addressed to Mr. Edwards, consul-general of the United States at this post, I have the honor to inform your excellency that I am instructed by Mr. Evarts to express to you the satisfaction with which the United States Government has heard of the courteous action of the Imperial Government in this matter—an action consonant not only with the friendly relations always existing between the United States and Russia, but also with the spirit of the age and the necessities of official intercourse.

I take, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 564. Mr. Hoffmam to Mr. Evarts. No. 564.
Mr. Hoffmam to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, July 21, 1880. (Received August 9.) No. 20.]

Sir: Referring to my correspondence with the Department upon the case of Henry Pinkos, an American Jew, ordered out of St. Petersburg, and especially to my No. 208 upon this subject, I have the honor to inform you that the three months’ delay granted Pinkos having expired, lie sold his little property at a sacrifice and prepared to leave Russia.

Having paid his passage and sent his baggage on board a vessel at Cronstadt, he was preparing to embark with his family when he was asked by the police for his passport. He showed them the indorsement ordering him to leave St. Petersburg, which he supposed to be sufficient. They told him that it was not, and sent him and his family back to St. Petersburg to procure the necessary permission. The ship sailed without him, carrying off his baggage. The captain refused to return the passage-money, as he had asked him if his passport was in order, and he found himself with his family penniless in St. Petersburg, and was Indebted to private charity for the means to leave the country. This he was to have done yesterday.

I was upon the point of addessing to Mr. de Giers a note, remonstrating against the harsh treatment of Pinkos, but have concluded to await your reply to my No. 18 in reference to this case and to the general subject of the expulsion of foreign Jews from St. Petersburg and other large cities.

* * * * * * *

Mr. Pinkos’ family complained bitterly of the unnecessary harshness with which they had been treated by the police at Cronstadt.

* * * * * * *

I am, sir, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 565. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman. No. 565.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Hoffman.

Department of State,
Washington, August 10, 1880. No. 22.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatches of the 15th and 21st ultimos, in the case of Henry Pinkos, a citizen of the United States, of the Jewish faith, who has been ordered to quit St. Petersburg.

In view of the cruel situation in which Mr. Pinkos was placed by the action of the police at Cronstadt I telegraphed you to-day as follows:

Dispatch 20 received. Make every proper representation to the government in Pinkos’ case that will relieve his situation.

I am sure that His Majesty’s Government will require no further reasons for the extension to Mr. Pinkos of such facilities for his departure from Russia, and for making good to him, as far as may be possible, the loss of property incident to the action taken by the authorities in his case, than a plain statement of the facts.

I am, sir, &c.

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 566. Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts. No. 566.
Mr. Hoffman to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, August 11, 1880. (Received August 30.) No. 23.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your cipher telegram of yesterday, which I deciphered as follows: Dispatch 20 received. Make every proper representation to the government in Pinkos’ case that may relieve his situation.

Mr. Pinkos left Russia with his family on the 20th July. I did not see him personally, but I inferred from what his wife said that there had been no further police interference with him, but that he had made up his mind that Russia was no place for one of his creed, and that he proposed to establish himself in Liverpool, or return to the United States.

As the object of your telegraphic dispatch appears to have been to do everything in your power to relieve Pinkos’ situation, and he has left the country, there appears to be no necessity for my communicating with the Russian Government. I shall call Mr. Foster’s attention, however, to your telegram immediately upon his return. This may be expected on or shortly before September 1.

I am, &c.,

WICKHAM HOFFMAN.

No. 567. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster. No. 567.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Foster.

Department of State,
Washington, September 4, 1880. No. 27.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of Mr. Hoffman’s No. 23 of the 11th ultimo in the Pinkos case.

Notwithstanding the tenor of your No. 9 and of your note to the Department of July 24 last, as to the inexpediency of presently appealing to the Government of the Czar in the sense of the instruction of June 28 last, touching the expulsion of citizens of the United States from Russia (or certain cities thereof) by reason of their religious convictions, the statements of Mr. Hoffman’s No. 23, of August 11 last, are such that the Government of the United States would seem indifferent to the cause of its citizens in Russia did it neglect to make immediate remonstrance as set forth in said instruction of June 28. Mr. Hoffman’s inference from the facts connected with Mr. Pinkos’ departure from Russia is that Mr. Pinkos had made up his mind that Russia “was no place for one of his creed.”

If the meaning of this is that a citizen of the United States has been broken up in his business at St. Petersburg, simply for the reason that he is a Jew rather than a believer in any other creed then it is certainly time for this government to express itself as set forth in the instruction above mentioned. It should be made clear to the Goverment of Russia that in view of this government the religion professed by one of its citizens has no relation whatever to that citizen’s right to the protection of the United States, and that in the eye of this government an injury officially dealt to Mr. Pinkos in St. Petersburg on the sole ground that he is a Jew, presents the same aspect that an injury officially done to a citizen of Russia in New York for the reason that he attends any particular church there would to the view of His Majesty’s Government.

It is evident that the losses incurred by the abandonment of his business in St. Petersburg will afford Mr. Pinkos ground for reclamation, if no other cause can be shown for the official breaking up of his said business than the religious views he entertained.

The direct application to have Mr. Pinkos indemnified, however, may be deferred until he shall make it appear what those losses were.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 568. Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts. No. 568.
Mr. Foster to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, September 16, 1880. (Received October 6.) No. 37.]

Sir: Your several dispatches relating to the expulsion from St. Petersburg of Henry Pinkos, a citizen of the United States of Jewish faith, had been already acknowledged by Mr. Hoffman before my arrival. Mr. Hoffman thought proper to defer action upon your No. 14 of June 28 last until further instructed after receipt of his dispatch No. 12, of the 20th of July, or till my return.

Having examined your instructions, and being informed of the facts of the case, I have felt no hesitation in communicating to Baron Jomini, the acting minister of foreign affairs, the protest of our government against the expulsion of American citizens from Russia for no other reason than their adherence to the Jewish religion. It will be seen that in my note upon the subject, of which I inclose a copy herewith, I have adopted the language of your dispatch, and have only enlarged upon that dispatch in referring to the experience had in the United States in admitting the Jews to the full and unrestricted rights of citizens, which I deemed warranted by the tenor of your dispatch No. 2, of April 14 last.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

[Inclosure in No. 37.]

Mr. Foster to Baron Jomini

Legation of the United States,
St. Petersburg, September 2–14, 1880.

Excellency: The expulsion from this city of Henry Pinkos, a citizen of the United States, with the aggravating circumstances attending it, having been brought to the attention of my government, I have been instructed by the Secretary of State to make known to your excellency the views of my government thereon, and to protest against the treatment which said citizen has received.

Although the case has been heretofore brought to the attention of your excellency’s department, it may be well to recall the facts attending it. In the month of April last, before I assumed the charge of this legation, Henry Pinkos applied to the consul-general of the United States in this capital for relief from an order which he said he had received from the police authorities to leave St. Petersburg, the only reason for his expulsion, as he understood it, being that he was a Jew. He was provided with a passport fully authenticating his American citizenship. The consul-general, upon inquiry, was informed that he was an industrious and quiet tradesman, and with a wife and one child had been residing in this city for some months. In the frequent interviews of the consul-general with the police authorities no charges or intimations were ever made that Pinkos was other than a peaceable and law-abiding resident.

The only relief which the consul-general and the chargé d’affaires of this legation could obtain from the police authorities was a suspension for a few days of the order of expulsion, until Mr. Hoffman was able to communicate with the foreign office and obtained through Mr. de Giers permission for Pinkos to remain for three months, to enable him to close up his business. At the expiration of this period Pinkos, having sold his little property at a sacrifice, proceeded to obey the order, placed his baggage on board a vessel at Cronstadt, and when preparing to embark with his family he was asked by the police for his passport; whereupon he presented his American passport with which he had entered the country, with the police indorsement upon it ordering him to leave St. Petersburg, which he supposed was sufficient. The police informed him that this was not sufficient, and compelled him and his family to return to St. Petersburg. The captain of the vessel refused to refund him the passage-money paid, and sailed without him, carrying off his luggage. Having obtained from the authorities the permission required by the police, finding himself penniless, he was indebted to priveate charity for the means to leave the country, which he has done in compliance with the original order referred to above.

While the order was in its form merely an expulsion from St. Petersbug, Mr. Pinkos understood it to be virtually an order to leave the empire, in view of the fact that similar measures had been taken in Moscow and other cities, and of the announcement in the public press, that foreign Jews were to be excluded from the country.

The Secretary of State instructs me to state to your excellency that in the presence of the fact that an American citizen has been ordered to leave Russia on no other ground than that he is the professor of a particular creed or the holder of certain religious views, it becomes the duty of the Government of the United States, which impartially seeks to protect all its citizens of whatever origin or faith, solemnly, hut with all respect to the Government of His Imperial Majesty, to protest. As this order of expulsion is understood to apply to all foreign Jews, in certain, cities or localities, at least, of Russia, it is, of course, apparent that the same is not directed specially against the government of which Mr. Pinkos is a citizen, and, indeed, the long standing amity which has united the interests of Russia with those of the Government of the United States would of itself forbid a remote supposition that such might be the case. Notwithstanding this aspect of the matter the United States could not fail to look upon the expulsion of one of its citizens from Russia, on the simple ground of his religious ideas or convictions, except as a grievance, akin to that which Russia would doubtless find in the expulsion of one of her own subjects from the United States, on the ground of his attachment to the faith of his fathers.

It having been intimated to the Secretary of State by this legation that the reason of this order may be found in the supposed implication of Jews in the plots formed against the life of His Imperial Majesty, the Emperor, the Secretary directs me to say that in so far as this may be true, the Government of Russia has the entire sympathy of the Government of the United States, in all just preventive efforts, and if there existed any good evidence that Mr. Pinkos has been connected with any of these attempts, the Government of the United States could not object to this expulsion on that ground. But neither the police authorities, in the several communications which the members of the consulate-general and this legation have had with them, in their efforts to obtain relief for Mr. Pinkos, nor your excellency’s department, in the notes addressed to this legation on the subject, have ever intimated the existence of such a charge. Nor does the character of the citizens of the United States of Jewish faith afford ground for the supposition that they would be likely to engage in conspiracies or plots against the established government of the country. From the foundation of the United States as a nation, they have been entitled to the full and unrestricted privileges of citizens, and have shown themselves to be peaceable and law observing in their conduct, quiet and industrious in their habits and are esteemed a valuable portion of the community, so that in so far as the regulation for the expulsion of foreign Jews from Russia affects American citizens, whatever may be the conduct of their co-religionists of this or other countries, it is an unjust reflection upon American Jews as a class and a discrimination which cannot be acquiesced in by my government.

As, then, it does not appear that any criminal or improper conduct has been established against Mr. Pinkos, the Secretary confidently submits to His Imperial Majesty’s Government, whether in view of the fact that Mr. Pinkos has been interrupted in his peaceful occupations and expelled from Russia on the sole ground that his religious views are of one kind rather than another, he is not justly entitled to make reclamation for the damage and loss to which he has been subjected.

In thus presenting, for consideration and appropriate action, the views of my government upon this important subject, I improve, &c.,

JOHN W. FOSTER.

Correspondence with the Russian Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the Russian Legation in Washington.

[569] . Mr. Willamov to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Russia in the United States, Washington, May 19–31, 1880. (Received June 9.)

[570] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Willamov.

Department of State, Washington, July 13, 1880.

[571] . Mr. Willamov to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, July 9–21, 1880.

[572] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Willamov.

Department of State, Washington, August 4, 1880.

No. 569. Mr. Willamov to Mr. Evarts. No. 569.
Mr. Willamov to Mr. Evarts.

[Translation.]

Legation of Russia in the United States,
Washington, May 19–31, 1880. (Received June 9.)

Mr. Secretary of State: The geographical congress which met at Paris in 1875 having recognized the necessity of organizing, in a uniform manner, in the various countries, the system of exchanging the various administrative, literary, or scientific publications of international interest, a resolution of the council of the empire, adopted April 10–22, 1877, and sanctioned by His Majesty, the Emperor, made provision for the establishment of a Russian commission of international exchange. The Imperial ministry now informs me that this commission has just been appointed under the presidency of Privy Councilor Bytchcow, and is composed of delegates from the various branches of the government of the empire. It will be governed by special regulations, a copy of which I have the honor herewith to transmit.

I have been instructed to bring the foregoing to the notice of the Federal Government, and to inform your excellency that it will be the duty of this commission to enter into relations with the commission of the same kind existing in the United States, as regards all those matters which form the object of its mission.

Communications intended for the Russian commission should be addressed as follows: “To the president of the Russian commission of international exchange, imperial public library, St. Petersburg.”

I avail myself, &c.,

G. WILLAMOV.

Regulations of the Russian commission for the international exchange of works of science and art.

The duties of the Russian commission shall be as follows: 1. It shall collect for the governments and learned institutions of foreign countries the publications intended for them, either as a gift or by way of exchange, and shall have charge of the shipment of such publications.

2. It shall send to the official and learned institutions of the Empire of Russia the publications which are intended for them, either gratuitously or by way of exchange, by foreign governments or institutions. Packages must be addressed to this commission.

3. It shall transmit to foreign commissions for the governments, and learned institutions of foreign countries, any information that may be asked of it, and that it may be able to supply.

4. It shall furnish to the official or learned institutions of such foreign countries as may request it through their respective commissions information concerning the documents in the Russian archives, and concerning the conditions on which a copy thereof will be furnished to them.

5. It shall have charge of the exchange of duplicates.

6. On the recommendation of foreign commissions, it shall facilitate the accomplishment of their mission to scientific men visiting Russia, furnishing them, to this effect, with information, letters of recommendation, &c. The Russian commission shall use its influence, to the same end, with foreign commissions in behalf of Russian scientists.

7. It shall act as a medium with foreign commissions for the obtainment of such information as may be required by the official and learned institutions of Russia.

8. It shall publish, annually, a catalogue of the official publications issued by the various departments of the government, the statistical committees, and the learned institutions and societies.

Within the limits of this programme, the Russian commission will enter into correspondence with foreign commissions of the same character.

The commission shall present an annual report of its proceedings to the minister of public instruction.

No. 570. Mr. Hay to Mr. Willamov. No. 570.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Willamov.

Department of State,
Washington, July 13, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of May 31 ultimo, in which you inclosed a copy of the regulations governing the Russian commission for the international exchange of books, and to say in reply that a copy of your note and its inclosure having been transmitted to the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, that officer has forwarded (in his communication of the 3d instant) a letter on the subject, addressed to you, which I have the pleasure to send to you herewith.

Accept, sir, &c.,

JOHN HAY.

[Inclosure No. 1.]

Prof. Baird to Mr. Willamov

Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D. C., July 3, 1880.

Sir: The Secretary of State of the United States has placed in my hands a copy of your letter to him of May 19, informing him that the Government of Russia has entered into the plan of an international exchange proposed at the convention of Paris of 1875, and that a commission of international exchange has been appointed for Russia, with headquarters in the Imperial Public Library, St. Petersburg, with Privy Councillor Bytchcow, as chief officer.

As Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution it gives me great pleasure to be informed of this action on the part of the Russian Government, especially as it is likely to facilitate very greatly the communication between our government and your own.

As the Smithsonian Institution has been designated by the Government of the United States as its agent for the prosecution of the system of international exchanges under the convention of Paris, it gives me great pleasure, as its Secretary, to welcome the Russian commission as a fellow-worker in a very important enterprise, and to assure you that everything will be done that is practicable in an exchange of official and private publications of countries so useful to both.

In illustration of the subject, I beg to inclose a copy of a letter on the inauguration by the Government of Italy, of a like enterprise, the same being addressed to Sir Castellani, president of the Italian commission of international exchanges.

I have, &c.

SPENCER F. BAIRD,
Secretary.

[Inclosure No 2.]

Prof. Baird to Señor Castellani

Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D. C., June 22, 1880.

Dear Sir: At present the exchanges between the Smithsonian Institution on the part of the United States, and the bureau of international exchanges of the ministry of public instruction of Paris, are being carried out to the entire satisfaction of both parties, and possibly a brief recapitulation of the arrangements entered into may be of interest to you.

The exchange is divided into two portions: first, that relating exclusively to the publications of the several governments, and, secondly, those of a miscellaneous nature, embracing those of learned societies, scientific men, &c.

1st. Under the first head the Institution has at its command a full series of all the official publications of the United States made during the past year, including whatever relates to legislation, finance, jurisprudence, statistics, history, geography, geology, and all other branches of knowledge, constituting a mass of about twelve to fifteen cubic feet each year.

One full set of all these publications is sent to the national library in Paris and a similar series is returned to the national library in Washington. A second set, more or less complete, is also placed in the hands of the French bureau to be subdivided to the various bureaus of the government, giving to each the portion most appropriate. These in return send us works for corresponding bureaus in Washington.

2d. The miscellaneous exchanges include the publications of learned societies of the United States, as also of State organizations for purposes of education, hygiene, history, agriculture, &c. Likewise such papers by specialists as they desire to send to their correspondents abroad, of which transmissions are made as often as the amount of material makes it necessary; to France about four times in a year, or oftener if required by any special exigency. A list of the addresses of the packages is prepared by us and sent to the agency in Paris. This, however, does not include the contents of the bundles, excepting in the case of donations by the Smithsonian Institution or the national library.

Boxes for containing these several packages are prepared of sufficient strength to permit their crossing the ocean alternately several times in succession. They are for the most part of the following dimensions: 18 by 18 by 36 inches = 6¾ cubic feet. The tops are screwed down to permit their ready removal without injury. Freight on these boxes is paid by the Institution to New York, or the shipping port; after that the entire expense of the ocean and inland freight to Paris is settled by the ministry of public instruction.

The returns for such exchanges, as also the publications of the government of bureaus, are administered by the French bureau in a similar manner, and freight on the boxes sent to the Smithsonian Institution is paid to Havre, or the nearest shipping port to Paris. The ocean freights to New York, and the inland freights from New York to Washington are borne by the Smithsonian Institution. In this way each party pays such portion of the expense as is most convenient, leaving nothing to be carried forward from one route to the other.

It will give us very great pleasure to enter into a similar relation with the bureau of which you are the head, delivering all the boxes we may have free of expense to New York and leaving you to pay the additional cost to Rome, you, on your part, paying the expenses to Genoa, or other point of departure, upon boxes sent to us, and we paying the ocean freight to New York and expenses to Washington.

We have heretofore used the agency of Mr. Hoepli, of Milan, in our exchanges with Italy, and work has been performed very satisfactorily to us. In accordance, however, with the treaty convention of Paris and the instructions of the American Department of State, we would prefer to enter directly into relations with yourself, as already explained.

The exchange of public documents with Italy is yet unsettled. On several occasions we have offered to make such exchanges, but it has not been acceded to. You will, therefore, oblige us by stating definitely whether you desire us to send on what we can of this character, and whether you will charge yourself with collecting as full a series of Italian state publications as you can now bring together. A single set of the works we have now on hand fills about twelve boxes of the size indicated above.

Should any of the bureas of the Italian Government desire any special publications from corresponding bureaus of the United States, it will give us great pleasure, on being notified, to endeavor to secure them. As soon as we hear from you we will take immediate action.

Very respectfully,

SPENCER F. BAIRD,
Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.

Signor C. Castellani,
President Italian Commission International Exchanges,
Victor Emmanuel National Library, Rome, Italy.

No. 571. Mr. Willamov to Mr. Evarts. No. 571.
Mr. Willamov to Mr. Evarts.

Washington, July 9–21, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: By order of my government I have the honor herewith to transmit to you a copy of the communications received by us from the government of France and that of England relative to the appointment of a commission of liquidation for the regulation of the finances of Egypt, together with a copy of the reply which the imperial cabinet has just addressed to the ambassadors of those powers at St. Petersburg.

I avail myself, &c.,

G. WILLAMOV.

Note from Mr. de Giers to Lord Dufferin (present), dated St. Petersburg, June 8, 1880.

With your note of the 5th–17th instant your excellency transmitted to us, by order of your government, the decree of the Khedive* appointing a commission of liquidation for the regulation of the Egyptian debts, together with a collective declaration of the powers constituting that commission. Your excellency was instructed at the same time to invite the imperial cabinet to adhere to that declaration, which recognizes the decisions of the commission of liquidation as having the force of law without appeal, and proclaims them as binding upon the reformatory tribunals as soon as they shall have been officially published by the government of His Highness the Khedive.

The imperial cabinet not being among the number of the governments which formed that commission of liquidation, declared from the outset that it reserved the privilege of forming an independent opinion concerning its decisions so far as they might affect the rights recognized as belonging to the mixed courts in whose organization Russia took part.

It cannot depart from that strictly legal attitude by pledging itself in advance to consider as binding and without appeal decisions rendered without its participation, even though they should be in contradiction with the duties incumbent upon it, both in view of the interests of Russian subjects and the general interests which the appointment of the mixed courts was designed to secure.

The imperial cabinet consequently deems it its duty to maintain its full liberty of judgment with regard to the decisions of the commission of liquidation, within the limits prescribed either by the protection due to its citizens, or by the rights with which the mixed courts have been invested. While reserving this liberty, it will by no means lose sight or the considerations which have induced the powers to form this commission with a view to protecting the interests of their creditors and to improving the finances of Egypt.

Begging your excellency to be pleased to bring the foregoing to the notice of your government, I avail myself, &c.

Note from Mr. de Giers to General Chanzy.

St. Petersburg, June 8, 1880.

With the dispatch of M. de Freycinet of the 28th of April last, a copy of which your excellency was pleased to send us, the French Government transmitted to us the Khedive’s decree appointing a commission of liquidation for the settlement of Egyptian debts, together with a collective declaration of the powers constituting that commission. At the same time Mr. de Freycinet invited the imperial cabinet to adhere to that declaration, which recognizes the decisions of the commission of liquidation as possessing the force of law, without appeal, and proclaims them as binding upon the reformatory courts, as soon as they shall have been officially published by the government of His Highness the Khedive.

The imperial cabinet not being among the number of the governments which formed that commission of liquidation, declared from the outset, that it reserved the privilege of forming an independent opinion concerning its decisions so far as they might affect the rights recognized as belonging to the mixed courts in whose organization Russia took part. It cannot depart from that strictly legal attitude, by pledging itself, in advance, to consider as binding and without appeal decisions rendered without its participation, even though they should be in contradiction with the duties incumbent upon it both in view of the interests of Russian subjects and the general interests which the appointment of the mixed courts was designed to secure.

The imperial cabinet consequently deems it its duty to maintain its full liberty of judgment with regard to the decisions of the commission of liquidation, within the limits prescribed either by the protection due to its citizens, or by the rights with which the mixed courts have been invested. While reserving this liberty it will by no means lose sight of the considerations which have induced the powers to form this commission with a view to protecting the interests of their creditors, and to improving the finances of Egypt.

Begging your excellency to be pleased to bring the foregoing to the notice of your government, I avail myself, &c.

* For this decree and accompanyiag declaration, vide correspondence with Turkey, post.

No. 572. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Willamov. No. 572.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Willamov.

Department of State,
Washington, August 4, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 21st ultimo, wherewith you transmit copies of the correspondence exchanged between the foreign office of your government and the representatives of Great Britain and France at St. Petersburg, relative to the appointment of a commission of liquidation for the regulation of the financial obligations of the government of Egypt.

This government accepts as a mark of consideration and favor the communication thus made to it by direction of that of His Imperial Majesty the Czar, for its information, and in response thereto can do no less than communicate for the reciprocal information of the Russian cabinet, the reply which it has made* to a like communication addressed to it by the representatives of Austria-Hungary, Italy, Germany, France, and Great Britain, accredited at this capital. As you will perceive, the attitude of reserve which this government was at first inclined to maintain in the premises, although founded upon considerations analogous to those adduced by your government, was to a greater extent conditional on the direct relations of Egypt to the United States, and has been abandoned upon the earnest showing of the Khedival government that the adhesion of the United States was regarded by it as essential to the working of a measure of domestic administration.

Accept, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

* For the text of the inclosure mentioned, see correspondence with British legation in Washington, ante, p. 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], being a note from Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond, of July 30, 1880.

SpainSpain

[573] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, November 8, 1879. (Received December 1.)

[574] . Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, November 11, 1879. (Received December 1.)

[575] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell.

Department of State, Washington, December 10, 1879.

[576] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild.

Department of State, Washington, March 12, 1880.

[577] . Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, April 13, 1880. (Received April 29.)

[578] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild.

Department of State, Washington, June 15, 1880.

[579] . Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, July 3, 1880. (Received July 24.)

[580] . Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, July 26, 1880. (Received August 14.)

[581] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild.

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1880.

[582] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild.

Department of State, Washington, August 11, 1880.

[583] . Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, September 4, 1880. (Received September 22.)

[584] . Mr. Reed to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Madrid, September 23, 1880. (Received October 13.)

Contents

Correspondence with the Spanish Legation in Washington. (Documents 585-588)

No. 573. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. No. 573.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, November 8, 1879. (Received December 1.) No. 215.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 168, I have the honor to report that on the 18th of December, 1878, and again, on the 5th of August last, I addressed the minister of state on the subject of the whaling schooner Edward Lee. From time to time, as occasion offered, I called his attention to the matter, but received no official reply till the 20th ultimo. I inclose a copy of my notes, and a copy with translation of the Duke of Tetuan’s reply.

* * * * * * *

It is but justice to say that I have hitherto found the Spanish Government ready to take a just and even liberal view of such cases as I have had occasion to present, and I feel quite sure that no minister of state will recede from the position affirmed and reaffirmed by two of his predecessors.

I have, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Appendix A to Mr. Lowell’s No. 215.]

Mr. Lowell to Mr. Silvela.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, December 18, 1878.

Excellency: I am instructed to call the attention of your excellency once more to the case of the American whaling schooner Edward Lee, which formed a part of the subject of my note to you of the 7th of December, 1877.

The owners of the vessel insist on their view of the case, which they have again laid before the President, strengthened by evidence of all the officers and crew, and from which it would appear that they suffered great and substantial loss by the violent proceedings of the Spanish gunboat. This loss they estimate at $10,000.

From the facts submitted to my government, it appears that the schooner was driven from her lawful fishing ground at a time when whales were abundant; that she was obliged indefinitely to prolong her voyage, and that in consequence she was exposed to dangers of the sea which she would otherwise have escaped, resulting in the loss of a suit of sails, and in great suffering on the part of the crew.

At the time when your excellency so readily made reparation for the wrongs of two other American whalers which had been the victims of a similar mistaken view of their rights and duties on the part of Spanish officers, you expressed a wish (while refusing to admit the justice of the claim of the owners of the vessel now again in question) to inform yourself more fully on the subject by the statements of the Spanish officers concerned. May I ask if your excellency is already possessed of that evidence; and, if not, that you will take the necessary measures to procure it?

Whatever new light may be thrown upon the affair by the statements of the officers of the gunboat, it will surely not avail to show that their action was not in direct contravention of the eighteenth article of the treaty of 1795 between the United States and Spain, and the question will remain substantially as now, not whether there be ground for any claim at all, but simply as to the amount of injury suffered and of reparation to be made for it.

I cannot admit your excellency’s suggestion that the date on which the owners of the schooner made their complaint should in any way affect the good faith or validity of their claim. The captain and crew were men ignorant of the law, and naturally desirous of reaching as soon as possible the more distant fishing grounds, to seek which they were driven by the hostile attitude of the gunboat. The question at issue, as it appears to me, is what the Spanish cruiser did, and not what the crew of the schooner did or left undone after the attack upon them.

Relying confidently on that sense of justice which your excellency showed in the two other similar cases I had the honor to lay before you, and on the good faith which the government of His Catholic Majesty has always shown in the performance of its treaties, I hope that the owners of the Edward Lee may receive an equal measure of justice, the more so that an act of the kind committed by the gunboat of His Catholic Majesty, if unredressed, is liable to irritate susceptibilities which it is the common desire of both nations to appease.

I gladly avail, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Appendix B to Mr. Lowell’s No. 215.]

Mr. Lowell to the Duke of Tetuan.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, August 5, 1879.

Excellency: On the 18th of December last I had the honor to address a note to your predecessor in the office which your excellency so worthily fills, recalling his attention to the claim for damages of the owners of the American whaling schooner Edward Lee, on account of certain hostile and altogether unwarrantable proceedings against her on the part of a Spanish gunboat off the coast of the island of Cuba.

As the facts of the case are clearly set forth in my note above referred to (December 18), and in that of the 7th of December, 1877, I do not deem it necessary at this time to again enter into a further discussion of it, further than to repeat that when your excellency’s predecessor, Mr. Silvela, made reparation in the two similar cases (the Ellen Rizpah and Rising Sun), he expressed a wish to further inform himself in regard to the claim of the schooner now in question. I do not doubt that the necessary steps to this end have been taken, and that your excellency is now in possession of sufficient information on the subject to arrive at a conclusion in this case as satisfactory to the President as that of the two others.

I beg to add that I have been informed by my government that the owners of the Edward Lee are naturally anxious to know the decision of His Catholic Majesty’s government in regard to their claim. I therefore simply call your excellency’s attention to the subject, in the full assurance that nothing more is needful to secure a prompt answer to my note of the 18th of December last, thus enabling me to communicate to my government the information desired by the owners of the vessel in question.

I avail myself, &c.,

J. R. LOWELL.

[Appendix D to Mr. Lowell’s No. 215.—Translation.]

The Duke of Tetuan to Mr. Lowell.

Ministry of State,
Palace, October 17, 1879.

Excellency:

My Dear Sir: I have received the note of your excellency under date of the 5th of August last, in which you were pleased to request definitive action in the case of the whaling ship Edward Lee, which had already been treated of in the note of your excellency of the 18th of December of last year.

In reply I feel it my duty to inform your excellency that there being no later grounds or evidence which could lead to a modification of the opinion formed by the government of His Majesty, communicated to you by my worthy predecessor in the last part of the note directed to your excellency on the 16th of January, 1878, treating the case of the Edward Lee as coming under conditions essentially distinct from those which led to the reclamations of the two other vessels, Ellen Kizpah and Rising Sun, to whose owners was conceded, and at the proper time paid, a pecuniary indemnification, the government of His Majesty does not consider that the claim of the owners of the Edward Lee is well founded, but still insists on the arguments contained in the above-mentioned note of the 16th of January, which I shall not reproduce here, in order not to weary the attention of your excellency.

You will permit me, however, to insist anew that the alleged infraction of the treaty of 1795 could not have taken place, as the Spanish gunboat was ignorant of the nationality of the Edward Lee, and being authorized by Article XVIII of the treaty above referred to, to inquire into it, used, preventively, the only measure admitted by maritime customs of firing a blank cartridge, to which signal the fishing vessel paid no heed, but precipitately abandoned those waters without hoisting her flag, the gunboat not being able, therefore, to ascertain the nation to which she belonged.

This fact, acknowleged by the owners, destroys the base on which the claim is founded, since it was not possible to inflict wrong on a flag not carried or made known, nor was excess on the part of the Spanish gunboat possible in having employed a measure admitted in all the navies of the world to ascertain the nationality of merchant vessels who do not fly their flag or have some interest in concealing it. As to the damages alleged to have been suffered by its precipitate flight from the waters in which she was fishing, and her removal to others less favorable for her industry, the captain of the whaling vessel is himself to blame if he preferred to encounter such consequences rather than to comply with his duty in obeying the signal legally made by a vessel of the State in whose jurisdictional waters he was found, by hoisting the flag of his nation.

The example lately given by the government of His Majesty of the friendly sentiments which animate it in its dealings with that of the United States, in an affair closely connected with that of the Edward Lee, proves sufficiently the spirit of equity in which the Spanish Government always treats the claims of American citizens when founded on facts and rights duly justified, and that nothing is omitted, on its part, to contribute to the maintenance of the cordial relations which exist between Spain and the United States.

The undersigned believes, therefore, that the government at Washington, inspired by similar sentiments, will recognize that the government of His Majesty has only complied with its unavoidable duty in not deeming admissible the claim of the owners of the fishing vessel Edward Lee.

I avail myself, &c.,

The Duke of TETUAN.

No. 574. Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts. No. 574.
Mr. Lowell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, November 11, 1879. (Received December 1.) No. 216.]

Sir: The preoccupation of all minds and the topic of all public and private discussion for the last few weeks have been the reforms of the island of Cuba Both the opposition and the immediate followers and dependents of the minister most important and influential as apolitical manager of those who went out of office in March (Señor Romero Robledo) are hoping to gain something by the embarrassments of the government. The Martinez Campos cabinet submitted their plan of emancipation and reforms to the Córtes on the 5th, and I inclose copy and translation of it. This will without doubt be accepted, receiving, as it will, the support of Señor Cánovas del Castillo, of the bulk of the liberal conservatives, and of the constitutionalists, who, though they might prefer another plan, are committed in favor of abolition. The scheme of the government is a kind of compromise, as you will see, between gradualism and immediatism, between compensation and no compensation to the inasters, but will serve its purpose of complete emancipation without directly recommending it; for I believe nobody expects that the system of guardianship will work, or that slaves can be kept by emancipation, the attempt to cross slavery with freedom being in its very nature futile. The proposed law was no doubt framed to satisfy the scruples of those who are willing to vote for immediate abolition, provided they can be made to seem to be voting for something else.

It is understood that the convention of Zanjon committed General Martinez Campos to very prompt and comprehensive measures not only in respect of slavery, but of commercial, financial, and tributary reforms likewise, and the pledges of the general are certainly binding on the government that accepted and approved them.

The real pinch of the Cuban question is not slavery, but commercial reform. It is here that the ministry will encounter the active and strenuous opposition of the protectionists, who form a large and influential part of their own supporters, and who have many specious pleas which appeal in turn to provincial selfishness and peninsular pride. The cabinet have deferred as long as they decently could the bringing of the Cuban question before the Cortes, and now they have begun with that part of it about which all parties are agreed that something decisive must be done and done soon. Of the more difficult politico-economic topic they still hesitate to provoke a discussion. In the mean time the deputies and senators from Cuba, though generally belonging or professing to belong to the liberal-conservative party, are said to have held a meeting in which they resolved to withdraw in a body from the Chambers, should there be any further unreasonable delay on the part of the government in making the nature, extent, and scope of such commercial reforms as it is disposed to recommend.

It would be premature to indulge in any prognostication before the questions are brought before the Cortes, and the debates begin.

* * * * * * *

The only firm conclusion I have been enabled to draw is that the gravity of the Cuban question is hardly yet understood in Spain, that one of the very few persons who seems to have some conception of it is General Martinez Campos, and that everything will depend on the ability he may show of impressing his opinions on others, either by force of argument or by political pressure.

* * * * * * *

Predictions of his overthrow are more rife than ever, but that would leave the situation unchanged, and the Cuban sphinx would confront his successor with the old riddle. I do not see why Señor Cánovas del Castillo should be readier for the part of Œdipus in December than in March.

* * * * * * *

Great opportunities imply corresponding risks, and in this instance the Spanish statesman who is clear-sighted enough to see the one, and resolute enough to incur the other, has not yet betrayed himself.

I have, &c.,

J. E. LOWELL.

[Appendix B to Mr. Lowell’s No. 216.—Translation.]

proposed law.

Article I. From the day of the publication of this law in the Havana Gazette the condition of slavery shall cease in the island of Cuba.

Art. II. All persons of both sexes, without infraction of the law of July 4, 1870, and its provisions, who shall be found in slavery at the date when this law is published, shall remain under the guardianship of those who shall have owned them, who shall pass from the relation of owner to that of guardian. This guardianship shall last eight years, and shall be transmissible so long as it may exist by all the means known to the law, besides being capable of renunciation for just causes.

Art. III. In virtue of the guardianship to which the preceding article refers, the guardian shall preserve the right of utilizing the labors of the manumitted persons who remain under his charge, and shall have the attributes which may belong to him as guardian in conformity with the law.

Art. IV. The obligations of the guardian in respect of those under his charge shall be: 1. To maintain them.

2. To clothe them.

3. To assist them in sickness.

4. To pay them monthly the wages prescribed by law.

5. To give them, if minors, primary instructions and the education necessary to exercise a trade or calling.

6. To feed, clothe, and assist in sickness during their infancy and childhood the children of those under guardianship born before and after the guardianship, so long as it may last, and to enjoy the service of the latter without compensation.

Art. V. The guardianship of those thus protected shall not be transferred without transferring to the same patron that of the children under twelve years of age, and that of their fathers and mothers respectively. In no case shall those be separated who constitute a family, whatever its origin.

Art. VI. The monthly wages to which Article IV refers shall be from one to two dollars for those wards under eighteen years of age. These wages shall be paid to the parents if known, and in default of them to the legal representative established for the formation of a private fund of savings. For all above that age, the wages shall be two dollars a month for the first year, two and a half for the second, and three for the third and for the remaining years of guardianship. The last wages that shall be paid by the guardian to those employed in domestic service shall be three dollars, though more may be paid by mutual agreement.

Art. VII. The guardianship shall cease— 1st. By extinction by lot in such sort that it may end within eight years after-publication of this law.

2d. By mutual agreement between guardian and ward, without outside intervention, except that of the parents if known, and in their default of the local magistrates in the case of those under twenty years, this age being determined in the manner set forth in Article XV.

3d. By the renunciation of the guardianship for just cause.

4th. By all the causes for manumission established by the penal code, and by any other proved abuses of the guardian, or if the latter should fail in the duties imposed by Article IV.

All those who cease to be wards shall enjoy their civil rights under the conditions and limitations defined by the common law, but shall remain under the protection of the state during the term of four years for the purposes set forth in Article IX.

Art. VIII. The extinction of the guardianship by lot referred to in the first paragraph of the preceding article shall only extend to the wards included in Article II of this law, and shall fake place by fourth parts, beginning at the end of the fifth year of guardianship, continuing at the end of the successive years, and concluding finally with that of the eighth. In this lottery, which shall be general for all the island on the 31st of December of the year in which it takes place, those who hold the lowest numbers shall cease to be wards, remaining, however, under protection of the state for the periods designated in Articles VII, IX, and XII. The regulations shall fix the form, method, and extent of the registers and lists which are to serve for the drawings, the method of performing them, the previous and concurrent conditions of publicity of the same, and the system of substitution of those who having drawn lucky numbers are to have their places filled either on account of death, or because they are no longer wards on the day of the drawing.

Art. IX. The guardianship established by this law having ended by lot, by the renunciation of the guardians, by their faults or by mutual agreement, the wards shall continue subject to the laws and regulations which impose the necessity of proving a contract for hire or a known trade or employment. Those who are under twenty years and have no parents, or parents still under guardianship, shall remain under the immediate protection of the state.

Art. X. The obligation to prove an engagement to labor referred to in the preceding article, for those who have ceased to be wards, shall last four years, and those who fail in it in the judgment of the governmental authority, concurrently with the local magistracy, shall be considered vagrants with all its legal consequences and subject to service in the regular army or to employment on the public works. At the end of the four years to which this article applies those who shall have been wards shall enjoy, within the limits of the common law, all their civil and political rights.

Art. XI. Those persons who may have arranged terms of manumission with their masters at the time of the publication of the present law, shall retain all their rights under such contracts, and their relations with their guardians shall be established by mutual accord, approved by the local or provincial magistrates on the basis of the rights and obligations prescribed by said law.

Art. XII. All persons of both sexes who, in virtue of the provisions of the law of 4th of July, 1870, may be free, because born since the 17th of September, 1868, shall he subject to the prescriptions of that law, except where those of the present maybe more to their advantage. Other persons freed in virtue of said law of 1870 shall remain under the immediate protection of the state and be obliged to prove during the next four years the contract for hire and other conditions of employment referred to in Article IX. Those who infringe this precept shall be deemed vagrants for all legal consequences in the sense defined by section XXV of Article X of the penal code, and shall be subject to the provisions of Article X.

Art. XIII. In every province shall be formed a commission, presided over by the governor, or, in his default, by the president of the provincial board, composed of one member of said board, one of the largest tax-payers, the judge of the lower court, and the district attorney, precedence being determined by date of commission where there is more than one court, which commission shall see to the exact fulfillment of the present law.

In towns where it may be fitting in the judgment of the respective governors, and with the approval of the governor-general, local commissions under the presidency of the mayor shall be formed, composed of the city attorney, one of the largest tax-payers, the judge, and public prosecutor, if there be any, and where not, two respectable householders who were not slaveholders when the present law was promulgated, which commissions shall see to the observance thereof, putting themselves in relation with the provincial commissions in order to remedy abuses and infractions that may come to their knowledge. A special regulation shall determine the character and attributions of said commissions as well local as provincial.

The public prosecuting officers, in the exercise of the faculties which have been or may be conferred on them by law, will also see to the exact fulfillment of the present law, and, as the official representatives of all those hereby put under guardianship, will complain and give formal notice to the judicial authorities of whatever abuses and irregularities may come to their knowledge by their own observation, by that of their agents, or by the accusation of others.

Art. XIV. For the formation of the savings funds to which Article VI refers, the guardians shall pay every month the wages of minors who have lost their parents or whose parents are on another estate, to the local commissions created by the preceding article. These savings shall be centralized in the provincial commissions and paid over to their owners when they have attained their full civil rights. The regulations will determine in what cases and under what conditions said savings are to be deposited in the savings banks.

Art. XV. Those shall be considered minors under the provisions of this law who can be proved to be under twenty years of age, and when this is not the case the age shall be decided by the local commissions in view of the physical condition of the minors after an examination by experts.

Art. XVI. Guardians shall in no case inflict corporal punishment on their wards, even on the pretext of maintaining the order and discipline of labor on their estates. They diminish the monthly wages in proportion to the faults of the ward, but of the sums produced by this pecuniary punishment a fund shall be formed by each guardian for the recompense and reward of the other laborers under his wardship who may deserve it. The local and provincial commissions will look with special vigilance to the exact performance of this provision.

Art. XVII. The wards referred to in Article II of this law shall be subject to the ordinary courts and tribunals for crimes and offenses of which they may be guilty, in accordance with the penal code, being excepted from this rule the crimes of rebellion, sedition, assaults, and public disorders, which, during the continuance of the wardship, shall be tried by courts-martial.

Art. XVIII. The regulations mentioned in this law are to be drawn up by the governor-general of the island of Cuba within thirty days after its promulgation and remitted by the first mail to the government, which will decide definitely and at the same time upon all points after consultation with the council of state in full meeting.

Art. XIX. All laws, regulations, and provisions conflicting with the present law are hereby repealed, without prejudice to the rights already acquired by slaves and freedmen in accordance with the law of July 4, 1870, in so far as these are not expressly modified by the preceding articles.

Madrid, November 4, 1879.

No. 575. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell. No. 575.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Lowell.

Department of State,
Washington, December 10, 1879. No. 185.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 216, regarding the proposed law for the abolition of slavery in Cuba; and, in reply, to express to you the satisfaction which is felt by the government at the intelligence on this subject, which your communication conveys; not only in the circumstance of the proposed abolition by Spain, but because this measure must be looked upon as a great step to complete and universal emancipation.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 576. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild. No. 576.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild.

Department of State,
Washington, March 12, 1880. No. 4.]

Sir: It is desired that one of your first official acts, after the presentation of your credentials as minister at Madrid, shall be to notify the minister of state of His Majesty that you are authorized, on behalf of the United States, to take part in a friendly conference of foreign representatives which it is proposed to hold at Madrid for the purpose of discussing the question of the protection extended to native Moors, in Morocco, by the diplomatic and consular agents of foreign states resident in that country.

In order that you may understandingly take part in that projected conference, and appreciate with as much exactness as possible the nature of the questions to be brought up before it, it will be necessary to give you a brief résumé of the facts so far as they appear in the correspondence of this Department, with transcripts of the pertinent papers.*

On the 14th of June, 1877, Mr. Plunkett, the British chargé d’affaires in Washington, addressed the Department, inclosing a printed extract from a dispatch from the British minister at Tangier to the Earl of Derby, with a memorandum of what took place at the meeting of the foreign representatives at the house of the Moorish minister for foreign affairs on the 10th of March, 1877. The dispatch of Sir J. H. Drummond Hay, thus referred to, contains various allegations as to the abuses which have grown up from the practice of giving protection to Moorish subjects by foreign diplomatic and consular officers, particularly by exempting them from the payment of taxes. It was therein stated that the evil is a growing one, “more especially on the part of those foreign officers who represent countries which have no trade and hardly any residents in Morocco belonging to their respective nationalities.” The several representatives who took part in that meeting discussed this question and seem to have admitted the existence of the evil and deprecated the practice.

* * * * * * *

The matter, however, speedily passed beyond this stage, and its next phase was a series of meetings held at Tangier, by the foreign representatives resident there, for the discussion of various points of administration and foreign intercourse, among them the question of irregular foreign protection. The details of these conferences were communicated to the Department by Mr. Mathews, in his No. 258, of November 9, 1877, with full copies of the procès-verbal of the meetings, and information of these proceedings was likewise received from the British chargé d’affaires here, under date of October 8, 1877, with accompanying copies of the correspondence of Sir J. H. Drummond Hay, and extracts of the pertinent portions of the procès-verbal. I have to refer you to these several papers, herewith transmitted in copy, an attentive perusal of which will acquaint you with all the facts in relation thereto in the possession of the Department, merely citing for your present information, in connection with this instruction, the language used by Sir J. H. Drummond Hay with reference to the action of Mr. Mathews. He says: The United States consul-general presented lists of thirty-seven persons protected throughout the empire. On observing that he protected ten native Jews as agents at Tangier, four at Meknas, three at Fas, and two at Alcassar, I said that it appeared strange that the United States consul should find it necessary to place these persons on the list of protected natives, when the trade of the United States with Morocco was almost nil, whereas Great Britain, which had two-thirds of the trade of the empire, did not protect a single native at any one of these towns.

Colonel Mathews declared that Cid Mohammed Bargash had frequently stated to him that he gave no trouble to the Moorish Government by these protections.

I have to remark that I did not find the list presented by the United States consul-general to his colleagues corresponded with that delivered by him to the local authorities.

It appears from the reports of the proceedings then had, that, although the greater part of the demands put forward by the Moorish Government were agreed to, yet some important questions were left undecided on account of the objections made by several of the powers—France, Italy, Portugal and Brazil.

Under instructions from his government the British minister at this capital brought this circumstance to the attention of this government on the 4th of November last, stating that it was thought that a continuance of the discussion was not likely to further an agreement upon the questions left undecided, and that unless the governments concerned were disposed to send positive instructions to their agents of a nature to satisfy the Moorish Government, the best prospect of a solution lay in a reference of the question to a commission or meeting of representatives at some foreign court in which the Moorish Government may be represented by a delegate or delegates deputed for the purpose, and suggesting the choice of Madrid for such a meeting. This course was represented as enabling, among other benefits, the removal of the discussion from the hands of those who have hitherto conducted it, and avoiding any difficulties which may have arisen from personal feelings or opinions, in which view I fully coincide.

It now appears from a telegraphic dispatch yesterday received from Mr. Reed, that the Spanish Government has taken the initiative in bringing about the conference suggested, and looks to the proper representation of this government thereat.

It is, in many respects, desirable that we should be competently represented at such a conference, and you have accordingly been designated for the purpose.

* * * * * * *

It is sincerely hoped that the anticipation of Lord Salisbury, conveyed in Sir Edward Thornton’s note of November 4, 1879, may be well founded, and that the discussion may proceed without any of the personal feeling which seems unhappily to have characterized its progress at Tangier hitherto. In principle, this government is cordially in favor of the adoption by common consent of an equitable rule which may do away with the excessive and injurious exercise of the prerogative of foreign protection of natives which has grown up under the shadow of treaty stipulations and native usage, and which is represented as burdensome to the Moorish exchequer and unjust to its government, but in reaching a due settlement regard must be had to the proper maintenance and security of consular establishments in that country and the necessary employment of natives as guards, interpreters, and servants, and in such-capacities as may be essential to the proper representation and protection of foreign commercial interests. This government could not, however, see with complacent indifference any proceedings on the part of the proposed conference looking to an investigation of the past conduct of foreign representatives at Tangier, and sitting in ex parte judgment on their motives and morality.

* * * * * * *

You will make full and prompt report to the Department of the proceedings of the conference, transmitting the procès verbal, and seeking, in your dispatches thereon, to elucidate for the better information of the Department, the points which may arise in the discussion.

It is not understood, from the invitation of the Spanish Government whether a formal full power will be needed by you. One is, however, transmitted herewith, in case you should find that your colleagues are required to present other credentials than those of their respective offices.

I am, &c.,

W. M. EVARTS.

* Inclosure omitted herefrom owing to their length.

No. 577. Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts. No. 577.
Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, April 13, 1880. (Received April 29.) No. 10.]

Sir: I learn that under the treaty between Spain and Morocco, all Spanish subjects residing in the latter country are held to be free from all taxation and from the civil and criminal jurisdiction of the Emperor. This exemption is also held to extend to such Moors as may become Spanish subjects and return to Morocco to reside. Under the most favored nation clause of other treaties some nations claim and have exercised these rights much to the detriment of Morocco. It is also I am informed the practice in Morocco to claim the same exemption for all Moorish subjects who are “protected” by foreign representatives, whether such Moors are in the direct employ of such representatives or not. It is claimed that such exemptions extend to all Moors who may be appointed commercial agents or brokers of foreign merchants. Such agents or brokers and other Moors, who, not acting in either capacity, are simply “protected” are liable to be “protected” in great numbers, and great abuses are said to have arisen in consequence thereof. It is supposed that these two points will come to the front as perhaps the most important questions to be discussed in the approaching conference.

As there will probably be time to hear from you before the meeting of the proposed conference I have thus briefly stated the points for your information and for your instructions should you desire to give any.

I am now inclined to the opinion that it is claiming altogether too much of any nation to demand that when its subjects go to a foreign country and there become naturalized they shall have the right to return to their native land to reside and be exempt from the payment of ordinary taxes and from the criminal and civil jurisdiction of the government. I am sure the United States would never for a monent allow such exemption.

Such exemptions claimed for Moors who may be in the employ or foreign merchants as brokers or business agents do not now seem to me to be founded upon strict justice to the Moorish Government. While such agents and brokers ought undoubtedly to be so far “protected” as to protect them from all harm and loss of property belonging to foreign merchants, I do not now understand why such agents should not bear their fair share of the burdens of taxation for the support of the government, nor why they should not be amenable to such civil and criminal laws as do not interfere with the full protection of the foreign merchants’ property while in such agents’ possession.

As a matter of course, I suppose, foreign representatives have generally claimed for the citizens of their respective countries all the rights and privileges which may at any time have been accorded to others, but now that these privileges and rights may come before the proposed conference for investigation and adjustment for the future, the question as to whether they are right or wrong, just or unjust, necessary or not, is a pertinent one, and it is well worth considering whether the United States should claim or uphold other nations in claiming in the conference any privilege which under ordinary circumstances we should not concede in our own country.

The right of foreign representatives in Morocco to see that their countrymen are not treated in an unwarrantable, unjust or harsh manner, and that they shall be free from all extraordinary taxes and services which ought not in justice and right to be demanded of them, is so clear that it will probably not be disputed or questioned at the proposed conference.

If Morocco is to be considered and treated as an independent nation, I now fail to see why foreign representatives should have the right in any way of protecting Moorish subjects, who are neither in their employ nor in the service of foreign merchants as agents or brokers. If one such moor can be “protected” out from under the jurisdiction of his government and rendered independent of the laws of his country, then a hundred, a thousand, or a million, or any other number may, and the Emperor be relieved of all his subjects and of the trouble of governing them. True the Emperor might be a happier man to be thus relieved, but why should that happiness be conferred on him, and his burdens assumed by the representatives of other powers?

I have, &c.,

LUCIUS FAIRCHILD.

No. 578. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild. No. 578.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild.

Department of State,
Washington, June 15, 1880. No. 30.]

Sir: On the 11th instant I received a call from the Austro-Hungarian minister in Washington, during which he stated that his government had instructed its representatives in the Morocco conference at Madrid to endeavor to secure religious liberty and complete religious toleration for all classes in Morocco, in accordance with the proposition of the Berlin conference. I at once telegraphed you as follows: “Support the Austrian proposition before conference to secure religious toleration in Morocco.”

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 579. Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts. No. 579.
Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, July 3, 1880. (Received July 24.) No. 39.]

Sir: The labors of the international conference on affairs in Morocco having come to an end, I beg to submit a general report of the proceedings of each session, of the position taken by each government, and of the final result of the conference. I also beg to transmit, for your further information, a complete set of the procès verbal of each meeting, which for convenience of reference I have repaged.

first meeting of conference.

As I had the honor to report in my No. 26 of the 20th of May, the first formal meeting of the conference was held at the palace of the presidency on the 19th of that month. At this meeting were present the representative of Germany, Count Solms; of Austria, Count Ludolf; of Belgium, Mr. Anspach; of the United States, Mr. Fairchild; of Spain, Señor Cánovas del Castillo; president of the council of ministers of France, Admiral Jaurès; of Great Britain, Mr. West (who also represented Denmark); of Italy, Count Greppi; of Morocco, Sid Mohammed Yargas, minister of foreign affairs of that empire; of the Netherlands, Baron Heldewier; of Portugal, Count Casal Ribeiro; and of Sweden and Norway, Mr. Akerman; all of whom, with the exception of Spain and Morocco, are the diplomatic representatives of their respective governments at Madrid.

It was decided that all should take the title of plenipotentiary. It was also decided that no government should have precedence, but that the representative of each power should be seated at the table in alphabetical order.

On the proposition of the plenipotentiary of Germany, Señor Cánovas del Castillo was chosen president. Mr. Cánovas then proposed Messrs. Figuera and Muro, of the ministry of state, as secretaries of the conference; and Messrs. Villa Urrutia, secretary of legation; and Osma, attaché (Spanish service), as aids.

This proposition of the president being accepted, the gentlemen in question were presented to the conference The documents relating to the conference held at Tangier were placed before the plenipotentiaries, and the latter then presented their full powers. This formality through with, Señor Cánovas del Castillo read a speech, in which he set forth the object of the conference (See Protocol 1.)

After having arranged in regard to certain rules of routine, the president proposed to listen to any general observations which the plenipotentiary of Morocco might have to make. Sid Mohammed Vargas, in reply, expressed the hope that he would find in the plenipotentiaries of the powers represented in the conference the same spirit of equity which he had found in his relations as minister for foreign affairs with the representatives of the same powers in Morocco. He announced at the same time that he should propose some modifications to the demands which he had made at Tangier, adding that his idea in general was to put a stop to the abuses of protection. The plenipotentiaries deeming it of importance to the regularity of discussion to know the exact text of the proposed modifications, the conference adjourned in order to permit Sid Mohammed Vargas to make known, in writing, the character of his new observations. (See Protocol 1.)

second meeting of conference.

The conference re-met on tire 24th of May, when the plenipotentiary of Morocco presented the additional declarations referred to in the session of the 19th. (For these declarations see Annex 1 to Protocol 2.) As to demand No. 1, made by him at Tangier (see Annex 1 to Protocol 1.) Sid Mohammed Vargas stated that they had tried it for nearly seventeen years, and had found that it caused prejudices to the commercial transactions in the interior of the country, and that it impeded the administration of justice and the maintenance of order in the markets of the interior and of the cities, as he had already shown at Tangier on the 19th of July, 1879. (See Annex 2 to Protocol 1.) For these reasons he prayed the conference to endeavor to arrive at a solution which, preventing in the future these prejudices, would be equally advantageous to foreign merchants and to merchants subjects of the Sultan. (See Annex 1 to Protocol 2)

In regard to demands Nos. 14, 15, and 16 (see Annex 1 to Protocol 1), he proposed, in substance, the following modifications: That agents (courtiers or censaux) of foreign merchants should be chosen from among the inhabitants of the cities and ports, and not from among the inhabitants of the country; that they should be subject to local jurisdiction, and to arrest for a punishable offense; that an inventory of any property found in the possession of the agent at the time of arrest should be made and sent to the governor of the city where the agent is to be tried by the local authorities, in the presence of the consul (who protects him); that the agent, if found guilty, shall be immediately struck from the list of agents, and the merchant shall name another to take charge of his property; that every agent shall be furnished with a letter from the governor of the city from whence he proceeds, stating that he is the agent of such a one, in order that the authority of the country may be informed; that protection shall extend over the merchandise and money of foreign merchants; that, should a governor of the country commit an injustice against an agent, complaint shall be made to the minister of foreign affairs at Tangier, and should such injustice be proven, the agent may obtain satisfaction in proportion to the injustice committed by the governor; and, finally, that subjects of the Sultan may be put on the same footing as foreign subjects, and that the independence of the Sultan and of his authorities may not be interfered with. (See Annex 1 to Protocol 2.)

On irregular protection, Sid Mohammed Vargas stated that certain fears having been expressed by the representatives at Tangier in the case of persons taken from their lists, and desiring to do away with such fears and to annul the propositions made by him in his two letters of the 18th of February and 12th of April, 1879 (see Annex 1 to Protocol 1, he would propose the following: That all questions relating to inheritances (immovable property) which come under the Chra may, as is now the practice, be submitted to the Kadi; that other questions, such as assassination, quarrels, &c., which come under the governor, the ex-protégé, should he not wish to submit his case to that official, will have the right to place it before the minister for foreign affairs at Tangier, and when sentence shall have been pronounced by him, if the ex-protégé deems himself wronged thereby, the minister will listen to the ambassador, and explain to him the grounds on which he based his sentence; and, finally, the representatives will send to the minister for foreign affairs a special list containing the names of the individuals who have been protégés and withdrawn from protection on account of this agreement. (See Annex 1 to Protocol 2.)

The plenipotentiary of France stated that he had summarily made known to his government the new propositions of Sid Mohammed Vargas, but that until it should be able to examine the propositions in full and make known to him its wish, he could not enter into a discussion upon them, declaring at the same time that he would not be permitted to allow international acts which bound France to Morocco to be put in question. (See Protocol 2.)

The plenipotentiary of Morocco, in view of these observations, declared that he only wished a solution satisfactory to the interests of all. The president, Señor Cánovas del Castillo, stated that he thought the plenipotentiary of Morocco might be able to renounce, without inconvenience, the proposed additions, but he felt himself bound to declare, with equal frankness, that if they must not, in the course of their deliberations, touch the text of the agreement of 1863, the conference would find itself under conditions less favorable than that at Tangier.

The plenipotentiary of France, in reply, called attention to the difference between the demand made at Tangier and the language used at Madrid by Sid Mohammed Vargas. He accepted the propositon of the president (Señor Cánovas del Castillo) to do away with the previous declaration; but there were also other points, the study of which had become necessary on account of the new additions, and which would not permit him to take part in the immediate discussion of the Moroccoian propositions.

The plenipotentiary of Morocco repeated that he only looked for a solution which would put the subjects of the Sultan and those of foreign powers on the same footing, and which would guard the rights of the Sultan. He recalled the words of the representative of France, who stated at Tangier that it only depended on Morocco to disengage itself if it desired to break the agreement of 1863. (Meeting 27th of March, 1879.) Nevertheless, he was bound to expose to the conference the present state of affairs, in the hope that the plenipotentiaries would be able to find a solution.

The plenipotentiary of France insisted on the point that his government had accepted the invitation to take part in a conference having for its end the examination of certain abuses and to endeavor to remedy them, and not to attack and destroy a convention. The denunciation of the agreement of 1863, if it was in question, seemed to him more naturally reserved to a direct negotiation between Morocco and France.

The president (Señor Cánovas del Castillo) observed that the plenipotentiary of France was the only judge whether or not he must await new instructions from his government, in view of the observations presented by Sid Mohammed Vargas. In this case the conference must adjourn. However, he believed it necessary, before suspending the deliberations, to fix the exact state of the question. According to his opinion the convention of 1863 had not in any way been put in question by Sid Mohammed Vargas, because a similar pretension must necessarily provoke from other plenipotentiaries declarations such as those made by the plenipotentiary of France; that Nos. 1 and 2 of the demands presented to the conference at Tangier (see Annex 1 to Protocol 1), are an attestation of the fact, and imply the recognition of the absolute force of the agreement of 1863. He then recalled the fact that Spain was bound by an identical convention. He thought, however, that the plenipotentiary of Morocco had only wished to state the difficulties resulting from the application of the convention of 1863, which forced him to pray the conference to endeavor to make conciliatory modifications of this international act, adding, in conclusion, that the conference at Tangier had discussed not only the absolute force, but also the eventual modifications of the agreement of 1863, and what had been discussed at Tangier may be discussed at Madrid.

The plenipotentiary of Great Britain declared himself in entire accord with the observations made by the president.

The plenipotentiary of France stated that he was equally in accord with the observations made by the president, but that he must, however, ask that the discussion be postponed until the next meeting, in order to permit the examination by his government of the other points newly raised.

The president then asked the plenipotentiary of France if, in the event of addition to demand No. 1 being retired, he would be able to take part in the immediate discussion of the demands (see Annex 1 to Protocol 1), up to No. 14.

The plenipotentiary of France insisted on his request for a postponement, adding that he would inform his government that the proposed addition to demand No. 1 being retired, the discussion would seem to be free up to demand No. 14.

On the request of the president, the plenipotentiary of Morocco declared that he would retire the proposed addition. The conference then adjourned until the 26th of May.

third session.

On reassembling on the 26th May, the conference at once proceeded to consideration of the demands presented by Sid Mohammed Vargas to the conference at Tangier in 1879 (see Annex 1 to Protocol 1.) Demands numbered 1 and 2 were considered as an attestation of facts, and were adopted with little or no discussion. Demand No. 3 was then taken up, when the plenipotentiary of France observed that, in view of the possibility of some day having consuls in the interior of Morocco, it would be well to suppress the restrictive phrase “dans les villes de la côte.” The president proposed to adopt the terms of the Spanish and English treaties. This proposition being accepted, No. 3 was adopted to read as follows: Consuls, vice-consuls, or consular agents, chiefs of port, who reside in the states of the Sultan of Morocco, shall not be able to choose more than an interpreter, a soldier, and two domestics from among the subjects of the Sultan. These shall not be subjected to any dues, impost, or tax whatever.

The conference equally adopted demand No. 4 with the amendment proposed by the representative of Germany at Tangier, viz: Nevertheless, he (the native consular agent) shall be able, for the exercise of his duties, to have a soldier protégé.

In the consideration of demand No. 5 a discussion arose as to the exact sense of the expression “des gens poursuivis,” for which had already been substituted by the conference at Tangier that of “aucun sujet marocain sous le coup de poursuites.” The plenipotentiary of Belgium proposed to develop the sense of the expression, by adding that “I1 reste entendu que les procès civils engagés avant la protection se termineront devant le tribunal qui en aura entrainé la procedure.” The demand with the above addition was reserved in order to permit the plenipotentiary of France to refer it to his government.

Demand No. 6 as amended and adopted reads as follows: The foreign representatives shall inform the minister for foreign affairs of the Sultan, in writing, of the choice which they have made of an employé. However, the right of protection shall not be exercised in behalf of persons pursued for an offense or crime before they may have been judged by the authorities of the country, and who have not, if it (the trial) has taken place, fulfilled their sentence.

On reaching demand No. 7 in regard to protection, the plenipotentiary of Austria remarked that the words “de certains parents mineurs” were too vague, and proposed that they be replaced by the words “des parents mineurs,” which was agreed to. In regard to hereditary protection the plenipotentiary of France stated that the convention of 1863 formally accorded such protection to the family Benchimol that the reasons which moved this exception were duly appreciated at the time by the Government of Morocco and had been preserved in all their force, and that consequently it was impossible for his government to abandon a family which had enjoyed for seventeen years this most just consideration. He therefore demanded the maintenance of this legitimate exception.

The plenipotentiary of Portugal maintaining in all its extent the right to the treatment of the most favored nation clause, admitted that France was able to allege special reasons in favor of an exception, which, according to his opinion, did not invalidate the principle. He accepted with reserve, therefore, that protection should not be hereditary, with the exception nominatively made in the convention of 1863, but in case where the Moroccan Government accorded other exceptions of this nature, he would reserve the right of his government to claim an analogous exception. Similar reserve was claimed by the other plenipotentiaries for their respective governments. Demand No. 7 was then adopted with amendments, of which the following is a translation: According to treaties and conventions, protection ah all extend to the family of the protégé, and his home shall be respected, but it is understood that the family must not be composed of more than the wife, children, and minor relations who live under the same roof. The conference declares that protection shall be limited to these individuals. Protection shall not be hereditary. A single exception is made, however, in favor of the family Benchimol, it being established in the convention of 1863, but it shall not create a precedent. However, if the Sultan of Morocco shall accord another exception, all the powers represented at the Conference will have the right to claim a similar exception.

The plenipotentiary of Italy stated that he did not feel himself authorized, without instructions from his government, to renounce the hereditary protection which the representative of Italy had claimed at the Tangier conference in favor of the family Toledano. At a subsequent meeting he stated that he had been instructed to withdraw the claim made in favor of this family.

Demand No. 8 was adopted with amendments. It reads as follows: The representatives shall communicate every year to the minister for foreign affairs a nominative list of the persons whom they protect or who are protected by their agents in the States of the Sultan of Morocco. Said list shall be transmitted to the local authorities, who must not consider as protégés more than those thereon inscribed.

Fourth Session.

The conference remet on the 28th May, and at once took up the discussion of demand No. 5, reserved for further deliberation in the meeting of the 26th. The president asked the plenipotentiary of France if he was prepared to accept this number. The latter replied affirmatively.

The plenipotentiary of Austria proposed to add the following words to No. 5: The execution of the sentence shall not be interfered with. However, the local Moroccan authority shall have care to immediately communicate the sentence rendered to the legation, consulate, or consular agency upon which the protégé depends.

This clause being accepted, No. 5 was adopted, and reads as follows: The Moroccan Government recognizes in the ministers, chargés d’affaires, and other representatives, the right which is accorded to them by treaty of choosing the persons whom they employ, either in their personal service or in that of their governments, provided they are not cheiks or other employés of the Moroccan Government, such as soldiers of the line or of cavalry outside the Maghazinas employed as their guards. Neither shall they be able to employ any Moroccan subject under the act of prosecution. It is understood that the civil proceedings begun before protection, shall terminate in the tribunals which had opened the procedure.

The execution of the sentence shall not be interfered with. However, the local Moroccan authority shall take care to immediately communicate the sentence rendered to the legation, consulate, or consular agency of which the protégé is a dependent. As to protégés who may have had a process begun before protection had been withdrawn-from them, their case shall be judged by the tribunal which was trying it.

The conference then entered upon the discussion of demand No. 7 likewise reserved at the last meeting, when the plenipotentiary of Italy declared that he was authorized to accept the demand as amended in the session of May 26. The conference consequently declared demand No. 7 adopted.

Demand No. 9 was declared to be a repetition of demand No. 3. It was therefore amended so as to read as follows: There shall not be accorded to the consuls, vice-consuls, or consular agents, chiefs of post, more than the number of protégés stipulated in No. 3—at least when they shall not have need of a native secretary.

In discussing demand No. 10, the plenipotentiary of France thought it would be well to understand that the lists of protection, regularly drawn up, should have full effect from the day on which they were made out and transmitted, and that they should not await the ratification, direct or indirect, of the Moroccan Government. The conference admitted the justice of this observation, which was also admitted by Sid Mohammed Vargas. The latter asked, and the conference conceded the request, that there might be no delay in communicating the changes made in the personnel of the consulates.

Demand No. 10 was then adopted with slight modifications. The following is a translation of the text as adopted: The agents shall remit each year to the authority of the country where they reside a list, with their seal, of the persons whom they protect. Said authority shall transmit it to the minister for foreign affairs, in order that, should it not conform to the rules, the representatives at Tangier may he informed of it.

The consular officer shall immediately announce the changes made in the personnel protégés of his consulate.

As to demand No. 11, the plenipotentiary of France observed that the position of consular agents, subjects of the Sultan, having been regulated by demand number four, it was advisable to regulate by the present number eleven, that of agents of vice-consulates, subjects of the Sultan.

Demand No. 11 was therefore amended to read as follows: The agents of vice-consulates, subjects of the Sultan, shall enjoy during the exercise of their duties, the rights recognized in No. 4 to consular agents.

Demand No. 12 was adopted as amended by the conference at Tangier without discussion. The following is a translation of it: The domestics, farmers, and others native employés of secretaries and native interpreters, shall not enjoy protection.

Demand No. 13 was amended and adopted to read as follows: The employés or Moroccan domestics of foreign subjects shall not be protected. However, the local authorities shall not be able to arrest an employé or domestic of a native officer in the service of a legation, of a consulate, or of a subject or foreign protégé without the authority of which he is a dependent being previously advised. If a Moroccan subject shall kill any one, or injure him, or violate his domicile, he shall be immediately arrested, but the diplomatic or consular authority under which he is placed shall be advised without delay.

fifth session.

The next session of the conference was held on the 1st of June. (See protocol 5.) The president (Señor Cánovas del Castillo) proposed to consider as one demands numbered 14 to 16, inclusive, as they all bore on the situation of censaux. The plenipotentiary of France was of opinion that they should be examined separately.

The plenipotentiary of Morocco, recalling the fact that the new demands which he had presented at Madrid in regard to these numbers (14 to 16) were no less than a reproduction of the language used by him at the meeting of the foreign representatives held at his house in Tangier, on the 19th of July, 1879 (see annex 2 to protocol 1), asked to retire them, and to hold to what he had said at Tangier.

He further stated that, he had only wished to express the wrongs which his country was suffering—that he would await the remedy of the conference, and that he would prefer to discuss what it might propose, adding that, in the presence of the prejudices occasioned by protection accorded to censaux, the Sultan would be able to use the right which the treaties gave him of suspending exportation, and that he (the Sultan) would also be able to declare that henceforth commerce should only be carried on in the ports which he might designate. He added, however, that the Sultan would not avail himself of any of these measures, preferring to submit to the equity of the plenipotentiaries called to discuss the question which was of such vital interest, to Morocco.

The plenipotentiary of Great Britain then asked permission to present some observations. He stated that the plenipotentiary of Morocco, having retired the additions to demands numbered 14, 15, and 16, the conference must discuss other means in order to arrive, by common accord, to a solution of the points which form the subject of those numbers; but before submitting to the conference the propositions which he had drawn up to this end, he must declare that his government desired to maintain the independence of the Sultan of Morocco, as well as his authority in his own proper territory, and that it (Great Britain) wished that he be liberated from the abuses of foreign protection. He then submitted for the consideration of the conference the propositions, nine in number, which appear on page 42 as substitutes for Nos. 14, 15, and 16 of the Moroccan demands.

The president observed that he had knowledge of other propositions which had been prepared by the plenipotentiary of Austria, and asked if he wished to present them. The latter replied that the priority of discussion should be given to the British propositions, and that the presentation of his would depend on the reception of those of Mr. West.

The plenipotentiary of France stated that the amendment which he had proposed to submit to No. 14 of the Moroccan propositions reproduced the text of the convention of 1863, from which the French Government was unable to depart. He further stated that no treaty limited for France the number of protégés, and that in fixing in 1863 two censaux for each branch house, it had perhaps gone beyond what the interests of French merchants exacted. He declared in conclusion that he was unable to consent that the number of censaux should be reduced.

The plenipotentiary of Austria remarked that it was essential to examine, in the first place, if censaux continued to be protected, and if so, in what degree.

The plenipotentiary of France replied that he only intended to discuss the existing fact; that is to say, the situation established by the convention of 1863, which only mentioned censaux protégés.

A long discussion then followed as to the order of procedure, and it was finally decided to discuss the propositions presented by the plenipotentiary of Great Britain.

The plenipotentiary of France then declared that he was ready to discuss the Moroccan demands, but as it had been decided to discuss the propositions presented by England, he must ask the conference to adjourn in order to permit him to make known to his government these new propositions. In view of these declarations the conference adjourned.

sixth session.

The conference reassembled on the 6th June, when the plenipotentiary of France spoke at length on the propositions presented by the plenipotentiary of Great Britain. (See protocol 6.) I shall not undertake to give a synopsis of his remarks. It will suffice to say that he declared that his government would not listen to the proposition in question.

The plenipotentiary of Morocco followed the plenipotentiary of France, stating in substance that the propositions presented by the plenipotentiary of Great Britain were acceptable to him, and that they guarded in effect the legitimate interests of commerce. He declared at the same time that he was ready to accept any arrangement which, according the same advantages to native merchants as to foreign merchants, would assure the most complete protection of foreign commerce, adding that he only protested against personal protection accorded to native courtiers (trading agents), which was the cause of the wrongs from which his country was suffering. The plenipotentiary of Great Britain, in view of the declarations made by the plenipotentiary of France, retired his propositions in order to leave the field free to others.

The president then asked the plenipotentiary of Austria if he intended to present his propositions. The latter replied in the affirmative, but he must say, nevertheless, that his articles, though based on existing treaties and comprised in the convention of 1863, established for the censaux certain protection deemed strictly necessary. He then read his propositions, the complete text of which will be found in annex 1 to protocol 6.

The plenipotentiary of France stated that the articles which had just been read constituted an extenuation of the last demands, but they contained, however, three essential points on which his government could not make concessions, viz, the number of censaux, the limitation of the choice of these agents, and the suppression of consular jurisdiction for the censaux.

The plenipotentiary of Italy asked to present a counter project, equally regulating the situation of censaux, the text of which appears in annex II to protocol 6, whereupon the conference adjourned until the 9th of June.

seventh session.

At the next session (June 9) (see protocol 7), the plenipotentiary of Austria announced that he had prepared new propositions, and that, with a view to reconciling them to those presented by the plenipotentiary of Italy, he had inserted many articles of the latter’s project, but that there were two essential points on which it had been impossible to agree with Count Greppi, viz, that agents shall not be arrested except in the case where they may be caught in the commission of the flagrant crime of murder; and, second, that agents must be placed exclusively under consular jurisdiction. Count Ludolf explained at length the reason why he objected to these provisions. Then on the invitation of the president he read his new propositions, which will be found in annex to protocol 7.

The plenipotentiary of Italy, in view of the new propositions presented by the plenipotentiary of Austria, asked permission to substitute another article for No. 4 of his project. This being done, the question arose as to which of the propositions should have priority of discussion, and it was decided that those of Austria should take precedence.

The plenipotentiary of France began the discussion. He stated that it was impossible for him to adhere entirely to the Austrian propositions—that he was willing to accept No. 1, but in No. 2 he must ask the suppression of the words “de préférence,” as they established a vague restriction which would only lead to difficulties. As to No. 3 he had already agreed, in principle, that censaux should pay certain determined taxes, provided the right of holding property should be conceded to foreigners; he had nothing to say in regard to No. 4, but he could not in any fashion accept No. 5. In conclusion he stated that France was unable to admit the suppression of protection of censaux, as it would be equivalent to the suppression of her commerce.

The plenipotentiary of Italy supported the observations made by the plenipotentiary of France.

The plenipotentiary of Morocco was of opinion that he should be able to accept the greater part of the new propositions presented by Austria, but he must ask the conference to adjourn in order to permit him to take them into more detailed examination, adding, at the same time, that his instructions prevented him from formally accepting that censaux should be chosen in the country.

The other plenipotentiaries reserving for discussion the different articles, the general discussion closed, and No. 1 of the Austrian propositions was adopted. No. 2 was necessarily reserved in view of the declaration made by the plenipotentiary of Morocco.

eighth session.

The conference re-met on the 12th of June, and after some discussion in regard to article 1 of the Austrian propositions adopted at the last session, the plenipotentiary of Morocco replied at length to certain observations made by the plenipotentiary of France in the session of the 6th of June. He also discussed the propositions presented by the plenipotentiaries of Austria and Italy, and in conclusion presented an amendment to No. 2 of the former’s propositions to the effect that agents or censaux should be chosen from the cities on the coast and in the interior, and not from among the inhabitants of the country where the population is submitted, as a reserve, to military service. (Protocol 8.) Exceptions being made to this amendment by the plenipotentiaries of Austria and France, the president asked the plenipotentiary of Morocco if he was disposed to accept article No. 2 of the Austrian project. Sid Mohammed Vargas replied in the negative, adding that he was unable to accept that protection should be extended to censaux chosen in the country.

The plenipotentiary of Morocco then stated that in view of the declarations made by the plenipotentiary of France in regard to the number of censaux, the limitation of the choice of such agents, and the suppression for them of consular jurisdiction, the conference seemed unable to find a remedy to correct the evils which arose under the agreement of 1863. Under these circumstances and for other reasons given by him, Sid Mohammed Vargas declared that he should reserve the right of his sovereign to obtain what he desired through diplomatic means. He further declared that in the mean time the agreement of 1863 should be punctually and scrupulously observed in every particular, and closed his remarks by praying the conference to be good enough to continue the discussion on the other demands, beginning with No. 17.

The president, in view of the gravity of the declaration made by the plenipotentiary of Morocco, proposed that the conference adjourn. The plenipotentiary of France observed that he was not alone in his declarations, that the plenipotentiaries of Austria and Italy demanded, as well as himself, the right to select censaux in the interior. The conference then adjourned subject to the call of the president.

Thus you will see that the conference had come to a dead-lock, and there was no immediate sign of its being broken, as neither the plenipotentiary of France nor of Morocco seemed disposed to concede anything on the part of their respective governments. A general conversation followed the adjournment, on the present state of affairs, when I took occasion to say to Sid Mohammed Vargas that I thought it would be for the interest of Morocco to consent to censaux being selected from the country and governed according to the stipulations of existing treaties and conventions. I said to him frankly, “If you do not concede this point, what will Morocco get? Nothing; while France and the other powers will still have their treaties and conventions, and things will continue as they are to day.” He appeared to appreciate my remarks, but did not seem disposed to give way. From the very first, I did not think that any of the propositions presented would be agreed to, but I had, nevertheless, prepared certain amendments to certain articles which I proposed to offer in the event of their being discussed. I even went so far as to prepare an entire new set of propositions during the time that elapsed between the last meeting and that of the 19th of June, but just as I had finished them I was informed that Morocco had conceded everything demanded by France, and that the selection and government of censaux would be in accordance with the stipulations of the convention of 1863, except as to taxation. Thus my proposed propositions were not needed.

ninth session.

In view of this concession on the part of Morocco, the president called a meeting of the conference for the 19th of June. (See protocol No. 9) The president stated that the conference had taken a recess since the 12th of June, in order to allow the plenipotentiaries time to exchange ideas on the subject of the important declarations made by the plenipotentiary of Morocco. He then asked Sid Mohammed Vargas if he intended to maintain these declarations. The latter replied that he intended to maintain them in effect, but would propose as a substitute for Nos. 14, 15, and 16 of the demands presented by him at Tangier, the following article: Nothing shall change the situation of censaux such as it has been established by treaties and by the convention of 1863, save that which shall be stipulated relative to imposts in the following articles.

In view of this declaration by the plenipotentiary of Morocco, the plenipotentiaries of Austria and Italy withdrew their propositions, and the conference then adopted the article proposed by Sid Mohammed Vargas.

The plenipotentiary of Morocco then asked the conference to be good enough to consider the request made by him at the last meeting in regard to adopting some measure which would put an end to existing abuses contrary to treaties and conventions. The plenipotentiary of France observed that it would be difficult for the conference to make a declaration of this nature, that it properly belonged to the Moroccan Government to denounce, by diplomatic means, to the foreign representatives at Tangier the existing abuses or those which might be practiced in the future. The conference ratified these observations.

The conference then proceeded to discuss No. 17 of the Moroccan demands (see annex 1 to protocol 1), which treats of the payment of imposts by protégés. The plenipotentiary of France stated that his government was willing to consent in principle to the censaux and other protégés paying agricultural taxes, but that it demanded in return the right of foreigners to hold property in Morocco, and that the exercise of this right must be regulated by a special rule between the Government of Morocco and the foreign representatives at Tangier. He then offered as a substitute for No. 17 the article which appears on page 69. The plenipotentiary of Morocco was ready to accept the first part of the proposed article, but as to the second part he must observe that the exercise of this right had never given place to difficulties nor to abuse, and that questions of procedure relative to immovable property had always been regulated by the law of the country; that if the rule demanded was no more than a reproduction of the law, it would be superfluous, if on the other hand it set aside the law, it would be impossible for his government to accept it. He added, in reply to a question of the president, that the right of property was already stipulated in the English and Spanish treaties and recognized by Morocco for all foreigners, but that immovable property was, and must continue to be, submitted to the national laws, and that he could not accept that it be made the object of a special rule.

The plenipotentiary of France then proposed to modify his article, but it was finally agreed to adopt the article on this subject (see annex 1 to protocol 1,) which had been agreed to at Tangier. This article reads as follows: The right of holding property in Morocco is recognized for all foreigners. The plenipotentiaries admit that the purchase of property must be effected with the previous consent of the government, and that the titles to said property must he made out in the form prescribed by the laws of the country, and that any question which may arise on these rights must be decided according to the laws of the country with the appeal stipulated in the treaties; that is to say, to the minister for foreign affairs.

On taking into consideration No. 16, relative to the payment of an agricultural tax by censaux and other protégés, a discussion arose as to how this tax should be regulated. A majority of the plenipotentiaries were of opinion that the conference might establish the principle of equality, and leave it to the representatives at Tangier to regulate the details of application. I suggested that the payment of this impost should be made by foreigners and protégés through the diplomatic and consular representatives. The plenipotentiaries of Germ any, France, and Italy, without denying the principle, thought that its application should naturally be reserved to the sanction of the representatives at Tangier. The following article was finally adopted: Foreigners and protégés, proprietors or tenants of cultivated lands, as well as censaux given to agriculture, shall pay the agricultural impost. They shall remit each year to their consul an exact statement of what they possess, placing in their hands the amount of the impost. He who shall make a false declaration shall pay a fine doable the amount of the impost which he would regularly have paid on the undeclared property. In case of a repetition of the offense said fine shall be doubled. The nature, the mode, and the quota of said impost shall be the object of a special agreement between the representatives of the powers and the minister for foreign affairs of His Sheriffian Majesty.

The conference then adopted an article relative to the payment of gate taxes on beasts of burden, which the representatives at Tangier had declared themselves ready to accept. (See annex 1 to protocol 1.) The following is a translation of the article in question: Foreigners, protégés, and censaux, owners of beasts of burden, shall pay gate tax. The quota and the mode of collection of said tax, common to foreigners and to natives, shall be equally the object of a special agreement between the representatives of the powers and the minister for foreign affairs of His Sheriffian Majesty. The said tax shall not be increased without a new agreement with the representatives of the powers.

The conference then accepted the demand contained in No. 18 of the Moroccan propositions (see annex 1 to protocol 1,) relative to the mediation of interpreters, &c., by adopting the following article: The mediation of interpreters, native secretaries or soldiers of the different legations or consulates, when in behalf of persons not placed under the protection of the legations or consulates, shall not be admitted unless they are the bearers of a document signed by the chief of mission, or by the consular authority.

I then asked to present propositions regulating the situation of protégés who ceased to be on the lists on account of the revision of said lists of protection. The conference, reserving these propositions for ulterior deliberation, adjourned.

tenth session.

The next session of the conference, June 21, was exclusively devoted to the question of abuses which arose from subjects of the Sultan becoming naturalized in a foreign country and then returning to reside in Morocco. The opinions of all the plenipotentiaries on the subject will be found in full in protocol 10. My own remarks on the subject were as follows: The United States admits of no distinction in the status of their native-horn and naturalized citizens, at home or abroad, and cannot concede to the Government of Morocco the right to disregard documents which certify one of its former subjects to be a naturalized citizen of the United States of America, nor can it admit its (Morocco’s) right to disregard a passport lawfully issued to any native-born or naturalized citizen of the United States. I do not, however, hold it to be right that a native of Morocco, who has become a naturalized citizen of the United States or of any other country, should return to Morocco with intent to remain there and continue to claim his naturalized citizenship. I concede that such return, with the intention to permanently remain, ought to work the forfeiture of his new citizenship and place him again in the same position in which he was before he left Morocco. I believe that it would be fair to consider such a person who returns to and resides in Morocco a certain number of years, to be agreed upon between the governments (with intent not to return to his adopted country), to have forfeited his new and résuméd his former citizenship. While I hold it to be the right and the duty of the Government of the United States to fully protect in every lawful manner its naturalized citizens, wherever they may be, I do not believe that any person should be allowed to become a naturalized subject of another country solely for the purpose of returning to reside in and evade the laws of his native land; and I will gladly join the members of this conference in recommending to our respective governments any measures which will protect Morocco from such injustice and fraud. My government, I have no doubt, would be willing to enter into a treaty with Morocco covering this question.

eleventh session.

At the next session, on the 24th of June (see protocol No. 11,) the discussion on the subject of naturalization was continued. The plenipotentiary of Morocco stated at length the views of his government on this question, the substance of which was that Morocco did not object to its subjects acquiring nationality in a foreign country, but if they returned to their native land they must subject themselves to the authority of the Sultan and the local jurisdiction. He then submitted to the consideration of the conference the following article: The Government of Morocco does not object to Moroccan subjects changing their nationality, but on returning to their native country they will not be able to withdraw themselves from the authority of His Majesty the Sultan, nor from local jurisdiction.

A general discussion followed, two or three different propositions were presented, among the number another by Sid Mohammed Vargas in the place of the one above mentioned, when the following article was finally adopted: Every Moroccan subject naturalized in a foreign land, who returns to Morocco, must, after a sojourn of residence equal to that which was necessary for him to regularly obtain naturalization, choose between his entire submission to the laws of the empire and the obligation to quit Morocco, unless it shall be proven that foreign naturalization had been obtained with the consent of the Moroccan Government.

Foreign naturalization acquired up to the present time by Moroccan subjects according to the rules established by the laws of each country, will be maintained in all its effect, without any restriction.

This was thought by the conference to be a happy solution of the question, and met with the hearty approval of all the plenipotentiaries, who were of the opinion that their respective governments would fully coincide in this decision. The conference then took into consideration the facts expressed to that at Tangier by Sid Mohammed Vargas in his letter of the 18th of February, 1879 (see annex 1 to protocol 1), relative to the interference of consuls with the Moroccan tribunals.

The president (Señor Cánovas del Castillo) stated that all the plenipotentiaries recognized, as well as the representatives at Tangier, the justice of the observations presented on the subject by His Sheriffian Majesty’s minister for foreign affairs, but it did not seem that it was for the conference to decide the point, since the representatives at Tangier had declared it their right to demand it of Sid Mohammed Vargas.

The plenipotentiary of France then proposed the following article: The right to the treatment of the most favored nation is recognized by Morocco to all the powers represented at the conference.

This article was unanimously adopted, when the president observed that as the conference had examined and decided upon each one of the nineteen demands presented at Tangier by the Moroccan Government, and had also adopted, in conclusion, a new article, it appeared to have arrived at the end of its labors, but he would ask the plenipotentiaries, nevertheless, in case they desired to submit new matters to common deliberation, to be good enough to lay them before the conference.

The plenipotentiary of Morocco then made the following declarations, which he deemed necessary, in regard to protection in Morocco: The Government of Morocco will not recognize other protégés than those whose number and quality have been determined by the articles which the conference has adopted. The individuals who do not find themselves within these conditions must consequently be taken from the lists and deprived of foreign protection; they will come under the direct protection of His Sheriffian Majesty, and the proceedings in respect to them in all cases where they may have disputes with other subjects of the Sultan or with subjects or foreign protégés shall be in the following manner:

Every question shall be submitted to the kadi or to the governor, according to what may be the jurisdiction of the one or the other, but always with the appeal stipulated in the treaties to the minister for foreign affairs at Tangier. In the case where an ex-protégé objects that his case was submitted to the Moroecaai authorities of his place of residence, he will have the right to carry it directly before said minister, who, after having pronounced sentence, and in the case where the ex-protégé thinks himself injured thereby, will listen to the foreign representative of the nation who previously protected the party interested, and will make known to him the facts on which he founded the sentence.

The foreign representatives will remit to the minister for foreign affairs a special list, giving the names and residence of the individuals who have been taken from the lists of protection on account of the present arrangements, in order that the local authorities may be advised by them.

The president remarked that this proposition reproduced the observations made by Sid Mohammed Vargas in his letters of the 11th of February and 12th of April, 1879 (See annex 1 to protocol 1), and recalled the fact that the conference had knowledge of a projét of the plenipotentiary of the United States, regulating the situation of ex-protégés, but this projé, which suppresses an anterior decision, appeared to be reserved to ulterior deliberation.

The plenipotentiary of Italy then addressed the conference at length, in regard to the number and quality of protégés in Morocco.

twelfth session.

On the reassembling of the conference (26th of June), the plenipotentiary of Morocco replied to the observations made by the plenipotentiary of Italy at the last meeting. The following article was then provisionally adopted (in order to allow the plenipotentiary of Italy to consult his government) in regard to irregular protection: Irregular protection cannot be accorded in the future. However, the exercise of the customary right (droit censuétudinaire) of protection shall be reserved in the single case where it is given to recompense notorious services rendered by a Moroccan subject to a foreign power, or for other services entirely exceptional and particular to said power. The minister for foreign affairs must he previously notified of the nature of the services and the intention to recompense them by protection, in order that he may be able, if necessary, to prevent observations; the definitive resolution will remain, nevertheless, reserved to the government to which the service may have been rendered. The number of protégés thus created shall not exceed that of three for each power.

The situation of protégés who have obtained protection in virtue of the customs henceforth regulated by the preceding arrangement, shall be for them and their families identical to that established for the other protégés.

The conference not having admitted that its decision should be retroactive and that consequently no names would be removed from the present lists of protected persons, I considered my propositions regarding ex-protégés unnecessary and therefore withdrew them.

The president then observed that the conference, having accomplished on the one hand the task which had been submitted to it, was on tine eve of adjournment; but he must bring to the knowledge of its members, before separating, an important communication which had been addressed by the Pope to the Government of His Catholic Majesty in regard to religious liberty in Morocco. (The communication in question appears in full in protocol 12.)

Señor Cñnovas del Castillo added that he had replied to the communication through the Nuncio at Madrid, that he was ready to present and support the propositions of the Pope should the plenipotentiaries of other powers be able to treat of questions outside of those which had brought about the meeting of the conference.

The plenipotentiary of Austria informed the conference that his government, on account of a similar communication from the Pope, had consulted other governments, and had been assured that they were disposed to join in recommending to the Sultan of Morocco the abolition of incapacities which still weigh oil certain classes of his subjects on account of their religious belief, and that, in view of this, he had been instructed to prepare an address to the sovereign of Morocco, which he had the honor to submit to the conference.

The address in full may be found on pages 91, 92. The following is a translation of the two essential paragraphs: 1. To respect in his states the principle that all those who live there and who may reside there in the future, may be able to profess and exercise without interference their religious beliefs.

2. To prescribe to his government, as an immutable base of the legislation of Morocco, the maxim already adopted in the decree of 26th Chaban, 1280, and according to which neither religion nor race will ever be a reason to establish a distinction in the treatment, by and before the law, between his Mussulman and non-Mussulman subjects, nor serve as a pretext to impose humiliations on the latter, to deprive them of any civil right whatever or to impede them from the free exercise of all professions and industries which the Mussulman subjects of the empire are permitted to enjoy.

The address was approved by all the plenipotentiaries, with the exception of the plenipotentiary of Morocco, who stated that he was unable to do more than to bring to the knowledge of his sovereign the views of the plenipotentiaries expressed in the name of their respective governments. Sid Mohammed Vargas added that he believed it his duty to state, however, that in Morocco Mussulmans, Christians, and Jews enjoyed the same liberty in religious matters; that he had no instructions from his sovereign which would permit him to treat of this question or of any other which was not directly the object of his mission to Madrid; but in view of the address adopted by the conference, he would read a letter which he had received from his sovereign in regard to his Jew subjects.

The following is a translation of the essential part of the letter: It has come to our knowledge that certain of our Jew subjects have on many occasions complained to their brothers resident in Europe and to the foreign representatives at Tangier, that they are unable to obtain justice in their reclamations relating to murders, robberies, &c. They allege that the governors show indifference in causing satisfaction to be made to them by the persons who attack them, and that their demands never reach our Sheriffian Majesty unless by the mediation of these persons (the Jews resident in Europe and the foreign representatives). Our Sheriffian wish is that they may obtain justice without the intervention of powers or of representatives, because they are our subjects and our tributaries, having thus the same rights as Mussulmans before us, and all abuse against them being forbidden by our religion.

This is why we order you to receive the reclamation of every Jew who may complain of not having obtained justice from a governor, and to inform us when you shall not find the means to right their complaints. We have sent orders in this sense to the governors of the cities, of the ports, and of the country, in order that they may make them known to the Jews, and at the same time we have warned them that if any one of them opposes himself or puts obstacles in the way of the complaint of a Jew reaching you, we will punish him severely. We order you to treat their affairs with all justice, and to conceal nothing from us in regard to the arbitrariness of the governors in respect to them, because all men are equal before us in matters of justice. 22 Joumadi, 1297.

The president stated in the name of all the plenipotentiaries the lively satisfaction with which the conference had received these declarations.

thirteenth session.

The next session of the conference was held on the 28th of June. The plenipotentiary of Italy not having been authorized by his government to accept the proposed article in regard to irregular protection, the president proposed to review the articles already voted and to examine the projét prepared by the secretaries which comprised and arranged the articles in question.

The proposition being accepted, the projét of the convention was adopted after an attentive examination of each article. Articles 16 and 18 were, however, reserved. (See protocol.)

fourteenth session.

The conference reassembled on the 30th June, when article 16 came up for further discussion. The president, recalling the fact of the final adoption of this article having been reserved at the request of the plenipotentiary of Italy, proposed a new article, which he thought would be acceptable to the plenipotentiaries of Italy and Morocco.

This article was the same as the original one, save two amendments, the first of which was as follows: The Moroccan authorities will not recognize other protection, whatever may be its nature, than that which is expressly stated in this convention.

The second amendment was as follows: The number of these protégés shall not exceed that of twelve for each power, which is fixed as a maximum, without obtaining the assent of the Sultan.

Article 16 as amended was then adopted.

The conference then proceeded to examine article 18 of the projét of the convention which had equally been reserved. The following article was proposed by the plenipotentiary of Belgium in place of the original one: The present convention shall be ratified. The ratifications shall be exchanged at Tangier, with the shortest delay possible.

By exceptional consent of the high contracting parties, this provisions of the present convention will be in force from the day of the signature at Madrid.

The article was adopted with the reserve for all the powers made by the plenipotentiary of Austria, viz, that the exceptional arrangement consented to should not create a precedent. The plenipotentiary of Italy stated, however, that he must reserve his formal approval of the convention; that while his government accepted in principle said article, it must have knowledge of the complete text of the convention before authorizing its representative to sign it.

The conference then adjourned, subject to the call of the president, for the purpose of signing the convention.

fifteenth session.

An extraordinary meeting of the conference was called on the 2d 01 July, when the president, recalling the fact that the plenipotentiary of Italy had reserved his formal approval of the projét of the convention in order to permit his government to examine the complete text, announced that Count Greppi wished to make a statement to the conference. The latter then stated that his government had authorized him to sign the convention on the condition that he obtain a slight modification of the last paragraph of article 16, which did not seem to sufficiently establish the principle of non-retroactivity in favor of former protégés created by customary right (le droit consuétudinaire.) He then submitted the following amendment (prepared by his government) to the paragraph above referred to: The situation of protégés who have obtained protection in virtue of the practice henceforth regulated by the present arrangement shall be without limitation of number for the present protégés of said category, identical, for them and for their families, to that which is established for other protégés.

The plenipotentiaries stated that while they had always understood that the original article established the fact of non-retroactivity, they were disposed, in deference to the Italian Government, to accept this amendment. The plenipotentiary of Morocco asked that the meaning of the words “sans limitation du nombre” be more clearly established. The conference replied that it was understood that the new article as well as the old one signified that the number of protégés of this category at present on the lists could not be reduced by erasure (i. e., that they should remain on the lists). The article was then adopted as amended by Count Greppi.

sixteenth and last session.

On the following day (3d of July) the conference met to sign the convention, but before proceeding with this duty the plenipotentiary of Germany begged to express to the president the thanks of the conference for the impartiality and conciliatory spirit with which he had directed its proceedings, and which had tended so much to bringing about the happy result of its labors.

The president replied, thanking the plenipotentiaries for the kind assistance which they had given him throughout the labors of the conference, without which it would have been impossible to have fulfilled the task imposed upon him.

The convention was then signed, as was also the address to the Sultan of Morocco in regard to religious liberty; the latter was intrusted to Sid Mohammed Vargas for conveyance to his sovereign.

The president then thanked, in the name of the conference, the secretaries and interpreters for the zeal and intelligence with which they had discharged their several duties, and after giving a short résumé of the result attained, the conference adjourned sine die.

In conclusion, I beg to add that the provisions of the convention give to Morocco the assurance that irregular and unauthorized protection will not in the future be extended to any of the subjects of the Sultan, and that all abuses of the right of protection shall cease; the right to collect certain taxes, under the supervision of the foreign representatives, from the resident foreigners and their brokers or agents; and the establishment of the status of Moors who, having become naturalized citizens or subjects of other countries, return to Morocco to reside. Morocco, on the other hand, renews her agreements as expressed in treaties and conventions, accords to foreigners the right to hold property, and fully acknowledges the foreign citizenship of such of her subjects as may become naturalized citizens or subjects of other countries.

Thus all the questions which have been at issue between Morocco and the powers with which diplomatic and consular relations are entertained have been happily settled, justly and fairly, and to the reasonable satisfaction of all concerned. The provisions of the convention are to take effect from the date of its signature, subject, however, to the ratification of the powers at an early day. I found no difficulty in agreeing to this, because 1 felt, and still feel, that the United States will join the other governments in approving the action of the conference.

I transmit herewith the convention.

I have, &c.,

LUCIUS FAIRCHILD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 39.—Translation.]

Extract from Protocol No. 12, of the session of 26 June, 1880.

question of religious toleration.

Present, the ministers plenipotentiary of Germany, Austria-Hungary, Belgium, Spain, the United States of America, France, Great Britain, Denmark, Italy, Morocco, The Netherlands, Portugal, and Sweden and Norway.

The session opens at one o’clock.

* * * * * * *

The president observes that the conference, having accomplished its task even beyond its expectations, is on the eve of adjournment. He must, however, bring to the knowledge of its members, before they separate, an important communication addressed by the Holy See to the Government of His Catholic Majesty.

Mr. Cánovas del Castillo reads the following translation of a letter dated 4th of May, 1880, which he has received from His Eminence Cardinal Nina: “Excellency: The Holy Father, obedient to the duties of his apostolic mission, cannot but profit by all the occasions which may offer to watch over the interests of Catholicism in whatever region of the globe. Having learned that, in the course of this month, a diplomatic congress is to be assembled under your presidency to treat of the affairs of Morocco, His Holiness, while recognizing the fact that among the questions to be submitted to the deliberations of the conference that touching religious liberty in the Moorish Empire has not been especially designated, believes, however, that nothing would prevent the plenipotentiaries assembled at Madrid from giving their attention to a subject so important to the welfare of the inhabitants of Morocco, even if only considered from the practical point of view.

“It is not to be’ doubted that, even as in the late congress of Berlin, the appeal made by my illustrious predecessor, Cardinal Franchi, to the representatives of France and Austria, Messrs. Waddington and Andrássy, resulted in the consideration and adoption, with general approval, of the demands of His Holiness relative to the freedom of the Catholic religion to the subjects of the Sublime Porte and of the neighboring states, so likewise now the proposition which I make will be no less favorably received on the part of the worthy representatives who are about to meet in the capital of a nation so devoted to the Holy See and bound by so many interests to the Empire of Morocco. On the other hand, it is not allowable to suppose that the Moorish Government, bound by so strong a tie to the Supreme Representative of Islamism, can refuse to follow the example afforded by the adhesion of the Emperor of the Ottomans to the articles stipulated in the congress of Berlin, when the conference now about to meet shall propose to him the adoption of a similar resolution.

“Obeying these considerations, the Holy Father has charged me to address your excellency, the worthy presiding officer of this assemblage, and to appeal, in his pontifical name, to your sentiments as a Catholic and as a Spaniard to the end that he may be pleased to take charge of proposing and maintaining before the congress the proposition I have indicated, to the effect that the subjects of the Sultan, as well as foreigners, shall enjoy in Morocco the free exercise of the Catholic worship without thereby suffering wrong or prejudice in their civil or political rights.

“The Holy Father is not unaware of the obstacles which the present state of Morocco offers to the realization of this freedom; but these obstacles, far from discouraging, should stimulate all generous hearts who regard only the greatness of the end to be attained.

“For the rest, this principle once accepted and an engagement entered into with the foreign powers to conform therewith, if these powers, in unison with Spain, whose relations with Morocco are of a special character, should wish to take a ground similar to that adopted by them in the East, it could reasonably be hoped that the progress of civilization would soon bring about, by peaceful means, the free exercise of the Catholic worship in these African regions.

“In conformity with the orders of the august Pontiff, I must at the same time inform you that the Holy Father is animated by the intimate conviction that you will respond to his paternal appeal, and that the representatives of the other powers will second your efforts by receiving with favor a request in consonance with the received modern principles of public international law.

“The Holy Father likewise believes that by thus acting your excellency will respond to the well-known sentiments of His Majesty the King, your august sovereign, in favor of our holy religion.

“I earnestly avail myself of this occasion, &c.,

“L. Cardinal NINA.

“To his excellency Mr. Cánovas del Castillo.”

Mr. Cánovas del Castillo has had the honor to answer Monsignore, the apostolic nuncio at Madrid, with whom he has conferred on this subject, that the plenipotentiary of Spain was ready to present, and support, in the conference, the proposition of the Holy See, so soon as he could be assured that the representatives of the other powers would consent to consider questions outside of those which formed the object of their meeting; he should, in particular, consult his colleague, the representative of Great Britain, whose government had taken the initiative in calling the plenipotentiaries together, as to the opportuneness of bringing this proposition before the conference. Mr. Cánovas added that, if the conference should admit, in principle, the possibility of treating of questions foreign to the precise end proposed for it, the plenipotentiary of Spain would have the honor to fulfill the mission which the Holy See had deigned to confide to him, and that he felt persuaded that the communication from the Holy Father would, in this event, be received with all the deference due to its high orign.

He recalled at the same time the fact that the treaty of 1861 assures religious liberty to Spanish Catholics in Morocco, and that, moreover, the English treaty of 1856 likewise stipulated for British subjects the free exercise of their worship.

Having subsequently become convinced that the plenipotentiaries are disposed to examine this question, the president thinks that the conference ought to make a declaration, erecting into a general rule the principle which Morocco has already admitted by her treaties.

The Austro-Hungarian plenipotentiary, speaking next, says that the government of His Imperial and Royal Apostolic Majesty, in consequence of a similar overture on the part of the Holy See, has for his part assured himself that the other cabinets would be, in fact, .disposed to join in a declaration like that toward which the president of the conference had taken the initiative, provided that this declaration should be expressed in favor of all the non-Mussulman inhabitants of Morocco, and that the conference should at the same time recommend to the wisdom of the Sultan of Morocco the abolition of the disabilities which still weigh upon certain classes of his subjects by reason of their religious belief. It is in this sense, therefore, and in order to give a more precise form to this declaration, that Count Ludolf has been charged with the preparation of the draft of an address to the sovereign of Morocco, which he has the honor to submit to the conference.

The plenipotentiary of Austria-Hungary thereupon reads the document in these terms: “On the eve of its dissolution, the conference, being informed by its president of the demand put forth on behalf of the Catholic Church by His Holiness the Sovereign Pontiff, in the letter which has just been read, asks, in its turn, that the free exercise of all worships be recognized in Morocco.

“The conference is the more convinced that this wish will be favorably received by His Sheriffian Majesty, inasmuch as the illustrious sovereign of Morocco has already given evident proof of his tolerance and his solicitude for the welfare of his non-Mussulman subjects by confirming, in 1874, the decree accorded by His Majesty the Sultan Sidi Mohammed, under date of 26th Chaban, 1280 (February, 1864), to Sir Moses Montefiore, which decree proclaims that all the subjects of the Moorish Empire shall have the same rank before the law; whence it follows that the Jews in Morocco should be treated conformably to justice and equity, and that no violence is to be shown with respect to either their persons or their property.

“As the result of this decree, many humiliating edicts and laws against non-Musselmans in former times have become obsolete, and the lot of the non-Mussulman races in Morocco has become more endurable.

“Nevertheless, these laws are not yet all formally revoked, and some of them even continue in force in more than one locality in the interior of the empire. Thus, the free exercise of their religion is not yet accorded in a legal manner to the non-Mussulman subjects of His Sheriffian Majesty, and many restrictions still exist for them, which are contrary to the spirit of the decree of 26 Chaban, 1280, and to the rule, at once so elemental and so universally respected, that the subjects of one and the same country, of whatever race or religion they may be, when faithfully fulfilling their duties toward the sovereign, should enjoy perfect identity of rights and complete equality before the law.

“Sultan Abd-ul Medjid, Emperor of the Ottomans, so long ago as 1839, by the hattisherif of Gulhané, spontaneously recognized and embodied in the legislation of his country this same principle, which has since been developed and confirmed by his successors, once in 1856 and latterly again in 1878, so that there can be no doubt that it is perfectly in accord with the Mohammedan law.

“Although persuaded that the illustrious sovereign of Morocco is animated, no less than the Sultan of Turkey, by benevolent intentions toward his non-Mussulman subjects, the conference would regard it as falling short of its duty did it not testify to the lively and profound interest it takes in the prompt amelioration of their lot. With this aim, the conference, in the name of the high powers represented therein, makes an appeal to His Sheriffian Majesty to the end that he, being faithful to his sentiments of justice and generosity, shall manifest that it is his firm determination— “1st. To cause to be respected in his states the principle that all those now dwelling and who shall hereafter dwell therein shall profess and exercise without hinderance their modes of worship.

“2d. To prescribe to his government, as the immutable base of the legislation of Morocco, the maxim already adopted in the decree of 26th Chaban, 1280, according to which neither religion nor race can ever be the motive for setting up a difference in the manner of treatment, by and before the law, between his Mussulman and non-Mussulman subjects, neither can they serve as a pretext for imposing humiliations upon the latter, for depriving them of any civil right whatever, or for preventing them from exercising freely all the professions and industries which are permitted to the Mussulman subjects of the empire.

“Such a manifestation would not only honor the reign of His Sheriffian Majesty, but would likewise inaugurate for his states a new era of prosperity.

“The undersigned, in placing the present act in the hands of his excellency Sid Mohammed Vargas, beg that the minister plenipotentiary of Morocco will transmit it to His Sheriffian Majesty, who certainly will not refuse to it the serious attention which is due to a desire expressed in the name of the powers which the undersigned have the honor to represent.

“Madrid, June 26, 1880.”

This text is approved by the plenipotentiaries, with the exception of the representative of His Sheriffian Majesty, who can merely engage to bring to the cognizance of his sovereign the desires which the plenipotentiaries have thus expressed in the name of their respective governments.

Sid Mohammed Vargas, however, deems it due that he should recall to mind that in Morocco the Mussulmans, the Christians, and the Jews follow their religions without any hinderance or obstacle being set in the way thereof. The plenipotentiary of Morocco has no instructions from his sovereign which permit him to discuss this question, or any other which, like this, is not directly related to the object of his mission to Madrid. Nevertheless, in view of the address which the conference has just agreed upon, he deems it due to communicate thereto a letter which he has received from His Majesty the Sultan Muley el Hassan, and which concerns his Jewish subjects. He thereupon reads it in these terms: “Praise to the One God! May the blessing of God be upon Mohammed, our lord and master, upon his family, and upon his comrades!

“To our esteemed servant, the Taleb Mohammed Vargas, may God prosper thee, and may peace be upon thee and likewise the benediction of the Most High God and His Mercy!

“And then:

“It has come to our knowledge that certain Jews among our subjects have made complaint again and again to their brethren dwelling in Europe, and to the foreign representatives at Tangier, that they cannot obtain justice for their complaints touching murders, robberies, and the like. They pretend that the governors show great indifference in procuring for them satisfaction from the persons who attack them, and that their grievances never reach our Sheriffian Majesty except through the medium of those persons (the Jews residing in Europe and the foreign representatives).

“Our Sheriffian will is that they shall obtain justice without the intercession of the powers or of the representatives, because they are our subjects and pay tribute unto us, having thereby the same rights as Mussulmans before us, and all abuses against them being forbidden by our religion.

“Wherefore, we command thee to hear the grievance of every Jew who may complain of not obtaining justice from a governor, and to lay it before us, whenever thou shalt find not the means of setting it right.

“We have sent orders in this wise to the governors of the cities, of the ports, and in the open country, to the end that they shall give knowledge thereof to the Jews, and at the same time we have warned them that if any one among them raises obstacles or prevents the complaint of a Jew coming even unto thee, we will punish him very sorely.

“We command thee to treat their business with all justice, and to hide from us nothing touching the doings of the governors toward them, for all men are equal before us in the matter of justice.

“22 Joumadi first, 1297.”

The President, in acknowledging this communication formally to the representative of Morocco, declares, in the name of all the plenipotentiaries, the lively satisfaction with which the conference receives the declarations which have just been made to it. The plenipotentiaries see, in the principle therein established of an appeal to the minister of foreign affairs, at once a proof of the sentiments of justice which animate His Sheriffian Majesty with regard to his Israelitish subjects, and an augury of the speedy accomplishment of the desires expressed by the conference.

* * * * * * *

The conference adjourns until Monday, the 28th of June.

The sitting ends at three o’clock.

Count SOLMS.

Count LUDOLF.

ED. ANSPACH.

A. CÁNOVAS del CASTILLO.

LUCIUS FAIRCHILD.

JAURÈS.

L. S. SACKVILLE WEST.

GREPPI.

MOHAMMED VARGAS.

M. de HELDEWIER.

Count de CASAL RIBEIRO.

H. AKERMAN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 39.]

Text of the Morocco Convention, as signed July 3, 1880.

His Excellency the President of the United States of America; His Majesty the Emperor of Germany, King of Prussia; His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary; His Majesty the King of the Belgians; His Majesty the King of Denmark; His Majesty the King of Spain; His Excellency the President of the French Republic;. Her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland; His Majesty the King of Italy; His Majesty the Sultan of Morocco; His Majesty the King of the Netherlands; His Majesty the King of Portugal and the Algarves; His Majesty the King of Sweden and Norway,

Having recognized the necessity of establishing, on fixed and uniform bases, the exercise of the right of protection in Morocco, and of settling certain questions connected therewith, have appointed as their plenipotentiaries at the conference assembled for that purpose at Madrid, to wit: His Excellency the President of the United States of America, General Lucius Fairchild, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of the United States near His Catholic Majesty;

His Majesty the Emperor of Germany, King of Prussia, Count Eberhardt de Solms-Sonnewalde, knight commander of the first class of his Order of the Red Eagle with oak leaves, knight of the Iron Cross, &c., &c., his envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary near His Catholic Majesty;

His Majesty the Emperor of Austria, King of Hungary, Count Emanuel Ludolf, his privy councillor in actual service, Grand Cross of the Imperial Order of Leopold, knight of the first class of the Order of the Iron Crown, &c., &c., his envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary near His Catholic Majesty;

His Majesty the King of the Belgians, Mr. Edward Anspach, officer of his Order of Leopold, &c., &c., his envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary near His Catholic Majesty;

His Majesty the King of Spain, Don Antonio Cánovas del Castillo, Knight of the Distinguished Order of the Golden Fleece, &c., &c., president of his council of ministers;

His Excellency the President of the French Republic, Vice-Admiral Jaurès, Senator, Knight Commander of the Legion of Honor, &c., &c., ambassabor of the French Republic near His Catholic Majesty;

Her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, the honorable Lionel Sackville Sackville West, her envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary, near His Catholic Majesty, who is likewise authorized to represent His Majesty the King of Denmark.

His Majesty the King of Italy, Count Joseph Greppi, grand officer of the Order of Saint Maurice and Saint Lazarus, of that of the Crown of Italy, &c., &c., his envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary near His Catholic Majesty;

His Majesty the Sultan of Morocco, the Taleb Sid Mohammed Vargas, his minister of foreign affairs and ambassador extraordinary;

His Majesty the King of the Netherlands, Jonkheer Maurice de Heldewier, commander of the Royal Order of the Lion of the Netherlands, Knight of the Order of the Oaken Crown of Luxemburg, &c., &c., his minister resident near His Catholic Majesty;

His Majesty the King of Portugal and the Algarves, Count de Casal Ribeiro, Peer of the Realm, Grand Cross of the Order of Christ, &c., &c., his envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary near His Catholic Majesty;

His Majesty the King of Sweden, arid Norway, Mr. Henry Åkerman, knight commander of the first class of the Order of Wasa, &c., &c., his minister resident near His Catholic Majesty;

Who, in virtue of their full powers recognized as being in good and due form, have agreed upon the following articles:

Article 1. The conditions under which protection may be conceded are those established in the British and Spanish treaties with the Government of Morocco, and in the convention made between that government, France, and other powers in 1863, with the modifications introduced by the present convention.

Art. 2. Foreign representatives at the head of a legation may select their interpreters and employés from among the subjects of Morocco, or others.

These protected persons shall be subject to no duty, impost, or tax whatever, other than those stipulated in articles 12 and 13.

Art. 3. Consuls, vice-consuls, or consular agents having charge of a post, and residing within the territory of the Sultan of Morocco, shall be allowed to select but one interpreter, one soldier, and two servants from among the subjects of the Sultan, unless they may require a, native secretary.

These protected persons shall, in like manner, be subject to no duty, impost, or tax whatever, other than those stipulated in articles 12 and 13.

Art. 4. If a representative shall appoint a subject of the Sultan to the office of consular agent in a town on the coast, such agent shall be respected and honored, as shall the members of his family occupying the same dwelling with him, and they, like him, shall be subject to no duty, impost, or tax whatever, other than those stipulated in articles 12 and 13; but he shall not have the right to protect any subjects of the Sultan other than the members of his own family. He may, however, for the exercise of his functions, have a protected soldier.

Officers in acting charge of vice-consulates, being subjects of the Sultan, shall, during the exercise of their functions, enjoy the same rights as consular agents who are subjects of the Sultan.

Art. 5. The Government of Morocco recognizes the right of ministers, chargés d’affaires, and other representatives, which is granted to them by treaties, to select the persons whom they employ, either in their own service or that of their governments unless such persons shall be Sheiks or other employés of the Government of Morocco such as soldiers of the line or of the cavalry, in addition to the Maghaznias in command of their guard. In like manner they shall not be permitted to employ any subject of Morocco who is under prosecution.

It is understood that civil suits commenced before protection shall be terminated before the courts which have instituted such proceedings. The execution of the sentence shall suffer no hindrance. Nevertheless, the local authorities of Morocco shall take care to communicate, without delay, the sentence pronounced, to the legation, consulate, or consular agency upon which the protected person is dependent.

As to those persons, formerly protected, who may have a suit which was commenced before protection was withdrawn from them, their case shall be tried by the court before which it was brought.

The right of protection shall not be exercised towards persons under prosecution for an offense or crime, before they have been tried by the authorities of the country, or before their sentence, if any has been pronounced, has been executed.

Art. 6. Protection shall extend to the family of .the person protected. His dwelling shall be respected.

It is understood that the family is to consist only of the wife, the children, and the minor relatives dwelling under the same roof.

Protection shall not be hereditary. A single exception, which was established by the convention of 1863, but which is not to create a precedent, shall be maintained in favor of the Benchimol family.

Nevertheless, if the Sultan of Morocco shall grant another exception, each of the contracting powers shall be entitled to claim a similar concession.

Art. 7. Foreign representatives shall inform the Sultan’s minister of foreign affairs, in writing, of any selection of an employé made by them.

They shall furnish annually to the said minister a list of the names of the persons protected by them or by their agents throughout the states of the Sultan of Morocco.

This list shall be transmitted to the local authorities, who shall consider as persons enjoying protection only those whose names are contained therein.

Art. 8. Consular officers shall transmit each year to the authorities of the district in which they reside a list, bearing their seal, of the persons protected by them. These authorities shall transmit it to the minister of foreign affairs, to the end that, if it be not conformable to the regulations, the representatives at Tangier may be informed of the fact.

A consular officer shall be required to give immediate information of any changes that may have taken place among the persons protected by his consulate.

Art. 9. Servants, farmers, and other native employés of native secretaries and interpreters shall not enjoy protection. The same shall be the case with Moorish employés or servants of foreign subjects.

Nevertheless, the local authorities shall not arrest an employé or servant of a native officer in the service of a legation or consulate, or of a foreign subject or protected person, without having notified the authority upon which he is dependent.

If a subject of Morocco in the service of foreign subject shall kill or wound any person or violate his domicile, he shall be arrested immediately; but the diplomatic or consular authority under which he is, shall be notified without delay.

Art. 10. Nothing is changed with regard to the situation of brokers, as established by the treaties and by the convention of 1863, except what is stipulated relative to taxes in the following articles.

Art. 11. The right to hold property is recognized in Morocco as belonging to all foreigners.

The purchase of property must take place with the previous consent of the government, and the title of such property shall be subject to the forms prescribed by the laws of the country.

Any question that may arise concerning this right shall be decided according to the same laws, with the privilege of appeal to the minister of foreign affairs stipulated in the treaties.

Art. 12. Foreigners and protected persons who are the owners or tenants of cultivated land, as well as brokers engaged in agricluture, shall pay the agricultural tax. They shall send to their consul, annually, an exact statement of what they possess, delivering into his hands the amount of the tax.

He who shall make a false statement shall be fined double the amount of the tax that he would regularly have been obliged to pay for the property not declared. In case of repeated offense this fine shall be doubled.

The nature, method, date, and apportionment of this tax shall form the subject of a special regulation between the representatives of the powers and the minister of foreign affairs of His Sheriffian Majesty.

Art. 13. Foreigners, protected persons, and brokers, owning beasts of burden, shall pay what is called the gate-tax. The apportionment and the manner of collecting this tax, which is paid alike by foreigners and natives, shall likewise form the subject of a special regulation between the representatives of the powers and the minister of foreign affairs of His Sheriffian Majesty.

The said tax shall not he increased without a new agreement with the representatives of the powers.

Art. 14. The mediation of interpreters, native secretaries, or soldiers of the different legations or consulates, when persons are concerned who are not under the protection of the legation or consulate, shall be permitted only when they are the bearers of a document signed by the head of a mission or by the consular authority.

Art. 15. Any subject of Morocco who has been naturalized in a foreign country, and who shall return to Morocco, shall, after having remained for a length of time equal to that which shall have been regularly necessary for him to obtain such naturalization, choose between entire submission to the laws of the empire and the obligation to quit Morocco, unless it shall be proved that his naturalization in a foreign country was obtained with the consent of the Government of Morocco.

Foreign naturalization, heretofore acquired by subjects of Morocco according to the rules established by the laws of each country, shall be continued to them as regards all its effects, without any restriction.

Art. 16. No irregular or unofficial protection shall be granted in future. The authorities of Morocco will recognize no protection, of any kind whatever, save such as is expressly provided for in this convention.

Nevertheless, the exercise of the customary right of protection shall be reserved for those cases only in which it may be desired to reward signal services rendered by a native of Morocco to a foreign power or for other altogether exceptional reasons. The minister of foreign affairs at Tangier shall be previously informed of the nature of the services and notified of the intention to reward them, in order that he may, if need be, present his observations thereon; yet the final decision shall be reserved for the government to which the service shall have been rendered. The number of persons thus protected shall not exceed twelve for each power, and this number is fixed as the maximum, unless the consent of the Sultan shall be obtained.

The status of persons who have obtained protection in virtue of the custom which is henceforth to be regulated by this stipulation, shall be, without limitation of the number of persons belonging to this class and now so protected, the same for themselves and their families as that which is established for other protected persons.

Art. 17. The right to the treatment of the most favored nation is recognized by Morocco as belonging to all the powers represented at the Madrid conference.

Art. 18. This convention shall be ratified. The ratifications shall be exchanged at Tangier, with as little delay as possible.

By exceptional consent of the high contracting parties, the stipulations of this convention shall take effect on the day on which it is signed at Madrid.

In faith whereof the respective plenipotentiaries have signed this convention and have thereunto affixed the seals of their arms.

Done at Madrid, in thirteen originals, this third day of July, one thousand eight hundred and eighty.
[l. s.] LUCIUS FAIRCHILD.
[l. s.] E. de SOLMS.
[l. s.] E. LUDOLF.
[l. s.] ANSPACH.
[l. s.] A. CÁNOVAS del CASTILLO.
[l. s.] JAURÉS.
[l. s.] L. S. SACKVILLE WEST.
[l. s.] J. GREPPI.
[l. s.] MOHAMMED VARGAS (in Arabic characters).
[l. s.] HELDEWIER.
[l. s.] CASAL RIBEIRO.
[l. s.] ÅKERMAN.

No. 580. Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts. No. 580.
Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, July 26, 1880. (Received August 14.) No. 54.]

Sir: Referring to your No. 29, instructing me to obtain certain information in regard to the transit through Spanish territory of criminals whose extradition has been conceded by a third power, I have now the honor to inclose herewith a copy and translation of a note and of its accompaniment upon the subject from the minister of state.

By this note and its accompaniment it will be seen on what ground Spain grants the transit through her territory of such criminals, and that she has no objection to applying the same provisions, on the ground of reciprocity, to analagous cases of American citizens.

I have, &c.,

LUCIUS FAIRCHILD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 54.—Translation.]

Mr. Elduayen to Mr. Fairchild

Ministry of State,
Palace, July 11, 1880.

Excellency:

I have received the note of your excellency of the 9th instant, in which you express the wish of your government, to obtain certain information in regard to the form in which Spain recognizes the right of transit through its territory of criminals whose extradition has been conceded by a third power:

In reply, I have the pleasure to transmit to your excellency a copy of the articles of existing conventions between Spain and Belgium, France, and the Netherlands, which refer to this point, and I hasten to inform your excellency that the Spanish Government has no objection to apply these provisions on the ground of reciprocity to analogous cases which may occur in regard to American citizens whose extradition has been conceded, and who may have to be conducted through Spanish territory.

I avail myself, &c., &c.,

J. ELDUAYEN.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 54.—Translation.]

belgium.

Convention for the reciprocal extradition of offenders between Spain and Belgium, signed at Brussels on the 17th of June, 1870.

Art. 15. It is formally stipulated that the extradition by way of transit through the respective territories of the contracting states shall be conceded on the simple presentation, in original or certified copy, of the sentence of procedure, as the case may be (in the preceding article 10), when asked by one of the contracting states in favor of a foreign state, or by a foreign state in favor of one of the said states, both bound to the state referred to by a treaty comprising the offense which was the cause of the demand for extradition, provided that it is not prohibited by articles 3 and 4 of the present convention.

france.

Convention of extradition concluded, between Spain and France, signed in Madrid on the 14th of December, 1877.

Art. 16. It is formally stipulated that extradition by way of transit through the territory of one of the contracting parties of an individual delivered to the other Will be conceded by the simple exhibition, in original or certified copy, of one of the sentences of the procedure as mentioned in article 5, provided that the act which serves as a basis for extradition is comprised in the treaty and does not refer to the exceptions made in articles 3 and 11.

netherlands.

Convention of extradition between Spain and the Netherlands, signed at the Hague on the 6th of March 1879.

Art. 15. The transit across the territory of one of the contracting powers of an individual delivered by a third power to the; other party, and who does not belong to the country of transit, will be conceded on the simple presentation, in original or certified copy, of one of the sentences of the procedure enumerated in article 7, provided the fact which serves as a foundation for extradition is comprised in the present convention and does not refer to the exceptions in articles 2 and 6, and that the transportation takes place, in regard to escort, with the aid of the officials of the country which has . authorized the transit through its territory. The expenses of transit will he borne by the country making the demand.

A true copy.

J. ELDUAYEN.

No. 581. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild. No. 581.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild.

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1880. No. 51.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 39, in relation to the Morocco conference, dated 3d ultimo, was duly received, and the convention, signed by you in company with the representatives of the other powers at that conference, has received careful examination in the light of the very full and intelligent summary you give of the proceedings which led up to that agreement. I am unable to perceive anything therein which can be regarded as militating in any way against the legitimate representative or commercial interests of the United States in the Empire of Morocco. On the contrary, the convention seems to me to be an eminently proper one for submission by the President to the Senate at the next session of that body, with a view to the stipulated ratification.

I may, however, express some regret that the result of the deliberations of the eminent men who represented at Madrid, in this matter, the most advanced spirit of civilization and freedom of the present day should not have shown it convenient or practicable to embody in the convention itself a provision recognizing the full and free liberty of conscience and of worship, if not throughout the empire, then to the persons for whom protection is in whole or in part stipulated.

With respect to the clause of the 18th, and concluding article of the convention, which provides that, “by the exceptional consent of the high contracting parties, the provisions of the present convention shall take effect from the day of its signature at Madrid,” I have to observe that while the constitutional provision prevents this government from according validity to such an international compact in advance of the consent of the Senate, yet in view of the exceptional circumstances under which the present convention was framed, and its limited operation within the territory of Morocco involving no apparent question of conflict with the domestic legislation of this country, I deem it entirely unlikely that any issue will arise, pending formal ratification, which would call for diplomatic intervention on the part of our Executive in a sense opposed to the provisions of the convention.

I am, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 582. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild. No. 582.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fairchild.

Department of State,
Washington, August 11, 1880. No. 52.]

Sir: I have to instruct you to bring to the earnest attention of His Majesty’s Government a series of occurrences on the high seas and in waters adjacent to the eastern part of the Island of Cuba of such exceptional gravity that this government cannot but attach the utmost importance thereto, inasmuch as the facts which have been brought to the attention of this Department, if substantiated, involve not only unwarrantable interference with the legitimate pursuit of peaceful commerce by American citizens, but also a grave affront to the honor and dignity of their flag.

Four separate instances of the visitation and search of American commercial vessels by armed cruisers of Spain have been reported in rapid succession, under circumstances which impress the mind of the President with the substantial truthfulness of the statements, made under circumstances which preclude collusion or willful deception on the part of those making them.

The facts of these occurrences, in the order in which they took place, as sworn to by the officers of the several vessels, are as follows: 1st. The schooner Ethel A. Merritt, one of the fleet belonging to the firm of Warner & Merritt, fruiterers of Philadelphia, sailed from Port Antonio, Jamaica, on the 29th May last, laden with fruit for Philadelphia. On the next day, May 30th, she was overhauled by a vessel of war under the Spanish flag, which fired a blank shot, upon which the Ethel A. Merritt displayed the United States flag and kept on her course. The cruiser then bore down upon her and fired a solid shot, which glanced and passed through her rigging. The master of the schooner, to save his owners’ property and the lives of his crew, then hove to and his vessel was boarded by an armed officer, in Spanish uniform, who searched her, and, finding nothing on board save legitimate cargo, permitted her to proceed on her course. The affidavits of the master and first mate of the schooner fix her distance from the nearest point of the Island of Cuba at the time she was boarded as between six and seven nautical miles. The name of the boarding cruiser was not ascertained at the time, and through the mistaken impression of one of the schooner’s crew, who read the name on her stern indistinctly, she was supposed to be called the Nuncio or Nunico.

2d. The schooner Eunice P. Newcomb, of Wellfleet, Mass., bound from Port Antonio, Jamaica, to Boston, with a cargo of bananas and cocoanuts, on or about the 18th of June last, was in like manner overhauled by a gunboat under the Spanish flag, which fired a blank shot across her bow. The Eunice P. Newcomb showed the United States flag and kept on her course, being then on the high seas, seven or eight nautical miles distant from the coast of Cuba. The Spanish cruiser next fired a solid shot across the schooners stern, when the latter hove to and was boarded by three men from the gunboat, who searched the vessel and left her to proceed on her course. In this case, also, the name of the boarding cruiser was not reported to the Department.

3d. The schooner George Washington, of Boothbay, Me., cleared from Baltimore, Md., on the 22d of June last, in ballast, for Manchioneal, in Jamaica, for a cargo of fruit. On the 5th of July, when about fifteen miles distant from Cape Maysi, on the eastern extremity of the Island of Cuba, she sighted a steamer some ten miles distant. The steamer altered her course and bore down upon the schooner, which hoisted the United States flag. The steamer overtook the schooner, not displaying the Spanish flag until abreast Of her, steamed ahead with guns manned and lowered a boat which put off to the George Washington. The master of the latter hove to, and the boat, containing two officers and two men, heavily armed, Rau alongside. The Spanish officers and coxswain went on board, examined the schooner’s papers, searched her hold and ship’s stores, inspected all her crew, and left her without explanation. The search took place about fifteen miles southeasterly of Cape Maysi. The name of the vessel was in this instance ‘also, not ascertained, but the concluding letters on her stern, all that could be read as she lay, are said to have been “gary,” which leads the Department to conjecture that she may have been the Blasco de Garay, the gunboat concerned the following day, in the same neighborhood, in the fourth and last of the cases of visitation and search thus far reported to this government.

4th. The schooner Hattie Haskell, of New York, sailed from that city on the 18th of June last, with a general cargo for the San Bias coast in the Colombian state of Panama: On the 6th of July she sighted the east coast of Cuba, off Cape Maysi. At two o’clock that day she sighted a side-wheel steamer, which gave chase, and, when near, set the Spanish flag, whereat the Hattie Haskell showed the American colors. At six o’clock the gunboat, which proved to be the Blasco de Garay, ordered the schooner to heave to, and when a cable’s length distant, sent a boat off to her with an armed crew, her guns being meanwhile manned and crew mustered for action. The boat carried two officers, who examined the schooner’s papers and searched her hold, after which she was permitted to proceed. This visit and search occurred about 32 miles southwesterly from Cape Maysi, as verified by the affidavits of the master, mate, and all the crew of the Hattie Haskell before the United States court at Aspinwall.

As may naturally be supposed, these occurrences gave this government much concern, and immediate steps were taken to ascertain the truth of the facts stated. The prompt denial of the possibility of such an event taking place, which was spontaneously made public through the press by the Cuban authorities, coupled with the circumstance of no vessel bearing a name even remotely like that of Nuncio or Nunico being in the Spanish service, gave rise at first to the conjecture that the search of the Ethel A. Merritt might have been the work of some piratical craft, and the Tennessee, a war vessel of the United States, was promptly dispatched to Cuban waters to make an investigation.

Your own dispatch of the 16th of June (No. 33) shows how quick the Spanish ministry was to disavow the act, then only known to it through the press; and how earnest was the assurance given that if the firing had taken place as reported, it was done contrary to the express orders and wish of the Spanish Government. It was, however, soon learned by the rear admiral commanding the Tennessee that the firing upon, boarding, and search of the Ethel A. Merritt and Eunice P. Newcomb was admitted by the Spanish authorities at Santiago de Cuba, the explanation given by them being that the guarda costas are not permitted to cruise at a greater distance than six miles from the Cuban shore; that the schooners when boarded by officers of the gunboat Canto were at a distance not greater than from two to three miles from the south coast of Cuba, and that the occurrences were immediately reported through the captain of the port of Santiago de Cuba to the Spanish admiral at Havana.

The reported visitation and search of the George Washington and Hattie Haskell has not as yet been in like manner admitted, but from the verification of the incidents with respect to the two previous searches, there can be little doubt that the occurrences in their cases will be likewise found to be true, and that the war vessels of Spain off the coast of Cuba have in at least four instances in rapid succession exercised the right of visitation and search upon vessels of the United States flying the American flag, and passing in the pursuit of lawful trade through the commercial highway of nations which lies to the eastward of the island of Cuba. This government does not lose sight of the ex-parte declarations made by the Spanish local authorities at Santiago de Cuba, that the two acts thus far verified took place within the three-mile limit. This point is in dispute, and evidence as trustworthy as proof can well be in such cases is adduced to show that the vessels were at the time from six to eight miles distant from the shore. In the cases of the two remaining searches the evidence fixes the distance from shore far outside of the limits mentioned, and in that of the Hattie Haskell, especially, at over twenty miles from the Cuban coast.

The question does not appear to this government to be one to be decided alone by the geographical position of the vessels, but by the higher considerations involved in this unwonted exercise of a right of search in time of peace, and to a greater extent than the existing treaty of 1795, between the two nations, in its eighteenth article, permits it to be exercised even in time of recognized public war, that article permitting visitation only, with inspection of the vessel’s sea-letters, and not search. These interferences with our legitimate commerce do not even take the form of a revenue formality performed by the revenue vessels of Spain, but carry in their methods most unequivocal features of belligerent searches made by the war vessels of Spain. From the unhappy history of the events of the past ten years in and about the waters of the Antilles, it is only too cogently to be inferred that these proceedings of Spanish war vessels assume a right thus to arrest our peaceful commerce under motives not of revenue inspection, but of warlike defense. In this aspect of the case it may well be doubted whether, under color of revenue investigation to intercept smuggling or other frauds, jurisdictional power within the limit of the recognized maritime league could be invoked in time of peace to justify the interference of Spanish cruisers with the lawful commerce of nations passing along a public maritime highway, in a regular course of navigation which brings them near the Cuban coast, though not bound to its ports. It is not to be supposed that the world’s commerce is to be impeded, and the ships of foreign and friendly nations forced to seek an unwonted channel of navigation; that they are to be driven out of their proper course into adverse winds and currents to avoid the offensive exercise of a right which is allowed only to the exigencies of a state of war, and to avert the imminent risk of armed attack and of discourtesy to the flag they bear. And it needs no argument to show that the exercise of any such asserted right upon commercial vessels, on the high seas, in time of peace, is inconsistent with the maintenance of even the most ordinary semblance of friendly relations between the nation which thus conducts itself and that whose merchant vessels are exposed to systematic detention and search by armed force.

I have made use of the terms “systematic detention and search” advisedly, for although I am loath to believe that the Government of His Majesty has determined upon the adoption of a course towards the vessels of the United States, in or near the jurisdictional waters of Spain, which can only imply a standing menace to the integrity and honor of my country and its flag, yet the occurrence in quick succession of four such grave acts of offensive search of our peaceful traders after so long an interval of repose since this question was last raised in the case of the American whalers on the southern coast of Cuba, cannot but make me apprehensive that the Government of Spain, or the superior authority of Cuba, in pursuance of the discretionary power it is understood to possess, may have taken up a new line of action, and one wholly inconsistent with those relations between the two countries which both their reciprocal interests and duties require should be maintained unbroken.

It is my profound hope that such apprehensions on my part may be found to be baseless. But in view of the length of time which has elapsed since the first of these occurrences was known to the public here and in Spain, of the anxiety which the minister of state expressed to you in the matter of the telegraphic inquiries made by him of the Cuban authorities, and of the Immediate report of the early cases to the admiral at Havana, which is said to have been made, I cannot but express my surprise and regret that the Spanish Government should not of itself have hastened to make some explanation of the incidents calculated to allay the anxiety of a friendly power, whose just susceptibilities as respects the safety of its commerce and the honor of its flag are so well known to the Spanish Government.

I do not undertake, now, either a full exposition of the doctrine of this government on the subject of the maritime jurisdiction of states over circumjacent waters, nor a particular inquiry as to the diverse views, in some sense, which have been brought forward, heretofore, in the discussion between Spain and the United States on the subject of jurisdiction over Cuban waters.

I desire, however, that the position heretofore more than once distinctly taken by this government, in its diplomatic correspondence with Spain, shall be understood by you and firmly adhered to in any intercourse you may have in the pending situation with the Spanish minister of foreign affairs. This government never has recognized and never will recognize any pretense or exercise of sovereignty on the part of Spain beyond the belt of a league from the Cuban coast over the commerce of this country in time of peace. This rule of the law of nations we consider too firmly established to be drawn into debate, and any dominion over the sea outside of this limit will be resisted with the same firmness as if such dominion were asserted in mid-ocean.

The revenue regulations of a country framed and adopted under the motive and to the end of protecting trade with its ports against smuggling and other frauds which operate upon vessels bound to such ports have, without due consideration, been allowed to play a part in the discussions between Spain and the United States on the extent of maritime dominion accorded by the law of nations which does not belong to them. In this light are to be regarded the royal decrees which it has been claimed by the Spanish Government had for more than a hundred years established two leagues as the measure of maritime jurisdiction, asserted and exercised by the Spanish crown, both in peninsular and colonial waters. Of this character, obviously, are the regulations of our revenue system in force since 1799, which not only allow but enjoin visitation of vessels bound to our ports within four leagues from land, which, in her diplomatic correspondence with this government, Spain has much insisted on as equivalent to its own dominion as asserted off its coasts, except that our authority was exerted at twice the distance from land.

But the distinction between dominion over the sea, carrying a right of visit and search of all vessels found within such dominion, and fiscal or revenue regulations of commerce, vessels and cargoes engaged in trade as allowed with our ports to a reasonable range of approach to such ports, needs only to be pointed out to be fully appreciated. Every nation has full jurisdiction of commerce with itself, until by treaty stipulations it has parted with some portion of this full control. In this jurisdiction is easily included a requirement that vessels seeking our ports, in trade, shall he subject to such visitation and inspection as the exigencies of our revenue may demand, in the judgment of this government, for the protection of the revenues and the adequate administration of the customs service. This is not dominion over the sea where these vessels are visited, but dominion over this commerce with us, its vehicles and cargoes, even while at sea. It carries no assertion of dominion, territorial and in invitum, but over voluntary trade in progress and by its own election, submissive to our regulations of it, even in its approaches to our coasts and while still outside of our territorial dominion.

You will observe, therefore, that the American vessels which have been interfered with thus unwarrantably were not engaged in trade with Cuba, and were in no degree subject to any surveillance or visitation of revenue regulation. The acts complained of, if, indeed, as our proofs seem to make clear, without the league accorded as territorial by the law of nations, have no support whatever from the principle of commercial regulation which I have explained. Spain had no jurisdiction over the waters in which our vessels were found, no jurisdiction over the trade in which they were engaged; and no warrant under the law of nations, to which alone these vessels in this commerce were subject, can be found for their arrest by the Spanish gunboats.

As the offense against the rights of our commerce and the freedom of our flag, which we complain of in those four instances, is substantive, it is not necessary for me now to insist upon the form and manner of these visitations and searches as elements or aggravations of this offense. It cannot, however, escape notice that each transaction has unequivocal features of the exercise of direct sovereignty, and by mere force, as if by territorial and armed dominion over the sea which was the scene of the transactions. These were gunboats, a part of the naval power of Spain, under the threat of their armaments and by the presence of adequate armed force boarding these vessels, compelling submission; their action was neither more nor less than such as it would have been under a belligerent right on the high seas in time of war.

In manner and form, then, as well as in substance, the power to which our commerce was obliged to succumb was not of commercial regulation or revenue inspection, or by any of the instruments employed in preventive or protective service with which commerce is familiar.

Unless some face shall be put upon these disturbances of our peaceful and honest commerce in one of the most important thoroughfares which I cannot anticipate, this government will look to Spain for a prompt and ready apology for their occurrence, a distinct assurance against their repetition, and such an indemnity to the owners of those several vessels as will satisfy them for the past and guarantee our commerce against renewed interruption by engaging the interest of Spain in restraint of rash or ignorant infractions, by subordinate agents ,of its power, of our rights upon the seas.

You may communicate these views to Señor Elduayen, by reading this dispatch to him and leaving with him a copy.

I am sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 583. Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts. No. 583.
Mr. Fairchild to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, September 4, 1880. (Received September 22.) No. 68.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 51, dated August 11, 1880.

I am especially pleased to know that you so fully approve of the convention regarding affairs in Morocco. Being thoroughly convinced, land in this feeling I am supported by the opinion of every member of the late conference, that that solution of the questions which have for so many years led to much disagreement between the Government of Morocco and the foreign representatives at Tangier is the very best now attainable, and comes so near being entirely just to all parties concerned, I am anxious to see the convention ratified by every nation represented in the conference. There seems to be no doubt that such ratification will be given at an early day.

I note you express regret that it was not found “convenient or practicable to embody in the convention itself a provision recognizing the full and free liberty of conscience and worship, if not throughout the empire, then to the persons for whom protection is in whole or in part stipulated.”

I felt the same regret and would have gladly voted for such a provision, as would, I believe, nearly every member of the conference, had it been a question which could have properly been brought before it in that shape.

Knowing so well the opinions of my government and of the people of the United States in favor of the most complete religious liberty, and being in entire accord with those opinions, I should not have hesitated a moment to have voted for the strongest and most far-reaching provision on the subject; but during the many informal discussions of the question it was found that most of the plenipotentiaries did not feel authorized to include it in a formal convention, as the subject was not mentioned in the document inviting the conference, and they had no instructions to enter upon its discussion with that view. Sid Mohammed Vargas, the representative of Morocco, was not authorized to discuss the question at all, but was confined to the limits of presenting to the conference the letter of the Sultan on the subject and of receiving the address of the plenipotentiaries to His Sheriffian Majesty; therefore any attempt to embody such a provision in the convention would have been futile, as there was not the slightest possibility of an unanimous agreement thereto.

The plenipotentiaries could and did readily agree upon the terms of the address to the Sultan, and it is hoped that that address, expressing as it does the sentiment of the civilized world, and proceeding with some color of official authority from the representatives of twelve of the principal nations, will be heeded and have some effect upon the mind of His Sheriffian Majesty and tend to hasten the day we all desire to see, when every person in Morocco can, without fear, worship God according to the dictates of his own conscience.

It is believed by those familiar with the internal affairs of Morocco that it would not be possible, at present at least, for the Sultan to enforce a decree granting religious liberty, even if he were so disposed; that the feeling among his Mohammedan subjects of contempt and hatred of all who follow another religion is so deeply rooted that any attempt to relieve the non-Mohammedans of all their disabilities would at once cause a civil war, and that the only way to bring about religious toleration is to steadily, and in a friendly manner, press upon the attention of the Moorish Government and people the sentiments expressed in the address, thus advancing in that direction.

I beg to express the hope also that the renewed interest awakened on this subject by its present discussion may be a step in the direction of the repeal of all laws and decrees which now in even the smallest degree stand in the way of free, public, unmolested, unintimidated worship of God by all men everywhere, in such manner as may seem to them right, every religion standing on an equality before human laws, without special privileges to any church, sect, or profession.

I fear, sir, that neither you nor I will live to see that happy day; nevertheless, I think we may be permitted to indulge in the it will dawn at some future time.

I have, &c.,

LUCIUS FAIRCHILD.

No. 584. Mr. Reed to Mr. Evarts. No. 584.
Mr. Reed to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, September 23, 1880. (Received October 13.) No. 31.]

Sir: Referring to General Fairchild’s No. 74, I have now the honor to inclose herewith a copy and translation of a note from the minister of state, acknowledging the receipt of a copy of your instruction No. 52, and stating that its contents had been made known to the Government of His .Majesty, which had given orders for an immediate investigation of the events therein complained of. I also inclose a copy of my reply, dated the 21st instant.

I have, &c.,

DWIGHT T. REED.

[Appendix B to No. 31.—Translation.]

Mr. Elduayen to Mr. Reed.

Ministry of State, Palace, April 17, 1880.

Excellency:

I have made known to the Government of His Majesty the dispatch directed to your excellency, under date of the 14th August last, by the Secretary of State of the United States, a copy of which your excellency was good enough to leave with me.

The events which that document denounces have not failed to call the most serious attention of the Government of His Majesty, which has always endeavored, and of which it has given repeated proofs, as your excellency is already aware, to do justice to the reclamations of that of the United States, so soon as it has been demonstrated that they are reasonable and well founded.

It has been ordered, consequently, to proceed without delay to institute through the ministries of marine and ultramar the opportune investigation in respect to the acts which are attributed to the gunboats of the royal navy that cruise in the waters of the island of Cuba, and it is hoped that the result of this investigation, clearing up the facts and giving to each the importance which really belongs to them, will carry to the mind of the Government of the United S bates the conviction of the friendly sentiments which that of His Majesty the King cherishes for a nation with which Spain maintains such cordial and sincere relations.

I avail myself, &e.

J. ELDUAYEN.

[Appendix C to No. 31.]

Mr. Heed to Mr. Elduayen.

Legation of the United States,
Madrid, September 21, 1880.

Excellency: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s note of the 17th instant, in which you were good enough to inform the legation that you had made known to the Government of His Catholic Majesty the dispatch directed to General Fairchild by the Secretary of State of the United States, a copy of which was left with you on the 13th instant, relating to the firing upon, detention, and search of certain American vessels by Spanish gunboats off the coast of the island of Cuba.

Although the assurance given by your excellency to General Fairchild in your late interview with him, that the Government of His Majesty the King would at once proceed to investigate the facts of the events complained of in the dispatch of the Secretary of State, with a view to making prompt and proper reparation, has already been communicated to Washington, I shall take great pleasure in at once transmitting to my government a copy of your excellency’s note to which this is a reply, and in which your excellency reiterates those assurances.

I need hardly assure your excellency that the sentiments of cordial friendship therein expressed by the Government of His Catholic Majesty are most cordially and heartily reciprocated by that of the United States.

I gladly avail myself of this occasion, &c.

DWIGHT T. REED.

Correspondence with the Spanish Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the Spanish Legation in Washington.

[585] . Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Spain at Washington, Washington, April 26, 1880.

[586] . Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Spain at Washington, Washington, April 26, 1880.

[587] . Mr. Evarts to Señor Mendez de Vigo.

Department of State, Washington, May 4, 1880.

[588] . Mr. Hay to Señor Mendez de Vigo.

Department of State, Washington, July 13, 1880.

No. 585. Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts. No. 585.
Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Spain at Washington,
Washington, April 26, 1880.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of His Catholic Majesty, has the honor, in obedience to instructions received from his government, to transmit to the honorable Secretary of State of the United States a copy of a communication which he has just received from the minister of state, explaining the object and fixing the date of a conference which is to be held at Madrid in the month of May next, to the end that if the Government of the United States approves the proposition contained in the accompanying communication, it may be pleased so to inform the undersigned, and also to state whom it will be pleased, in that case, to appoint as its representative at that conference.

The undersigned avails himself, &c.

FELIPE MENDEZ de VIGO.

[Inclosure in Señor Mendez de Vigo’s note of April 26, 1880.]

The Minister of State to the Minister Plenipotentiary of His Majesty at Washington

Madrid, April 10, 1880.

Most Excellent Sir: Your excellency was duly informed of the steps taken by the representative of Her Britannic Majesty at this court, who had been properly authorized by his government, with a view to reaching an understanding with the other governments of Europe and America with regard to the right of protection exercised by foreign legations and consulates in the Empire of Morocco.

In its desire to strengthen the authority of the Sultan, which it considers daily more necessary to do, the London cabinet thought that nothing would so much conduce to the accomplishment of this purpose as would the settlement of this question: consequently, and in view of the ill success that had attended the conferences held at Tangier in relation to this matter by the diplomatic and consular officers accredited there, it proposed, through its representative, to the Duke of Tetuan, to inaugurate special negotiations for this purpose between the powers interested, adding that Madrid appeared to be the most suitable place for the meeting of the negotiators.

Being influenced by these considerations, the Government of the King, as your excellency is aware, did not hesitate to espouse the views of Her Britannic Majesty, with the object of endeavoring to have the question of protection and those intimately connected with it treated in a special manner, outside the territory of Morocco, stating at the same time that Spain would be very happy to receive at this court the commissioners who should be designated for this purpose by the various powers.

Since that time the minister of Her Britannic Majesty at this court, and the representatives of Spain in foreign countries have reported to the Government of the King that the proposition of the London cabinet has been favorably received by the powers to which they are accredited; the undersigned minister consequently thinks that the proper time has arrived for him directly to address the governments interested, that they may, if they think proper, designate persons to represent them at the proposed conference.

The foregoing is sufficient to enable the Government of the United States to understand the object and purview of the deliberations of said conference; still, I think it proper for me to state, in this dispatch, an important consideration which has been suggested to the Government of His Majesty by the desire that the result may be as advantageous as is hoped by all.

The negotiations hitherto carried on at Tangier having been unsuccessful, it seems proper that none of the representatives now residing in Morocco should be present at the new conference. On this subject the London cabinet is perfectly in accord with His Majesty’s Government. What is now needed is, in the opinion of both governments, that the persons charged with the settlement of these questions should be free from all prejudices derived from their individual impressions, with a view to the more ready obtainment of results favorable to the common interest, and in accordance with the spirit and letter of the treaties existing between the Emperor of Morocco and the Christian powers.

His Majesty’s Government has also considered, as was natural, the best time for holding the conference, and considering the season and the general utility that would result from the speedy adoption of the desired arrangement, it proposes that the meeting take place on the 15th day of May next.

By royal order I inform your excellency for the purposes aforesaid. May God guard your excellency many years.

J. ELDUAYEN.

No. 586. Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts. No. 586.
Señor Mendez de Vigo to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Spain at Washington,
Washington, April 26, 1880.

The undersigned, envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary of His Catholic Majesty, referring to the conference which he had the pleasure to have this morning with Mr. John Hay, has the honor herewith to transmit to the honorable Secretary of State of the United States a copy of a royal order, bearing date of the 27th of May last, which he has just received from his government, with instructions to communicate it to the Washington cabinet.

The undersigned begs the Hon. William M. Evarts, if, as he confidently hopes, the President shares the view of the Spanish Government, whose sole object is the avoidance of those conflicts of jurisdiction which frequently occur in the case of collisions of vessels carrying different flags, to be pleased so to inform the undersigned, who gladly avails himself of this occasion once more to reiterate to him the assurances of his very high consideration.

FELIPE MENDEZ de VIGO.

[Inclosure.]

The minister of state to the minister plenipotentiary of His Catholic Majesty at Washington

Madrid, March 27, 1880.

Most Excellent Sir: The conflicts of jurisdiction in the decision of cases of injury done to vessels by collisions on the high seas has for a long time called for the adoption of an international arrangement by maritime nations, and it might be well, perhaps, to extend this arrangement to the few nations that are not maritime, so far as cargoes are concerned.

The same is the case with collisions in waters under the jurisdiction of any country; for, although all ought to submit to the jurisdiction of that country, they often refuse to do so.

This necessity is further shown by various publicists, who declare the need of a .general arrangement on this as on many other points of international law; and our ministry of marine, by a royal order of the 4th instant, takes the initiative in a way which does it honor, proposing that the maritime powers of Europe and America be invited to a congress, of delegates from them all, at such place as may be designated, for the purpose of agreeing, if possible, upon some common legislation as regards proceedings for the settlement of these disasters at sea (which are so frequent among vessels carrying different flags), including cases occurring both on the high seas and in the territorial waters of the powers represented.

By royal order, &c.

J. ELDUAYEN.

A correct copy.

No. 587. Mr. Evarts to Señor Mendez de Vigo. No. 587.
Mr. Evarts to Señor Mendez de Vigo.

Department of State,
Washington, May 4, 1880.

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the note which you were pleased to address to me on the 26th ultimo, in obedience to the instructions of your government, informing that of the United States of the object and probable date of a conference which is to be held at Madrid in the course of the present month, at which the representatives of the several powers holding relations with Morocco are invited to assist, for the purpose of discussing the question of the proper protection and personal security to be extended in that empire to the citizens, subjects, and merchants of foreign countries.

The objects to be brought before the proposed conference have for some time had the attention of this government, and, prior to the invitation contained in your note, it had already, upon the verbal suggestion of the minister of state of Spain to the chargé d’affaires ad interim of the United States, of which telegraphic information was received, designated the United States minister at Madrid as its representative in that conference, to meet and confer with other representatives in like manner designated by their respective governments, and to come to such understanding as might seem proper to be reached in the premises, subject, so far as this government is concerned, to its ratification or approval.

Accept, sir, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 588. Mr. Hay to Señor Mendez de Vigo. No. 588.
Mr. Hay to Señor Mendez de Vigo.

Department of State,
Washington, July 13, 1880.

Sir: Referring to your note of the 26th of April last, conveying information of a proposition of His Majesty’s government for a congress of maritime powers to discuss legislation for the international settlement of damages arising from collisions at sea, I have the honor to state that the Department is in receipt of a communication on the subject of your note, from the Secretary of the Treasury. That officer states it to be the understanding of his Department that the present mode of procedure in the case of collisions, which is the result of long experience, is not considered objectionable by persons engaged in maritime affairs, who, at the same time, it is believed, would deprecate a change from established precedents without strenuous reasons.

The Government of the United States, however, appreciates the good motives that have actuated the proposition for a Congress of this character, and is not prepared to pass judgment in advance upon the advantages or disadvantages which might result from the assembling of such a body. Should it appear from the communications on the subject which may be received from the various maritime powers that there exists a general disposition to accede to the proposition of which your note has made the Department aware, the Government of the United States would be glad to take the subject into further consideration.

Accept, sir, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

Sweden and NorwaySweden and Norway

[589] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, March 9, 1880. (Received March 27.)

[590] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Stevens.

Department of State, Washington, March 29, 1880.

[591] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, April 20, 1880. (Received May 7.)

[592] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, April 27, 1880. (Received May 17.)

[593] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, June 16, 1880. (Received July 3.)

[594] . Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation, Stockholm, July 26, 1880. (Received August 16.)

Contents

Correspondence with the Swedish Legation in Washington. (Documents 595-596)

No. 589. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. No. 589.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, March 9, 1880. (Received March 27.) No. 67.]

Sir: In my dispatch 55,* of September 23, 1879, relative to the dispatch of the Secretary of State touching the emigration of Mormon disciples from Sweden and Norway, I gave the result of my interview with the minister of foreign affairs, the favorable indications given as to the views and wishes of the Swedish and Norwegian Government on the subject.

Recently I have received a note from the minister of foreign affairs, a copy of which is inclosed under the date of February 24, supplementing and confirming the assurances given in September last as stated in my communication 55.

* * * * * * *

In this regard, therefore, the interests of these kingdoms and those of the United States are entirely in accord. The practical difficulties in the way of the entire carrying out of the views and policies of the two governments are manifest. There can be little doubt that the circular of the Secretary of State, and the occasion which its receipt has furnished this government for some action on the subject to which it relates, will have beneficial results among the Swedish and Norwegian populations liable to fall victims to Mormon propagandism.

I have, &c.,

JOHN L. STEVENS.

[Inclosure in No. 67.]

Mr. Björnstjerna to Mr. Stevens

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Stockholm, February 24, 1880.

Mr. Minister: By a communication dated September 23, 1879, you were pleased to have recourse to my intermediation, with the view of obtaining that the government of the King should take measures to prevent the agents of Mormonism from disseminating the doctrines of that sect among the population of the united kingdoms, and to oppose the departure of their proselytes for the United States.

After your demand, I addressed the competent authorities of the united kingdoms, praying them to guard, by such means as they should judge proper, the populations against the fallacious promises of the Mormon agents, and to inform them of the severe penalties to which they would expose themselves according to the American laws if they should attempt to put in practice the doctrines of Mormonism in the United States. I hope that these measures, being all that are compatible with our legislation, will prevent the extension of the doctrines putting in practice of which is contrary to the principles admitted by civilized states.

Be pleased, &c.,

O. M. BJÖRNSTJERNA.

* Vide volume of Foreign Relations for 1879, page 964.

No. 590. Mr. Hay to Mr. Stevens. No. 590.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Stevens.

Department of State,
Washington, March 29, 1880. No. 71.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your No. 67, transmitting the result of your presentation to His Majesty’s Government of the considerations contained in the circular instruction of August last, touching the prevention of an emigration to this country from foreign parts of persons intending to join the Mormon community in Utah, and in reply to request that you will express to His Majesty’s Government the appreciation of the Government of the United States of the action taken by it in the direction referred to.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 591. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. No. 591.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, April 20, 1880. (Received May 7.) No. 70.]

Sir: Of late the political and court circles of the Swedish capital, usually so even and placid, have been somewhat moved by a change of ministry and by the circumstances and incidents which led to this result. For some time, in well-informed circles, such a change has not been thought improbable. Early in the session of the Diet, which opened in January, there were strong indications that, at least in the lower house, the government would not command a majority on a measure to which the ministry attachéd much importance, and the failure of which Barou De Geer, the premier, and his leading associates, were to consider as sufficient reason for sending to the King their resignations. This measure was the army bill, which provides for the extension of the period of military enrollment to include those from twenty-one to thirty years, instead of from twenty-one to twenty-five, as under existing law.

Some ten days since this measure was defeated in the lower house by a decisive vote. Soon alter the ministers handed their resignations to His Majesty. Of course there are some other reasons than the failure of the army bill for the promptness with which the ministry arrived at this determination. Its leading members had held their positions for a somewhat lengthy period, and probably were not reluctant to lay off the harness. What is termed the “Peasant’s party” for several sessions of the Diet has resisted some of the appropriations for military and naval purposes which the government has deemed necessary. The party of opposition has gained strength of late, its force being largely from the rural sections of the country, having been augmented and vitalized by the desire to modify the existing taxation, wishing to impose more upon the cities and large towns, which have of late years, as in most other countries, increased in wealth and population more rapidly than the country districts. The president of the second chamber, Count Aroid Posse, being deemed the leader of the “opposition,” the King called on him to form a ministry.

After several days of deliberation a new cabinet was organized and announced on the 17th instant, composed as follows: Aroid R. F. Posse, minister of state and provisionally of foreign affairs; H. Forssell, of finance; C. G. Molmström, of public w:orship and education; N. H. V. von Steyern, of justice; C. G. von Otter, of the navy; O. F. Taube, of war; F. L. S. Hederstjerna, of the interior; and C. G. Hammorskjöld, minister without department, but taking part in cabinet deliberations. It is rumored that Baron D. A. G. Bildt, now minister plenipotentiary at Berlin, and father of the Swedish secretary of legation at Washington, will take the department of foreign affairs as soon as the formalities of his recall can be passed through.

None of the new ministry belonged to its predecessor, except Forssell and Molmström, who hold the same positions as before; Count Posse, the minister of state, is a lawyer by profession and practice; is acquainted with public affairs, and has strong qualities, though he has never before occupied a seat in the cabinet.

Baron Bildt has had extensive acquaintance with foreign affairs; is regarded as well qualified for the position he isto assume. Forssell has the confidence of the Diet and the financial public as an efficient officer, and the other members of the new ministry are believed to have the strength and characteristics fitted for the places to which they are called.

The retiring ministry retain the respect of the country in a marked degree. Baron Louis De Geer, chief of the old cabinet, has been a minister nearly twenty years in all, and is regarded as the foremost statesman of the country. He is understood to be in a large degree the author of the present constitution of Sweden, which was adopted in 1866, audit was very much owing to his good management and the public confidence in his character that so important a change in the fundamental law went into successful operation. A man of great simplicity and modesty, as well as of marked integrity and firmness, lie still commands the esteem of the public, even from those who differ from him as to his policy and measures. I think he does not regret the opportunity to honorably get rid of administrative responsibility.

General Björnstjerna, who retired from the department of foreign affairs, has occupied the place since 1872, to the great satisfaction of the foreign legation in Stockholm, and to the credit of his government. He was formerly minister to Russia, and it is believed that he will be sent as embassador to Berlin, when Baron Bildt assumes the duties of the department of foreign affairs of Sweden and Norway.

I have, &c.,

JOHN L. STEVENS.

No. 592. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. No. 592.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, April 27, 1880. (Received May 17.) No. 71.]

Sir: Perhaps it will not be deemed by the Secretary of State unfitting that I should communicate a condensed account of the reception given by the Swedish Government and people to Professor Nordenskjöld on his arrival in the Vega at Stockholm, the 24th. Having had distinguished honors paid him at Naples, Rome, Paris, London, and Copenhagen, the Swedes did not mean to be eclipsed in their public attestations of regard for their fellow-citizen who had won such distinguished renown by his scientific studies and exploits as a daring and sagacious navigator, whom they regard with great esteem and pride. The preparations to receive him were extensive and elaborate, and in the sequel highly successful. The honors paid him in this regard were more than equal those given any monarch that ever visited the capital. An elaborate bridge was constructed from the quay over a broad area and a principal business street to the royal palace, at midway of which was an “arch of triumph” in a befitting style of architecture. The landing from the Vega was at the foot of the broad steps leading from the water’s edge to the bridge, through the triumphal arch, to the threshold of the palace, where the hero of the day was received by the King in person, attended by his highest officials.

A fleet of 150 steamers and steam launches went out some 30 miles to meet and escort him as his vessel came in from the Baltic, and approaching the city for the distance of 10 miles there was a continuous chain of fire-works and illuminations, it being evening. The chief buildings of the city were brilliantly illuminated and the long succession of fire-works was surpassingly fine. More than 100,000 persons were probably out to witness the display and to share in the common respect to the successful navigator and discoverer. All classes and professions seem to take equal interest in the brilliant tokens awarded him. For magnificence and completeness of scenic effect the display was never equaled in Stockholm.

On the following evening, .the 25th, the King gave a dinner to his honor in the chief hall of the palace, at which 160 persons were at the table, made up of the members of the foreign legations, chief government officials, members of the scientific bodies, and leading men of business. During the present week there is a continuous round of feasts and ovations to Nordenskjöld and Palander, by the scientific, commercial, and other associations. The King takes a special and indefatigable personal interest in these ovations. He advanced liberally of his private funds towards fitting out the Vega expedition, the remainder of the expense being paid by Mr. Oscar Dixon, of Gottenborg, a wealthy Swedish merchant, whose father was a native of Scotland. This is the eighth expedition of a similar character to which Mr. Dixon has been the larger financial contributor, and the ninth in which Nordenskjöld has been engaged, and he is now only forty-eight years of age. Like most men of signal merit, he is very plain and unpretending in his manner and general expression. A short, compact, vigorous frame, a massive head, a visage of iron in its general outlines, yet lighted up with the real idealty of genius, and written all over with indomitable resolution and energy. He already begins to talk about another expedition in 1883.

I have, &c.,

JOHN L. STEVENS.

No. 593. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. No. 593.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, June 16, 1880. (Received July 3.) No. 77.]

Sir: It may be considered in the line of my duty to give information to the Secretary of State as to what is now transpiring in Norway in a political sense. Of the two countries of which, the dual kingdom is composed, it is generally admitted that there is more political thought and feeling in Norway. For some time there has been under consideration in Norway the proposition to so amend the constitution as to have the Norwegian ministers of the crown occupy seats in the Storthing and answer questions and give explanation of the measures, action, and expenditures of their respective departments, according to the manner in vogue in most constitutional countries; Sweden has had in exercise for some time this provision in its constitution. As the legal theory of Norway’s union with Sweden is one of entire equality of the two countries, it is not strange that the Norwegians desire the same access to and control over, their ministers as the Swedes enjoy. Recently matters in this regard have reached what may be deemed a crisis. Paragraph 1 of the Norwegian constitution is as follows: The kingdom of Norway is a free state, independent, indivisible, and inalienable, united to Sweden under the same king. The form of government is that of a constitutional and hereditary monarchy.

Treating of legislation and projects of law, paragraphs 78 and 79 of the same constitution read as follows: 78. If the King approves the resolution he will thereto place his signature, and from then it shall have the force of law. If he does not approve of it, he shall return it to the Odelsthing [the lower chamber of the Storthing], declaring that for the present he judges it not useful to sanction it.

79. In that case the Storthing then assembled can no more submit the resolution to the King, who can act in a like manner if the following Storthing ordinary proposes to him de novo the same resolution. But if after having been discussed de novo, it is again adopted without change by the two houses of the third ordinary Storthing, and afterwards submitted to the King with the demand that his Majesty may be pleased not to refuse his sanction to a resolution which the Storthing, after the most mature deliberations, believe to be useful, it shall have the force of law when even the sanction of the King shall not be given before the dissolution of the Storthing.

Touching amendment of the constitution of Norway, the following is the one hundred and twelfth paragraph of that document: If experience demonstrates that any part of the present fundamental law of the kingdom of Norway ought to be modified, the proposition to this end shall be made to an ordinary Storthing and published through the medium of the press. But it shall not appertain except to a following ordinary Storthing to decide if the change proposed should have place or not.

Such change, however, must never be contrary to the principles of the present fundamental law; it should have for object only some special dispositions, which alter not the spirit of the present constitution, and two-thirds of the Storthing must be of accord on such change.

After weeks of deliberation and much discussion, the Storthing, by a vote of 70 to 40, for the third time, adopted the amendment to the constitution, which provides that the ministers of the crown shall be admitted to the debates of the Storthing, the veto of the King having been given some weeks since.

The existing excitement in Norway has been somewhat intensified by this refusal of the King to sanction the amendment, inasmuch as the Storthing now assembled passed it prior to his veto by a vote so nearly unanimous as 93 out of 114, and particularly as the King’s absolute veto has now been employed for the first time since Norway became an independent nation under its free constitution.

About twenty years ago the royal government itself advocated that the ministers should take part in the discussions of the Storthing, and there, face to face to the representatives of the people, explain the measures taken by the executive power. But it has since entirely changed its position in this regard, and has systematically refused to sanction the amendment, which is considered by the liberal party as a vital condition for further progress in Norway’s political life.

The following are the terms of the amendment which the King has vetoed and the Storthing reaffirms: When discussions in the Storthing have been opened in accordance with the seventy-fourth paragraph of the constitution, the ministers and councillors of state have the right to be present in the Storthing, as well as in its two houses, on equal terms with members of the same, without the right to vote, to take part in the debates that may arise, as far as these are public, but in regard to measures discussed with closed doors, only so far as may be allowed them by the Storthing in session.

Soon after the royal veto of this proposition was communicated to the Storthing, its president, Johan Sverdrut, the indefatigable leader of the Norwegian liberals, made a proposition to the Storthing in the following terms: “That the amendment, notwithstanding the King’s refusal to sanction it, shall be promulgated as a part of the fundamental law of the country.” This decisive declaration was sustained by the Storthing by a vote of more than two-thirds.

It is said to be the opinion of the most eminent jurists and commentators of the Norwegian constitution that the King is entitled to an absolute veto to proposed amendments thereof; of course this involves directly the old question so long in debate among statesmen and peoples to whom belongs original sovereignty. Obviously the absolute right of royal veto of constitutional amendments is not specifically declared in the constitution itself. The Storthing, as previously indicated in this communication, plants itself on what it holds to be its sovereign rights and the powers given it by paragraph 112 of the constitution above given, touching amendments, and has declared by its vote that the amendment before stated shall form a part of the fundamental law of the country.

It remains to be seen what will be the result of this direct issue between the King and the parliamentary authority of the Norwegian people, now nearly two millions in number, among whom there is more democratic sentiment and more political interest than in either of the other Scandinavian countries.

On the other side the government contends that it would be impossible to allow the ministers to go into the Storthing without at the same time strengthening the executive power by new constitutional guarantees providing for the election of an upper house in a manner to give it a more conservative character than the present upper chamber, and conferring on the King the right to dissolve the Storthing. At present the excitement in Norway is said to be without parallel.

* * * * * * * *

I have, &c.,.

JOHN L. STEVENS.

No. 594. Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts. No. 594.
Mr. Stevens to Mr. Evarts.

United States Legation,
Stockholm, July 26, 1880. (Received August 16.) No. 82.]

Sir: I have received the following communication from Mr. G. Gade, United States consul at Christiania, relative to the action of the Norwegian Government concerning Mormon proselytism and emigration: United States Consulate,
Christiania, July 20, 1880.

Dear Sir: In compliance with instruction from the Department of State, I have the honor to transmit to you the subjoined translation of a circular issued by the Norwegian department of justice, on the 6th instant, relating to Mormonism in Norway.

“In consequence of a communication from the minister for foreign affairs to the effect that the Government of the United States has, through its minister resident at Stockholm, expressed the wish that Mormon agents should be, as much as possible, checked in making proselytes in Norway and Sweden, and the latter prevented from emigrating to the Mormon community in Utah, at the Salt Lake, in America, the Department deems it its duty to warn people against listening to the enticement of the emissaries of Mormonism. The department makes also known, that the United States Government has resolved to enforce the law with its full severity against those who may be found guilty of polygamy, which is prevalent in the Mormon community”.

I remain, &c.,

GERHARD GADE.

John L. Stevens,
United States Minister Resident, Stockholm.

The above proof of the friendly response of the Norwegian authorities to the request of the United States Government, as well as what I have previously made known to the Department of State, respecting the assurances and action of the Swedish Government, accord entirely with all the information which comes to me in an informal manner, that the United States Government has the entire sympathy of the government and public opinion of these countries in its efforts to put an end to the crime of polygamy in the Territory of Utah.

There can be no doubt that the most vigorous measures by the United States authorities to stamp out this crying iniquity will give sincere satisfaction to the best friends of our country on this side of the Atlantic and receive the general approval of the public opinion of Europe.

I have, &c.,

JOHN L. STEVENS.

Correspondence with the Swedish Legation in Washington.Correspondence with the Swedish Legation in Washington.

[595] . Count Lewenhaupt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Sweden and Norway, Washington, January 8, 1880.

[596] . Mr. Evarts to Count Lewenhaupt.

Department of State, Washington, February 14, 1880.

No. 595. Count Lewenhaupt to Mr. Evarts. No. 595.
Count Lewenhaupt to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of Sweden and Norway,
Washington, January 8, 1880.

Mr. Secretary of State: On the 1st of October last a conference was held at Hamburg with a view to examining the question of a scientific international exploration of the polar regions, at which conference several governments were represented.

The majority of the delegates were not authorized to contract formal engagements on behalf of their respective governments. However, the representative of the ministry of public instruction of Austria, Lieutenant Weyprecht, who was at the same time the delegate of the Count de Wilczek, was able to promise that an expedition would be sent to Nova Zembla. The assurance was given, moreover, on the part of the Russian Geographical Society, that measures had already been taken to occupy the mouth of the Lena, and it was stated that Prussia would take charge of the occupation of the east coast of Greenland, and would send one or two expeditions to the Antarctic Seas. Scientific observations, it was announced, would be taken in Finmark under the auspices of Norway; others would take place in Western Greenland at the expense of Denmark. As to the occupation of the Asiatic coast of Behring Strait, the conference expressed a desire that Holland should take charge of this. The representative of France refrained from making any promise, but he alluded to a French expedition to the Antarctic Seas as a possible thing. Cape Barron and probably Sitka were to be occupied by America. Sweden was expected to establish a station of observation in Spitzbergen.

The conference subsequently expressed the opinion that the meteorological observations at the stations designated ought all to take place during the year 1881–’82.

The work marked out by the conference being of such a nature as to require official co-operation, the government of the King has instructed me to let it know to what extent the Government of the United States is disposed to lend its support to the plans which were discussed and approved by the conference, and for the obtainment of this information I beg your excellency to permit me again to have recourse to your kind mediation.

I avail myself, &c.,

C. LEWENHAUPT.

No. 596. Mr. Evarts to Count Lewenhaupt. No. 596.
Mr. Evarts to Count Lewenhaupt.

Department of State,
Washington, February 14, 1880.

Count: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of the 8th ultimo, in which you allude to the proceedings of a conference held at Hamburg, October 1, 1879, with a view to examining the question of a scientific international exploration of the polar regions, and observe that the work marked out by the conference, being of such a nature as to require official co-operation, the Government of the King has instructed you to let it know to what extent the Government of the United States is disposed to lend its support to the plans which were discussed and approved by the conference.

In reply I have the honor to state that, on the 6th instant, Mr. Whitthorne, M. C., introduced in the House of Representatives the following resolution, which was agreed to: Resolved, That the President of the United States be requested to furnish this House, if not incompatible with the public interests, with any information he may have received of the proceedings of the international polar congress convened in Hamburg Germany, October 1, 1879.

The Department has reported to the President all the information it possessed on the subject, mainly derived from your note, and has included in the report the inquiry of your government relative to the disposition of the Government of the United States with respect to a tender of assistance in the consummation of the plans approved by the conference.

As the subject of your note is now before Congress, it is presumed that some definite action on the same may presently be expected, and I shall find pleasure in apprising you of any results in the direction of providing for the participation of this government in the schemes of the Hamburg conference which may come within the cognizance of this Department.

Accept, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

SwitzerlandSwitzerland

[597] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, October 18, 1879. (Received November 6.)

[598] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, October 21, 1879. (Received November 7.)

[599] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fish.

Department of State, Washington, November 12, 1879.

[600] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, November 27, 1879. (Received December 13.)

[601] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, February 11, 1880. (Received March 1.)

[602] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, May 25, 1880. (Received June 7.)

[603] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, September 30, 1880. (Received October 21.)

[604] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Berne, September 30, 1880. (Received October 21.)

[605] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fish.

Department of State, Washington, October 19, 1880.

No. 597. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. No. 597.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, October 18, 1879. (Received November 6.) No. 219.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy and translation of the Swiss federal law, of December 24, 1874, concerning the social state (état civil), the keeping of registers relating to it, and marriage.*

This law, which prescribes a uniforn manner of recording births, marriages, and deaths throughout the confederation, also prescribes the formalities necessary to constitute a valid marriage, and regulates the question of divorce. Though enacted in December, 1874, it did not go into operation until January 1, 1876.

While the law, being uniform throughout all the cantons, has done away with many annoying provisions formerly existing in some of them, it is not free from objection on the part of a number of our citizens who desire to marry in this country. These objections are, however, principally due to the difficulty of procuring in the United States the documents, such as copies of records or certificates concerning the pro visions of law of the respective. States required by the Swiss law. This difficulty is mainly owing to our different method of recording births, marriages, and deaths, and the recognition in our legislation of religious solemnization of marriage, and to the records being kept in parish registers, as well as to the impossibility of the legation assuming to certify to questions of law arising under the legislation of the various States.

Since my connection with this mission (August 3, 1877), there have been received 39 communications relating to questions arising under this law, 25 of which merely transmit to the legation certificates of births, marriages, and deaths. The remaining 14, emanating from the Federal Government, the officials of the état civil, and from private individuals, are so varied in their nature that I inclose an abstract of their record on the register of the legation.

So far as I can gather, no return has been furnished you of the certificates of births, marriages, and deaths which have been transmitted to the legation by the Swiss authorities under the operation of this law. I therefore inclose a statement of them from January 1, 1876, to August 31, 1879. These certificates are sent to the legation sometimes from the federal chancery, and sometimes directly by the local authorities. Among the persons whose certificates of birth, marriage, or death have thus been sent, I believe that there are several whose claim to be considered citizens of the United States is at least doubtful, but as I know of no law by which the deposit of such certificates in this office would confer on them or their descendants any greater claim to our nationality than that to which they were already entitled, I have not deemed it expedient to ask for the evidence of the nationality of the parties concerned.

I have also obtained from each of the principal consular officers a statement of similar certificates on file in their offices. A comparison of these with the one from the legation shows that there are several names included in both the consular and the legation’s statements.

At the legation there have been filed the certificates of 35 births, 15 marriages, and 19 deaths. At the consulate at Zurich 6 births, 5 marriages, and 2 deaths; but of these the certificates of 2 births, 1 marriage, and 1 death refer to persons whose certificates are on file at the legation. At the consulate at Basle the certificates of 2 births, 2 marriages, and 1 death have been filed. At Geneva the consular records do not show a single such certificate filed under the provisions of this law. At the commercial agency at St. Galle, the certificate of 1 birth and of 1 marriage have been filed, but the latter is also on file at the legation.

That these represent the whole number of births, marriages, and deaths among the Americans in Switzerland I do not for a moment believe, for in a period of three years and seven months there have been no certificates received from a majority of the cantons, and those received account for only 46 births, 21 marriages, and 21 deaths; and moreover I know of individual cases which do not appear in any of the lists. I infer therefore that the sending of the certificates depends rather on the local official of the place, than on his superiors, the cantonal or federal authorities.

It may be of interest to you to know the nature of the inquiries propounded by this government to the legation, and of the replies furnished, in order that you may judge whether the latter have been judicious and in accordance with your views.

I therefore inclose copies of all such correspondence from the date on which the Swiss law went into effect.*

I have endeavored in my answers to this government, in view of the somewhat different provisions of law of some of our States, to avoid any committal of the legation upon questions arising under legislation of the various States, and have confined myself to stating the provisions of our Revised Statutes and the construction of them as set forth in the consular regulations. In reply to similar requests from private individuals and local officials, I have suggested the propriety of their procuring the desired information from the United States, through the Swiss consul, in whose jurisdiction the State in question may be situated.

In a recent case I have been asked by this government whether the marriage of a citizen of the United States celebrated in Switzerland in accordance with Swiss law would be recognized as valid in the United States, or whether to give it validity the presence of the consular officer of the United States is requisite. In my answer, I cited section 4082 of the Revised Statutes, and stated that there can be no doubt that a marriage performed in Switzerland under Swiss law and in conformity with said section of the Revised Statutes would constitute a valid marriage and be recognized as such.

I considered it more courteous to this government to confine myself to this answer rather than to discuss the special case to which it referred (that of Egon Kohler), as had I entered on a discussion of the merits of the case, I might have shown that the cantonal government of Schaffhausen was in error in stating that the official of the état civil did not know the requirements of our law in regard to this particular case, for those requirements had been communicated to him at his own request before the marriage took place, with special reference to Kohler’s case. I dwell upon these details, as it is not the first time that I have found that the federal government has been misled by the inaccurate statements furnished it by the cantonal governments.

I have noticed in our press several articles advocating a United States statute regulating the questions of marriage and divorce, and while I am not prepared to say that the adoption of such a law, furnishing a uniform system throughout the Union, would be advisable just at present, I believe that a better acquaintance with the Swiss law would be of interest to many of our citizens; and should the movement in favor of a similar law at home assume a more definite shape, I think this law would merit the attention and study of our legislators. Like any law we may hereafter enact on this important subject, it was carefully drawn, after great and thorough study, to meet the requirements of varied legislation in numerous cantons or states; and while it has set aside some of the previous requirements of the latter, it has been successful in reconciling the conflicting questions to which they too often gave rise. While some provisions of the law occasionally cause individual embarrassments, on the whole the practical working of the law is satisfactory, and it affords a much more convenient form of marriage to such of our citizens as desire to avail themselves of it. Its requirements are likewise much more clearly defined than they were in many cases under the former cantonal enactments which it supersedes.

* * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

[Inclosure in No. 219.—Translation.]

SWISS LAW CONCERNING THE SOCIAL STATE, THE KEEPING OF REGISTERS RELATING TO IT AND MARRIAGE, OF DECEMBER 24, 1874.

[Recueil Officiel I, page 471.]

federal law concerning the social state, the keeping of registers relating to it and marriage, of december 24, 1874.

The Federal Assembly of the Swiss Confederation, in execution of articles 53, 54, -and 58, second paragraph of the federal constitution, considering the message of the federal council of October 2, 1874, decree:

A.—General Provisions.

Article 1. The civil state (état civil) and the keeping of the registers relating thereto belong to the civil authorities in the whole territory of the Confederation.

The officers of the civil state must be laymen, and they alone have the right to make entries on the register of the civil state and furnish extracts therefrom.

Art. 2. Each officer of the civil state (état civil) shall keep, according to uniform formulae determined by the federal council, three registers, bearing the following denominations: “Register of Births,” “Register of Deaths,” “Register of Marriages.”

These registers are furnished by the cantons; they are to be kept in duplicate, each being an original. At the end of each year they are closed, and certified as true by the officer of civil state. One of the copies remains at the disposition of the officer of civil state, and the other is transmitted, within ten days after the end of the year, to the designated authority in each canton, to be placed and kept in its archives.

The entries made on the first copy after the filing of the second must be communicated immediately in the form of a certified copy to the functionary in whose hands the latter copy has been placed, and inscribed by the latter on that register.

Art. 3. The determination of the districts of the civil state and the provisions relative to the nomination and emoluments of the officers of the civil state remain a cantonal prerogative.

The boundaries of the cantonal districts must be communicated to the federal council before the going into effect of the present law, and afterwards at each subsequent modification.

Art. 4. Each birth, each death, and each marriage shall be first inscribed in the district where it occurs.

Art. 5. The officers of the civil state are compelled— a. To inscribe in the registers destined for that purpose the births, the deaths, the publications, and the marriages which occur within their district, and moreover to proceed with the publications and the celebration of marriages.

b. To communicate officially within a period of 8 days to the Swiss officers of the civil state of the place of domicile and of the place of birth, the entries of births, deaths, or marriages, concerning persons who are domiciled or were born in another district of the civil state.

c. To inscribe in the subdivisions of the register of births, deaths, and marriages the communications of a like nature for births, deaths, and marriages coming from other districts of Switzerland or from foreign countries, as well as to inscribe the divorces or the decrees of nullity of marriage pronounced by the courts, so far as these various documents concern the inhabitants or natives of their districts.

d. To deliver extracts of these registers, upon the request of those interested upon the payment of the cost of transmission.

e. To deliver statistical extracts, and to furnish information to the federal authorities in conformity to the formulae established by the latter, upon an indemnity to be determined by the federal council.

f. To keep all other registers which may be prescribed by the laws or the regulations of the cantons and to deliver the necessary extracts for cantonal and communal administrations.

Art. 6. The acts of the civil state are inscribed on the registers in the order of date of succession, without any margin, with a single series of numbers, terminating with each year.

There must be nothing written in abbreviation, and no date shall be inscribed in figures. The entries, the erasures, and there turns must be signed by the officer of the civil state.

Art. 7. Nothing shall be written on the registers which is foreign to the subject. The family names and Christian names of the persons who figure in the acts must be inscribed in accordance with the acts of birth and other acts of the civil state; they may be accompained by the indication of the profession and functions which the person exercises or has exercised.

Art. 8. The officer of the civil state shall immediately proceed to the entry of the acts upon the register immediately after the declaration has been made to him, or the receipt of the official reports, extracts, or judgments which are forwarded to him.

The entries and official communications required by the present law are to be made free of charge.

The other extracts and copies are subject to forwarding charges, according to a tariff established for their territory by the cantonal governments, and approved by the federal council.

Art. 9. The officer of the civil state shall not modify or add anything to the acts inscribed in the registers.

The rectification of the acts of the civil state can only be ordered by the judgment of the competent cantonal tribunals.

Notwithstanding when there is a manifest error, the cantonal authority charged with the superintendence of the civil state may order the correction of it by way of administration.

Summary mention is made in margin on the entry of all decisions or judgments ordering the correction of an act of the civil state.

Art. 10. All documentary proofs which serve as a basis for the entries on the registers of births, deaths, and marriages, shall be preserved by the officer of the civil state, and classed for each year in three distinct series in accordance with or agreeably to article 2, in the order of the numbers of the register.

Art. 11. The registers of the civil state, and the extracts rendered, which are certified to as correct by the officer of the civil state, are authentic acts in which entire faith is placed as to the contents so long as the falsity or inexactitude of the indications and statements upon which the entries are based is not proved.

Art. 12. The officers of the civil state are responsible for the carrying out of their duties towards the cantonal authorities, who give them the necessary instructions conformably to the present law.

The cantonal governments are obliged to order annual inspections of the administration of the officers of the civil state, and to address to the federal council a report upon the result of these inspections.

In case of irregularities or abuse, the federal council has the right to interpose, and to order, at the expense of the cantons, such measures as it may hold expedient. The federal council is furthermore authorized to institute special inspections.

Art. 13. The federal council is authorized to grant, where it sees fit, to diplomatic and consular agents of the confederation in foreign countries, prerogatives relative to the authentication of births and deaths of Swiss citizens, and to the celebration of i marriages between Swiss citizen’s, and between Swiss citizens and foreigners. It will publish with this object the rules and regulations necessary upon the basis of the present law.

B.—Special Provisions upon the keeping of Register of Births.

Art. 14. Every birth, as well as each premature birth after the sixth month pregnancy, shall be verbally declared within three days to the officer of the civil state of the district in which it occurs.

Births which occur in public establishments (lying-in hospitals, hospitals, or prisons) are declared by an official letter from the directors of these establishments.

Art. 15. The following are obliged to make the declaration of birth: 1st. The legitimate father, or the person authorized to represent him.

2d. The midwife or physician present at the confinement.

3d. Any other person present.

4th. The person in whose house or in whose apartment the confinement took place.

5th. The mother as soon as she recovers.

This obligation is successively imposed upon the persons above designated, and only commences in the case where the preceding persons have failed to fulfill it, or are prevented therefrom.

Art. 16. The entry on the register of births must state— a. The place, the year, the month, the day, and the hour of the birth. If two or more twins are born, this circumstance is mentioned, indicating at the same time, as precisely as possible, the moment of the respective births of each of them.

b. The family name, Christian names, and sex of the child. When the child is stillborn, or dies before the expiration of the delay fixed for the declaration, the entry does not mention the Christian names.

c. The family and Christian names, the profession, the birthplace and domicile of the father and mother if the child is legitimate, or of the mother if the child is born out of wedlock.

d. The family and Christian names, profession, place of birth and domicile of the person making the declaration.

Immediately after the declaration the birth is inscribed upon the register and the entry is signed by the person making the declaration. When the person making the declaration does not know how to or is unable to sign, special mention of this fact is made on the register.

Art. 17. The officer of the civil state, when, the statements of the declaration do not appear to him worthy of belief, shall make the necessary inquiries, and make the entry only when he is satisfied of the correctness of the statements. If the person who makes the declaration is not personally known to him he will cause his identity to be certified to.

Art. 18. The modifications which occur in the civil state (état civil) subsequently to the entry on the register of births (settling the paternity of an illegitimate child by decree of court, or voluntary recognition, legitimization, adoption, &c.) are, at the request of one of the parties concerned, entered in the margin on the act of birth, when the facts are certified to by authenticated documents.

In case of the adjudication of an illegitimate child by decree of court, the judicial authority shall notify the officer of the competent civil state thereof.

The recognition of an illegitimate child in the declaration of birth, made by him who admits being the father of the same, is inscribed on the register, if the cantonal legislation authorizes this recognition.

Art. 19. For foundlings the notice authority of the commune is obliged to announce for the entry, within three days after the child is found: a. The place, the time, and the circumstances in which the child has been found.

b. The sex of the child, with presumable age, as well as any particular marks and signs by which it may be recognized.

c. The nature of the clothing and other objects found with the child.

d. The names given it.

e. The person with whom the child is placed.

C.—Special Provisions upon the keeping of the Register of Deaths.

Art. 20. Every death must be announced verbally to the officer of civil state of the district within forty-eight hours at the latest.

Those obliged to make this declaration are the head of the family, the widow or the other nearest relations of the deceased; in their default, or in case of their being prevented, the person in whose apartment or in whose house the death has occurred, or the persons present at the death, or, finally, the local police.

The dispositions of articles 17, 14 second paragraph and 15 last paragraph, are equally applicable to declarations of deaths.

Art. 21. No burial can take place without the permission of the authority of the local police before the death has been inscribed upon the register of the civil state. If the burial has taken place contrary to this limitation, the entry of death can only he made with the permission of the authority charged with the superintendence of the civil state after proving of the facts.

Art. 22. The register of deaths shall state— a. The year, the month, the day, the hour, and the place of death.

b. The family names, Christian names, and, should the case occur, surnames of the deceased and his parents; his place of birth and of domicile (in the cities, the name of the street and number of the house), his religion, his profession, and his civil state (single, married, widowed, or divorced), the year, month, or day of his birth.

c. The family names, Christian names, and profession of the surviving party, husband or wife, deceased or divorced.

d. The cause of death assigned by the physician, as far as possible.

Immediately after the declaration, the death is inscribed on the register, and the entry is signed by the person who makes the declaration. When the person who makes the declaration does not know-how or is unable to sign, special mention of the fact is made on the register.

Art. 23. When an unknown person is found dead in the district of the civil state, the declaration of decease is made by the communal police.

The entry shall state— a. The place, the time, and the circumstances in which the body has been found.

b. The sex and presumable age of the deceased.

c. Marks on the body and particular signs which could serve to recognize or identify the deceased.

d. The nature of the clothing and other objects found with the body.

e. The probable cause of death. The names and place of birth should be inscribed when they are known.

Art. 24. Persons who have disappeared whose decease is acknowledged or recognized by decree of court are inscribed on the register of deaths with the mention that this entry takes place on the strength of a declaration of decease pronounced by the competent authority.

The authority who declares the death shall communicate either to the officer of the civil state of the last known domicile of the person, or to the officer of the place of birth.

d.—Special Provisions relative to the celebration of and the keeping of the Register of Marriage.

i.—of the qualifications and conditions necessary in order to contract marriage.

Art. 25. The right of marriage is placed under the protection of the confederation.

No hinderance to marriage can arise from confessional motives, from the indigence of the one or the other contracting party, from their conduct, or from any other police motive whatever.

Every marriage solemnized in a canton or a foreign land agreeably to the legislation which is there in force, shall be recognized throughout the confederation.

The wife acquires by marriage the right of citizenship and burgership of her husband.

Children born out of wedlock are legitimatized by the subsequent marriage of their parents.

There shall be no marriage fee or any such tax collected from either of the contracting parties (article 54 of the federal constitution).

Art. 26. No marriage is valid without the free consent of the contracting parties. Compulsion, fraud, or a mistake in the identity of the contracting parties, exclude the presumption of consent.

Art. 27. To contract marriage the man must have completed his eighteenth year, the woman her sixteenth.

Persons who have not yet reached the age of twenty full years cannot be married without the authorization of that one of their parents, father or mother, who exercises the parental authority. If they are deceased, or in the impossibility of manifesting their wishes, the consent of the guardian is requisite. The parties interested can have recourse to lodging an appeal with the superior tutelary authority against the refusal of the guardian to give his consent.

Art. 28. Marriage is forbidden— 1st. To those persons already married.

2d. For cause of parentage or alliance. a. Between ancestors and descendants of all degrees, between brothers and sisters of the whole blood, or by half blood by the father’s side, or of the same mother but not by the same father; between uncle and niece, between aunt and nephew, whether it be a legitimate or illegitimate relationship.

b. Between relations in line direct ancestral or of descent, between parents and adopted children.

3d. Between persons attacked with insanity or imbecility.

Widows and divorced women, as well as those women whose marriages have been pronounced null, shall not contract a new marriage before the expiration of 300 days from the time of the dissolution of the marriage.

ii.—of formalities relative to the celebration of marriage.

Art. 29. Every celebration of marriage within the territory of the confederation must be preceded by the publication of the intention of marriage. This publication must be made in the place of domicile and place of birth of each of the contracting parties. When the publication is to be made in a foreign country and is refused as being needless or inadmissible according to the laws of the country, a eertificate stating this fact takes the place of the publication.

Art. 30. In order to proceed to the publication of the intention of marriage, the officer of the civil state must have presented to him— a. The certificates of birth of both contracting parties.

b. For those persons who have not yet completed their twentieth year, a declaration of consent of that one of the parents who exercises parental authority, or of the guardian, or finally of the competent tutelary authority.

c. In case the two contracting parties do not personally appear, a promise of marriage signed by them and legalized by the competent or proper authority.

Art. 31. If the result of the declarations and documents produced prove that the prescribed conditions are carried out, the officer of the civil state draws up the act of the intention of marriage and proceeds to its publication; he transmits it officially to the officers of the Swiss and foreign civil state in whose district the publication should also be made, according to article 29.

All these transactions arc made free of charge in as far as the officers of the Swiss civil state are concerned.

The officers of the Swiss civil state are obliged to give their attention to the applications addressed to them by foreign authorities for the marriage of Swiss citizens or of foreigners born or living in Switzerland.

If the future husband is a foreigner in Switzerland, the publication is only made upon the presentation of a declaration from the competent foreign authorities, stating that the marriage will be recognized with all its legal results.

The cantonal government is authorized to dispense with this formality, and to admit, in default of the declaration required, any other sufficient justification.

Art. 32. The certificate of the intention of marriage should indicate: The family and Christian names, the profession, the place of domicile, and place of birth of the future husband and wife, and of their parents; for widowed or divorced persons, the family and Christian names of the former husband and wife; finally, the delay fixed for the oppositions.

Art. 33. In the entire territory of the confederation this publication is made by the officer of the civil state designated by law, in the same manner for all intentions of marriage, either by posting up a placard, or by insertion in the official newspaper.

Art. 34. The obstacles to the marriage must be announced within a delay of ten days after the publication of the intention of marriage to one of the officers of the civil state who have proceeded to the publication. Forty-eight hours at the utmost after the expiration of this delay the other officers of the civil state who have proceeded to the publication must notify the officer of the place of domicile of the husband whether or no there is opposition.

Every opposition or obstacle not founded upon one of the motives foreseen in articles 26, 27, and 28 of the present law should be officially put aside, and cannot be taken into any consideration whatever.

Art. 35. All opposition to the celebration of the marriage is communicated to the husband by the officer of the civil state of his place of domicile; the husband must declare within a delay of ten days whether he admits or contests the correctness of this opposition. In the latter case, the declaration of the husband is communicated to the adversary, who must within a delay of ten other days bring an action before the competent judge of the place of residence of the husband, or it this latter has no residence or place of domicile in Switzerland, before the competent judge of the place of residence of the wife. In the default of the bringing, of any action within this delay, the opposition falls to the ground.

Art. 36. At the expiration of the delay of fourteen days after the publication of the intention of marriage at the place of residence of the husband, the officer of the civil state of this domicile, if he has been notified of no opposition, or if the opposition has been set aside by the competent judge, shall deliver to the future husband and wife, at their request, a certificate of publication certifying that the legal publication has taken place, and that there exists no obstacle to the celebration of the marriage. The publication ceases to be valid, if within a delay of six months it has not been followed by the celebration of the marriage.

Art. 37. Upon the presentation of the certificate of publication, the officer of the civil state proceeds to the celebration of the marriage, which takes place as a rule in the district of the place of residence of the husband.

In case of danger of death, the officer of the civil state may, with the permission of the competent cantonal authority, proceed to the celebration of the marriage even without previous preliminary publication.

With the written authority of the officer of the civil state of the place of residence of the husband, the marriage can also be celebrated before the officer of another district within the territory of the confederation. In such case the latter should immediately send a copy of the certificate of marriage for entry on the official registers of the place of residence.

If the husband is a foreigner the marriage can only be celebrated upon the presentation of a declaration of the competent foreign authority certifying that the marriage will be recognized in that country with all its legal results. The right of dispensation is, however, reserved to the cantonal governments foreseen in article 31, last paragraph.

Art. 38. At last two days in each week the celebration of marriages must be feasible, the marriage takes place publicly, and in the hall of a building of public administration.

In the case of serious illness on the part of one of the contracting parties, certified to by a medical certificate, the marriage may be celebrated in a private house. Under all circumstances the presence of two witnesses of full age is necessary.

Art. 39. The marriage is celebrated in the following manner:

The officer of the civil state asks each of the contracting parties separately:

“N —— N ——, do you declare that you are willing to take N —— N —— for your wife?

“N—— N ————, do you declare, that you are willing to take N —— N —— for your husband?

“In consequence of this declaration which you have both just made, I declare you to be, in the name of the law, united in marriage.”

Immediately after this declaration the marriage is inscribed on the register and the entry is signed by the husband and wife, and by the witnesses.

Art. 40. A religious ceremony can only take place after the legal celebration of marriage by the civil functionary, and upon the presentation of the marriage certificate.

Art. 41. The husband and wife should declare to the officer of the civil state of their place of residence at the time of the marriage, or at the latest within a delay of thirty days, the children they may have had previously, and which are legitimized by their subsequent marriage. Nevertheless, if for any motive whatever this declaration has not been inscribed, nothing prejudicial to the rights of their children born before the marriage or their descendants can arise from this omission.

Art. 42. The register of marriages should state— a. The family and Christian names, the place of origin, of birth, and of domicile, the profession, and the date of birth of each contracting party.

b. The family and Christian names, the profession and domicile of the parents.

c. The family and Christian names of the deceased or divorced husband and wife, when one of the contracting parties has been previously married; also the date of the death or divorce.

d. The date of the publication of the intention of marriage.

e. The date of the celebration of marriage.

f. A list of the documents deposited.

g. The family and Christian names and domicile of the witnesses.

E.—Special Provisions as to Divorce, as to Nullity of Marriage, and as to the entries to be made in such cases.

Art. 43. Actions for divorce and for nullity of marriage must be brought before the tribunal of the place and domicile of the husband. The appeal to the federal tribunal is reserved in conformity with article 29 of the law of the federal judiciary organization of June 27, 1874.

In default of a domicile within the confederation, the action may be brought in the place of birth (bourgeoisie) or at the last domicile of the husband in Switzerland.

Art. 44. From the time when the action is instituted, the tribunal permits the wife, at her request, to live apart from her husband, and orders in general, throughout the continuation of the suit, the necessary measures for the support of the wife and children.

Art. 45. When the man and wife are both applicants for divorce, the tribunal will pronounce whether circumstances exist of a nature which render a continuation of a life in common incompatible with the nature of marriage.

Art. 46. At the request of either the husband or wife the divorce should be granted— a. For adultery, if not more than six months have elapsed since the injured party has been aware of it.

b. On account of an attempt upon one’s life, cruelty, or serious injuries.

c. On account of a condemnation to an ignominious punishment.

d. For malicious desertion, when it has lasted for two years, and a judicial summons, fixing a delay of six months for the return, has produced no effect.

e. On account of mental derangement, when it has lasted three years and is declared incurable.

Art. 47. If none of these causes of divorce exist, and nevertheless circumstances have arisen by which the conjugal bond is gravely affected, the court may decree divorce or separation. This separation cannot be pronounced for more than two years. If during that period a reconciliation has not taken place between the husband and wife, the demand for divorce can be renewed, and the court pronounces then freely, according to its convictions.

Art. 48. In the case of divorce for a prescribed cause, the husband or wife against whom the divorce has been pronounced cannot contract a new marriage before the expiration of a year after the decree of divorce. This term can nevertheless be extended to three years at the most by the decree of the court.

Art. 49. The subsequent effects of the divorce or of the judicial separation as to the persons of the husband and wife, as to their property, as to the education of the children, and as to the indemnities imposed upon the guilty party, are regulated by the legislation, of the canton to whose jurisdiction the husband is subject. The court pronounces upon these questions officially, or, at the request of the parties, at the same time as upon the request for divorce.

The cantons which have no legislative dispositions on this subject are obliged to promulgate them within a period fixed by the federal council.

Art. 50. A marriage contracted without the free consent of the two contracting parties or one of them, by constraint, by fraud, or through mistaken identity as to the person, may be declared null upon the request of the person wronged.

The action for nullity cannot, however, be entertained if more than three months have elapsed since the husband or wife has recovered his or her full liberty or has acquiesced in the error.

Art. 51. The nullity of marriage should be officially proceeded with when the marriage has been celebrated contrary to the provisions of article 28, numbers 1, 2, and 3.

Art. 52. A marriage celebrated between husband and wife who had not yet attained the age fixed by article 27, or if one or other of them had not attained that age, may be declared null at the request of the father, of the mother, or of the guardian. Nevertheless such action for nullity cannot be entertained— a. When the husband and wife have attained the legal age.

b. When the wife has become pregnant.

c. When the father, the mother, or the guardian have given their consent to the marriage.

Art. 53. The nullity of a marriage contracted without the consent of the parents or guardians (article 27, paragraph 2), and without the publications prescribed by the law having taken place, cannot be demanded except by those whose consent was required, and only then when the husband and wife have not yet attained the legal age.

Art. 54. A marriage contracted in a foreign country under the jurisdiction of the legislation which is there in force, cannot be declared null except when the nullity arises at the same time from the foreign legislation and the provisions of the present law.

Art. 55. A marriage which has been declared null produces, nevertheless, the civil effects of i a valid marriage, as far as regards the husband and wife, as well as the children born or legitimatized by such marriage, when it has been contracted in good faith by both parties.

If the good faith exists only on the part of either the husband or the wife, the marriage produces only the civil effects of a valid marriage for that one of the couple and for the children.

Finally, if neither of the two parties were of good faith the children alone profit by the civil effects of the marriage as if it had been valid.

Art. 56. As to marriages between foreigners, no action for divorce or nullity of marriage can be admitted by the courts if it is not established that the country to which the husband and wife belong will recognize the decree which may be pronounced.

Art. 57. All judgments pronouncing divorce or nullity of marriage should be immediately transmitted, by the tribunal which decrees them, to the officers of the civil state of the place of domicile and place of birth, and recorded by the latter in the register on the margin of the record of the marriage.

F. —Penal Provisions.

Art. 58. The officers of the civil state are responsible to the parties interested for all damage caused by their negligence or lack of observance of their duty.

Art. 59. Those persons should be proceeded against and officially punished, or upon complaint— 1st. Those who have not observed the provisions of articles 14, 15, 20, and 21, concerning the declarations of births and deaths, by a fine not to exceed one hundred francs.

2d. By a fine not to exceed three hundred francs, those officers of the civil state who have violated the duties imposed by the present law as well as the clergy who have acted contrary to the provisions of article 40. In case of a second offense the fine is doubled and the functionary dismissed.

The clergy are equally responsible towards the parties interested for the civil consequences.

The parties interested have the right to appeal to the “tribunal federal” against the decisions of the cantonal courts as to the application of the provisions of the present article.

G.—Final Provisions.

Art. 60. The cantonal regulations for the carrying into effect of the present law must be submitted for the approval of the Federal Council.

Art 61. The present law shall go into effect the 1st of January, 1876, subject to the reservation of article 89 of the federal constitution, and of the federal law of June 17, 1874, respecting the voting of the people upon the federal laws and decrees:

Art. 62. The following will be repealed from that date: 1st. The federal law of mixed marriages of December 3, 1850.

2d. The supplementary law of mixed marriages of February 3, 1862.

3d. The concordat of July 8, 1803 (and July 9, 1818).

4th. The concordat of July 4, 1820.

5th. The concordat of July 6, 1821.

6th. The concordat of August 14, 1821.

7th. The concordat of July 11, 1829.

8th. The concordat of July 15, 1842.

9th. The concordat of February 1, 1855.

10th. All other cantonal laws and ordinances in opposition to the present law.

H.—Transitory Provisions.

Art. 63. The final or temporary separations decreed before the going into effect of the present law may be the basis of an action for divorce if the causes upon which they are founded can according to the present law serve as a motive for divorce.

Art. 64. The cantons have the power to cause to be furnished to the civil functionaries all the registers and documents concerning the civil state, or copies of such registers and documents so far as the same is necessary.

From the going into effect of the present law, the new officers of the civil state are alone authorized to furnish certificates and extracts of the civil state.

Art. 65. In case that the present registers concerning the persons mention only the baptism and not the birth, the certificate of baptism may replace the certificate of birth prescribed in article 30, letter a.

Thus decreed by the Council of States.

Berne, the 24th of December, 1874.
The President:
KOECHLIN.
The secretary:
J. L. Lütscher.

Thus decreed by the National Council.

Berne, the 24th of December, 1874.
The President:
L. RUCHONNET.
The secretary:
SCHIESS.

The Federal Council decrees:

The foregoing law, published the 30th of January, 1875, will go into effect in accordance with article 89 of the federal constitution and the federal decree of July 1, 1875, and will have the force of law from the 1st of January, 1876.

Berne, the 7th of July, 1875.

In the name of the Swiss Federal Council.

The President of the confederation:
SCHERER.
The chancellor of the confederation:
SCHIESS.

* The text of this law will also be found in Vol. 1 of the Swiss Recueil Officiel, p. 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 300].

* These inclosures are omitted from the present publication.

No. 598. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. No. 598.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, October 21, 1879. (Received November 7.) No. 220.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 213, arid to your instructions, No. 107, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a note which I addressed to Mr. Hammer, President of the confederation, respecting Mormon emigration to the United States.*

Although my note is dated the 17th instant, I was unable until to-day to find the President to speak to him with reference to this subject.

I had learned from Mr. Doerr that he had received the instruction referred to in your No. 107, and from that fact thought it expedient to present my note, which I accompanied with a German translation.

In our interview I found the President well disposed to do all in his power to assist us in our endeavors to suppress the emigration of recruits for the polygamous community in Utah, but I doubt whether, under existing legislation, much eta be done beyond a publication in the Feuille Fédérate and the public press in this direction. This the President said would be cheerfully accorded.

I shall keep you informed of the position of the Swiss press on this question, and with this view shall communicate a translation of my note to the consular officers with a request that they should further its promulgation and likewise report any discussion it may create in the newspapers.

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

* For the substance of Mr. Fish’s representations see the Department’s circular instruction of August 9, 1879. (Foreign Relations, 1879, page 11.)

No. 599. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fish. No. 599.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fish.

Department of State,
Washington, November 12, 1879. No. 120.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 218, of the 18th ultimo, has been received.* It relates to the detention by the Swiss local authorities of property in Switzerland claimed by natives of that country naturalized in the United States. The reasons assigned for that detention are believed to be so insufficient practically, morally, and legally that it is hoped the Federal Government of that country will lose no time in applying its authority or influence towards redressing the grievance.

It is noticed with regret that the Swiss local authorities, at least, are disposed to maintain the doctrine of perpetual allegiance by denying the right of a native of that country to become naturalized elsewhere without their consent.

This pretension has always been regarded here as extravagant, and as such has been resisted, so that several of the most important European countries with monarchical governments, which were most strenous in supporting it, have receded from their claims, and have concluded naturalization treaties with the United States. Switzerland as yet has no such treaty, but the convention of 1850 between the United States and that country contains stipulations which seem applicable to the present case and adequate for disposing of it contrary to the views held in that quarter.

It appears from your dispatch that one of the claims of the communal authorities is that they can recognize no native of Switzerland as a citizen of the United States who shall not have obtained their consent to his naturalization. This pretension is in direct conflict with the fourth article of the treaty, which says that in order to establish their character as citizens of the United States of America, persons belonging to that country shall be bearer of passports certifying their nationality. If, therefore, the nationality of any Swiss naturalized here, who may visit his native country with such passport, shall there be questioned, that act must be looked upon as a flagrant violation of the treaty, which could not be acquiesced in.

Again, the fifth article stipulates in substance that the heirs of a. Swiss decedent, being citizens of the United States, whether native or naturalized, shall inherit and dispose of the property of such decedent at their pleasure.

An authenticated copy of the judgment of the court which may have naturalized a Swiss citizen must be regarded as conclusive proof of that act in regard to all such naturalized Swiss who may not visit their native country.

As explicit abjuration of allegiance to his native country is by law required of every foreigner naturalized here, the fact of such abjuration is mentioned in the record. It is presumed, therefore, that when a duly attested copy of such record is presented to the authorities in Switzerland, the sufficiency of the proof which it contains will be acknowledged without hesitation.

You intimate that the supreme court of the Confederation might decide the question conformably to the views entertained here, and suggest that a test case be prosecuted for the purpose of obtaining their opinion. This course it would be difficult and inconvenient for this government to adopt, but it might be the most eligible for a claimant to sufficient property in that country to incur the hazard and expense which would attend it.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

* For above-mentioned dispatch vide volume Foreign Relations for 1879, page 973.

No. 600. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. No. 600.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, November 27, 1879. (Received December 13.) No. 229.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 220, in which I inclose a copy of my note to this government respecting the Mormon question, I have now the honor to submit a copy and translation of their reply.

It will be seen that their answer, while dealing in general with the question, refers to a particular case, of which I have no other knowledge than that contained in their note.

* * * * * * *

The reply of the Swiss Government indicates to me a disposition to furnish us a moral support in the suppression of Mormonism, but it does not encourage me to hope for an active assistance on their part. I am of opinion that were we to exert an active influence over here by instructing our consuls to vigilantly search for and protest against the shipment of recruits to the polygamous colony, we might occasionally thwart the shipment of individual recruits; but were we to cause the detention of some of these latter at the ports of embarkation upon satisfactory evidence, as we are now authorized to do in regard to paupers imbeciles, and lunatics, we might easily draw to our aid a more active co-operation, or a more explicit opposition than we are, in view of the present correspondence, led to expect.

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

[Inclosure 2in No. 229.—Translation.]

Mr. Hammer to Mr. Fish

Berne, November 19–25, 1879.

By his note of the 17th October last, the chargé d’affaires of the United States at Berne draws the attention of the Federal Council to the propaganda carried on in Switzerland by the agents (apostles) of Mormonism, and expresses the desire that measures may be taken with a view of putting an end to this condition of affairs, contrary not only to the laws of the United States, but also to the peace, good order, and morality which are cultivated and encouraged by ail civilized nations.

While admitting with regret that in fact agents of Mormonism have at various periods spread themselves, and perhaps even now are scattered over many countries of Europe, including Switzerland, the Federal Council must remark that these proceedings have taken place on no portion of our territory with the tacit assent of the Federal or cantonal authorities; but, on the contrary, that the laws of all the cantons are quite as severe against polygamy as that one of the United States mentioned in the note of October 17, and that each time that such acts have been discovered against the Swiss laws they have been repressed according to the gravity of the circumstances. The same will not fail to be the case in the future.

On the other hand it cannot be disputed that as long as the laws voted by the Congress of the United States shall remain unapplied in Utah Territory, it must unfortunately be expected that a secret propaganda, difficult to lay hold of, will be made in favor of Mormonism in other countries, and the strictest scrutiny will not be successful in preventing persons free in their persons and their property from emigrating towards the country which promises the realization of their ideas.

Furthermore, the Federal Council can but hope for the time when the severe measures taken by the Government of the United States to do away with the blot of Mormonism shall have produced all the effects expected of them. In this reference the Federal Council should inform Mr. Fish, chargé d’affaires, that it has addressed to the American Government, through the Swiss consul-general at Washington, a request concerning a young Swiss girl, Marie Wyss, of Zaziwyl (Berne), who allowed herself to be seduced by the hidden propaganda of Mormon emissaries, and who, having fallen into the most unfortunate situation at Bear Lake County, where she now is, is to-day demanded by her parents. Cases of this nature show sufficiently that, in order to destroy the evil, a commencement must be made by destroying the cause, and the latter is without question the existence of a state of Mormons, which we hope will not fail to make place for a condition of affairs in conformity with notions of morality and social order as well as with the intentions of the Government of the United States.

The Federal Council seizes this occasion, &c.,

In the name of the Federal Council.

The President of the Confederation:
HAMMER.
The chancellor of the Confederation:
SCHIESS.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 229. Extract from the Gazette de Lausanne, November 24, 1879

.—Translation.

swiss abroad.

Several complaints having been addressed to the Federal Council, in order that an end might be put to the active propaganda of Mormon agents in Switzerland, the Federal Council has decided that there is no occasion for them to take special measures, inasmuch as the cantonal laws punish polygamy, and that the American Government, in execution of the act of Congress of July 1, 1862, seeks to completely suppress it in the Territory of Utah. The Federal Council declares, moreover, that last summer,* it intervened upon the request of a family to reclaim a young girl who had emigrated at the instigation of a Morman agent.

* In the German text the words “last summer” are made to qualify the date of emigration.—N. F.

No. 601. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. No. 601.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, February 11, 1880. (Received March 1.) No. 247.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith copies of a correspondence with this government respecting George Retschel, a native of Baden, who is ill at Boujean, canton of Berne, and who has a certificate of naturalization, issued by the district court for the city and county of Philadelphia, on the 22d day of April, 1856.

The Federal Government communicate to me the request of the cantonal government of Berne, that I furnish means of subsistence to the said Retschel and to his family. I have declined to comply with their request, and in framing my answer I have been guided by my experience in the case of Jean Lerch, and by Mr. Seward’s instruction, No. 54, to Mr. Fogg of July 28, 1864.

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 247.—Translation.]

Swiss Federal Council to Mr. Fish

Berne, January 12, 1880.

A certain George Retschel or Ritschel, a native of the Grand Duchy of Baden, hut naturalized as an American citizen at Philadelphia the 22d of April, 1856, as appears from the document herewith inclosed, has fallen ill at Boujean near Bienne, canton of Berne, and his wife is not in a position to provide subsistence for the family, consequently the government; of the canton of Berne requests that the chargé d’affaires of the United States should furnish assistance sufficient to enable this unfortunate family to subsist.

In transmitting this request to Mr. Fish, and in asking him kindly to return the certificate of Retschel’s naturalization, the Federal Council seizes this occasion, &c.,

In the name of the Federal Council.

The President of the Confederation:
WELTI.
The chancellor of the Confederation:
SCHIESS.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 247.]

Mr. Fish to Mr. Welti

Legation of the United States,
Berlin, February 11, 1880.

The undersigned, chargé d’affaires of the United States of America, has the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the highly esteemed note of his Excellency Mr. Welti, President of the Swiss Confederation, of the 12th ultimo, respecting the request of the government of the canton of Berne, that the undersigned should furnish the means of subsistence to one George Retschel, a native of Germany, who claims to have been naturalized in the United States in 1856, and also to his family.

The undersigned regrets his inability to comply with the request without entering upon a discussion of the merits of Retschel’s claim to naturalization. The undersigned notes that he is not provided with the documents prescribed by Article IV of the treaty between the United States and the Swiss Confederation. Moreover the United States has no law which entitles a citizen, whether native or naturalized, who voluntarily abandons its territory and seeks asylum in a foreign land, to be supported there at the expense of the Government of the United States.

In the United States the destitute Swiss emigrant, able and willing to work, is placed at once upon the broad foundation of the public charity, and in case of illness, or of his there succumbing to poverty after his arrival, he is treated on a footing of equality with citizens of the United States, and the question is not even asked whether or not he has been naturalized or domiciled in the United States. It should be borne in mind that the United States annually receives thousands of Swiss emigrants to whom its hospitality is thus extended.

The undersigned while returning the document inclosed in the highly esteemed note above mentioned, renews to his Excellency Mr. Welti, President of the Swiss Confederation, and to the high Federal Council, the assurances, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

No. 602. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. No. 602.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, May 25, 1880. (Received June 7.) No. 275.]

Sir: This government has always abstained from participation in colonization or emigration schemes, and while it will soon legislate upon the subject of emigration agencies, it is not the policy of the Federal Council to advocate any definite scheme of colonization, nor will it favor emigration to any particular country. Its action will be confined in this respect to recommending the enactment of a law to enable the supervision and regulation of the methods by which the emigration is carried on and to protect the emigrants, so far as is possible, while on their journey. In my No. 263 I transmitted to you a copy of the law which they propose.

The “Grütliverein,” having at its head the philanthropist, Dr. Wilhelm Joos, have, for a long time, advocated the participation of the government in establishing a colony in America, and that for this purpose the Confederation, or the cantons, or even the communes, should acquire tracts of land for the establishing of a Swiss colony on a large scale.

In furtherance of their views the “Grütliverein” been actively circulating for signature a declaration on this subject, of which I inclose a copy and translation.* The French text is headed, “Émigration et colonization,” while the German is more explicit, “Kolonisatorische auswanderung,” or colonizing emigration.

There are six paragraphs setting forth the evils which prompt them to make this declaration, which are followed by as many (numbered from 7 to 12 inclusive) setting forth their views of the advantages to be gained by the adoption of their proposals, which are followed by a recapitulation of their wishes, which are as follows: We hereby declare that we desire: a. That by means of purchase or donation acquisition should be made of one or of several tracts of land fit for colonization in the name of the Swiss Confederation, or in the name of the cantons and of the communes, or even in the name of corporations or societies acting in concert with the communes.

b. That the great proprietors of real estate in America (States, railway companies, and others) should be invited to make known to the address of the central committee of the “Grütliverein” the conditions upon which they would be willing to cede said lands.

c. That steps should be taken in order that the authorities or corporations above mentioned may examine in time the propositions which may be made to them, and accept those which may appear suitable.

Holding these views it is not surprising that the law proposed by the Federal Council should meet with opposition from the “Grütliverein,” inasmuch as it carefully abstains from encouraging the establishment of a Swiss colony.

The Bund of this morning announces that the “Grütliverein” have presented a petition to the Federal Assembly similar to the tenor of their declaration, and that it is signed by 17,877 persons. The article also says that the “Grütliverein” do not find the proposed law respecting emigration agencies sufficient for the protection of the emigrants, and that they demand the establishment of colonies; “that the Swiss who seeks a new home by means of emigration should not be left to his fate.”

The declaration of the petitioners is vague and indefinite as to the extent of the protection they wish accorded to their emigrants, or rather to the proposed colony; but a perusal of that document leaves on my mind the impression that its authors believe it to be possible to establish on our soil and within our jurisdiction a colony of Swiss to be in a measure subject to Swiss legislation.

I inclose herewith a table concerning the emigration of Swiss to countries beyond the sea for 1878, compared with the period from 1868 to 1877. Unfortunately these tables, prepared from the cantonal records, do not include many Swiss who have emigrated to the United States after residing in other countries, nor do they include those who have emigrated without the knowledge of the cantonal or local authorities. This will account for the difference in the number of Swiss going to the United States, and the number which our records show to have arrived there. According to the Swiss tables, the total emigration for 1878 was 2,608, of whom 1,602 went to North America, that is 61 per cent. of the whole number. The total increase compared with the emigration (luring 1877, is 569, or 34 per cent.

The emigration for 1880 will no doubt greatly exceed that of last year. I base this opinion on the fact that the agents of several land companies have been actively at work in offering inducements to emigrants, and in one case in West Virginia a committee of experts from Berne have visited their lands, and are, I am told, favorably impressed with the examination; and among those instrumental in selecting these experts was a very prominent member of the cantonal government of Berne. Should my information as to the result of the examination by the experts be correct, it will be followed by a considerable emigration from this canton, perhaps under a subsidy from the canton or the respective communes from which the emigrants may go.

I have the honor, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

* Omitted from the present publication.

No. 603. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. No. 603.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, September 30, 1880. (Received October 21.) No. 303.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 219, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a circular concerning marriages, which I have issued to obviate the necessity of replying to the numerous letters addressed to the legation on the subject of the validity of marriages of citizens of the United States in Switzerland.

I may add that this circular has materially facilitated the work of the legation, and has at the same time removed some of the embarrass merits which the Swiss law tended to place in the way of marriages of our citizens in Switzerland. * * *

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

[Inclosure in No. 303.]

Circular from the legation of the United States of America at Berne, concerning marriages of citizens of the United States in Switzerland

Applications are frequently made to this legation, by the cantonal or communal authorities as well as by private individuals, for certificates as to the validity of a marriage of a citizen of the United States, performed in Switzerland; these applications are generally coupled with a request that the legation should certify that the marriage is valid according to the laws of the United States, and that it will be recognized as valid by the laws of the State or Territory from which such citizen comes.

It is not within the province of the legation to certify officially as to the laws of the different States, nor is it called upon to decide whether a marriage is valid or not. Those questions are properly within the competence of the judiciary, and the legation therefore confines itself to giving a statement of the laws of the United States concerning marriages in foreign countries, and the instructions issued to the consular officers on the subject, as follows:

“Sec. 4082. Marriages in presence of any consular officer of the United States in a foreign country, between persons who would be authorized to marry if residing in the District of Columbia, shall be valid to all intents and purposes, and shall have the same effect as if solemnized within the United States. And such consular officers shall, in all cases, give to the parties married before them a certificate of such marriage, and shall send another certificate thereof to the Department of State, there to be kept; such certificates shall specify the names of the parties, their ages, places of birth, and residence.” (Revised Statutes of the United States, section 4082.)

The instructions to the consuls from the Secretary of State of the United States contain the following:

“In the District of Columbia at the time of the passage of the act, males who had arrived at the age of twenty-one years, and females who had reached the age of sixteen were held competent to marry; and every minister of the gospel appointed or ordained according to the rights or ordinances of his church, whether his residence was within the District of Columbia or not, could be licensed to perform the ceremony.” (Consular regulations, § 275.)

“The statute does not authorize the consul to perform the ceremony. It is not to be supposed that Congress intended to authorize a consul to perform the ceremony of marriage, or to countenance the doing of any act which would be or even seem to be a violation of the laws of the country in which he resides. Marriage is a contract which each State regulates for itself by its own laws. Inasmuch as rights of inheritance may depend upon the validity of marriages, consuls cannot be too cautious in satisfying themselves, when their presence is asked at a proposed marriage, not only that the parties may lawfully intermarry according to the laws of the country in which the ceremony is to take place, but also that all requirements of law necessary to give vidality to the marriage have been had. In no case should the consul himself assume to perform the ceremony, unless authorized by the laws of the country to do so. The statute contemplates that the ceremony is to be performed in his presence, but it should be done according to local laws. These considerations, however, do not apply to oriental countries, such as China, Japan, Turkey, &c.” (Consular regulations, § 278.)

From examination of the above it appears that a marriage performed under, and in accordance with the Swiss Federal law, concernant l’êtat-civil, la tenue des registres qui s’y rapportent et le mariage, of December 24, 1874, if performed in the presence of a consular officer of the United States, will be valid to all intents and purposes, and shall have the same effect as if solemnized within the United States.

The legation cannot undertake to procure certificates as to the laws of the different States or Territories (each of which has its own laws on marriage, divorce, and the rights of married women). Persons desiring such certificates should apply to the-proper officials of such States or Territories, either direct, or in the case of Swiss citizens through the officials of their own country.

Legation of the United States, Berne, July 20, 1880.
NICHOLAS FISH,
Chargé d’ Affaires of the United States to the Swiss Confederation.

To —— ——,
—— ——.

No. 604. Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts. No. 604.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Berne, September 30, 1880. (Received October 21.) No. 304.]

Sir: In March of last year, Dr. Joos, of Schaffhausen, introduced in the National Council, the following motion: 1. Article 39 of the federal constitution is suppressed and replaced by the following:

2. The confederation alone has the power to issue bank notes or treasury bonds. It cannot, however, decree for them a compulsory circulation.

3. This revised article will be submitted to the popular vote.

4. The Federal Council is charged with the execution of the present decree.

This motion was rejected by the National Council without hesitation and Dr. Joos then set to work to gather the necessary 50,000 signatures to a petition demanding the revision of Article 39.

Article 39, of the federal constitution, is as follows: The confederation has power to decree by legislative measures general provisions concerning the emission and redemption of bank notes. It cannot, however, create a monopoly for the emission of bank notes, nor decree the obligatory acceptance of those notes.

The article (120) of the federal constitution concerning the method of its revision, is as follows: When one branch of the Federal Assembly decrees the revision of the federal constitution and the other branch does not agree thereto, or when 50,000 Swiss citizens, having the right to vote, demand the revision, the question Whether the federal constitution should be revised is, in either case, to be submitted to the vote of the Swiss people by ayes and nays.

If in either of these cases the majority of Swiss citizens taking part in the vote, decide in the affirmative, the two councils will be renewed for (the purpose of) working upon the revision.

Dr. Joos and his supporters, in their petition, did not confine them selves to a request for the revision of Article 39, they demanded its revision under Article 120, and that it should be revised in the following manner: 1. Article 39 of the federal constitution is suppressed.

2. It is replaced by the following:

“The confederation alone has the right to issue bank notes or treasury bonds. Nevertheless it cannot decree their compulsory circulation. The profit resulting from the issuing of bank notes or treasury bonds shall be divided between the confederation and the cantons in a proportion to be determined by the law.”

3. This revised article shall be submitted to the popular vote.

4. The Federal Council is charged with the execution of the present decree.

The Federal Council in bringing the demand for revision to the Federal Assembly’s attention, naturally took exception to the petitioner’s right to thus initiate legislation by the popular vote, and also to the restriction of the question to be submitted to popular vote to a single article of the federal constitution, and recommended that the question to be submitted to the popular vote should be: Shall the present federal constitution be revised?

The Federal Assembly met in extra session to consider the petition, and by a very large majority adopted the recommendation of the Federal Council. The latter has published, in the last number of the Feuille Fédérate, the decree of the Assembly and has fixed the 31st October as the day for the popular vote.

There is but little chance that the revisionists will obtain the majority; they will have against them the banking and money interests of the country, the large number of voters who see no benefit in a change, the partisans of cantonal rights, and more numerous and more powerful than all the large number of voters who here, as with us, look with jealous eye upon any alteration in the organic law of the confederation.

I inclose you copies of a letter from Dr. Kern,* the able and intelligent representative of Switzerland at Paris, and one of the framers of the constitution of 1848, to Mr. Schenk of the Federal Council, giving his views concerning the manner of proceeding to be observed in regard to the petition of Dr Joos, and his supporters. It is a valuable commentary on the provisions of the constitution respecting revision, and the position of its author entitles it to great consideration.

I likewise inclose copies of the message of the Federal Council to the Federal Assembly, and a copy of the decree as voted by the latter.*

I have, &c.,

NICHOLAS FISH.

* Omitted from the present publication.

* Omitted from the present publication.

No. 605. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fish. No. 605.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Fish.

Department of State,
Washington, October 19, 1880. No. 170.]

Sir: I have received your dispatch, No. 301, of the 27th ultimo, wherein, in reply to my telegram of the 25th of the same month, you communicate the details of the application of Carl Gottlieb Rau for a passport and your action thereon.

Briefly, Rau, born of naturalized parentage, in Kansas, is taken to Europe while a minor, marries and establishes himself in Switzerland; not in the country (Würtemberg) whence his father emigrated. Upon his applying to you for a passport as an American citizen, you required his definite declaration of intention to return to the United States within some certain time, basing your requirement on the ground that, under the circumstances of Rail’s birth and residence during minority, his indefinite residence abroad, without evident intent to return, amounts to self-expatriation.

The proper officers of the Department have given every attention to the case, both as reported by you, and upon the appeal and documentary evidence submitted by Mr. Rau.

It is conceived that, in applying to his case the doctrines of repatriation as tantamount under the circumstances to expatriation, you have extended the thesis you advance of Rau’s citizenship being due to his father’s naturalization beyond the point where it should rightfully rest. For, while there may be rational doubt as to whether Rau is a good citizen of the United States, sharing alike the burdens and privileges of his fellow citizens, he is still undoubtedly a citizen. Having been born here, of a naturalized father, the question of repatriation would not obtain in his case, even if he were permanently domiciled in Würtemberg his father’s place of nativity. The Department holds that for a native American to put off his national character he should put on another. Continued residence of a native American abroad is not expatriation, unless he performs acts inconsistent with his American nationality and consistent only with the formal acquirement of another nationality, and the same rule holds equally good in the case of a naturalized citizen of the United States who may reside abroad otherwhere than in the country of his original allegiance. Existing statutes confirm the principle by providing that citizenship shall flow to the children of American citizens born abroad, the birthright ceasing only with the grandchildren whose fathers have never resided in the United States. Foreign residence, even for two generations, is, therefore, not necessarily expatriation, in the sense of renouncing original allegiance, nor is it necessarily repatriation Unless through the conflict of laws of the respective countries and the conclusion of conventional agreements between them.

If, therefore, Mr. Rau shall make application in the usual form, fortified by affidavit and documentary evidence of his American birth, and shall show that he has not forfeited his native allegiance by assuming another, the Department conceives that he is entitled to a passport for himself and wife.

The application of Mr. Rau to this Department, through the Hon. J. W. Stone, M. C., of Michigan, was in the nature of an appeal from your action in his regard, coupled with a request that a passport should issue to him directly from the Department. The rule which has been enforced for some years is that citizens of the United States desiring to obtain passports while in a foreign country must apply to the chief diplomatic representative of the United States in that country.” There is no good reason why that rule should not be applicable now, or why action should be taken here which might imply reversal of your decision. The Department prefers to regard you as not having refused a passport to Mr. Rau, but, rather, as having, through commendable zeal in the furtherance of true American interests abroad, required of the applicant a declaration not technically necessary, either in view of his birthplace or present country of residence.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Turkish EmpireTurkish Empire

Contents

I—Turkey.I—Turkey.

[606] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, October 21, 1879. (Received November 10.)

[607] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, November 15, 1879. (Received Dec. 13.)

[608] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, December 2, 1879. (Received Jan. 3, 1880.)

[609] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, January 10, 1880. (Received February 9.)

[610] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, February 19, 1880. (Received March 16.)

[611] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, March 5, 1880. (Received March 29.)

[612] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, March 26, 1880. (Received April 19.)

[613] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, March 30, 1880. (Received April 19.)

[614] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, April 22, 1880. (Received May 10.)

[615] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, May 8, 1880. (Received May 31.)

[616] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Payson.

Consulate-General of the United States, Constantinople, June 10, 1880. (Received July 6.)

[617] . Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, June 22, 1880. (Received July 12.)

[618] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, July 19, 1880. (Received August 9.)

[619] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, August 1, 1880. (Received August 23.)

[620] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, August 9, 1880. (Received August 30.)

[621] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap.

Department of State, Washington, August 21, 1880.

[622] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap.

Washington, August 23, 1880.

[623] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Heap.

Department of State, Washington, September 2, 1880.

[624] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, September 13, 1880. (Received Oct. 2.)

[625] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Heap.

Department of State, Washington, September 15, 1880.

[626] . Mr. Hunter to Mr. Heap.

Department of State, Washington, September 22, 1880.

[627] . Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Constantinople, October 11, 1880. (Received Oct. 30.)

[628] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap.

Department of State, Washington, October 15, 1880.

No. 606. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. No. 606.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, October 21, 1879. (Received November 10.) No. 351.]

Sir: This morning I received from Hagoss Effendi Matteosian, Vekil (secular agent) of the Protestant community in the Ottoman Empire, a note, of which a reply is inclosed; also, a pamphlet which he requests transmitted to you.

Hagoss Effendi, as his name indicates, is an Armenian, and by virtue of his office holds the esteem of the Protestants, and is respected by others of different faith. His pamphlet, though brief, is a forcible presentation of Protestantism in Turkey.

He would greatly err, however, who should estimate the fruits of missionary labors in Turkey by the number and character of the Protestant community alone. The stimulus given to the native Christian churches by awakening a zeal for education and kindling a brighter and more ardent piety has been productive of indirect results greater by far, in my opinion, than the direct results, however considerable.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure in No. 351.]

Hagoss Effendi to Mr. Maynard

Constantinople, October 18, 1879.

Sir: I have taken the liberty to inclose two copies of a pamphlet intended to show the necessity of the complete organization of the Protestant community for the security and prosperity of that people, and that in order to do this their constitution must be ratified by the Porte and an imperial berat be given them, like those of other communities.

Begging that you will kindly forward one of the accompanying pamphlets to the Hon. Mr. Evarts, the Secretary of State, I remain your obedient servant,

HAGOSS MATTEOSIAIST,
Vekil of the Protestant Community.

Statement as to the present position of the Protestant community in the Turkish Empire.

The history of Protestantism in Turnkey dates from the introduction of Protestant missions into the empire, and as there is scarcely a Protestant country which has not more or less operated here, so nearly every Protestant country is interested in the enterprise represented by the Protestant community.

This movement does not assume majestic features, like the Roman Catholic propaganda. On the contrary, operating among the masses, it has hitherto been to the Jews a stumbling-block and unto the Greeks foolishness. The admirers of Roman Catholic splendor may see but little to admire and respect in Protestant operations and institutions. Yet, despite external appearance, the steady growth of the community in numbers, the marked improvement in the intellectual and moral condition of its members, the high character of its institutions, and the approbation already gained by its liberal principles among the masses, may assure its friends that the reforming and elevating power of its faith will bring forth the same results here as elsewhere, though much remains to bring this community to a position to make its beneficial influence generally acknowledged.

Statistics could be brought to show that the Protestant movement in this empire is not a contemptible enterprise. The whole work is characterized by that Anglo-Saxon and Teutonic stability so well adapted to the sober-mindedness of the masses, and which, it is hoped, will counteract the ostentatious Latin influence which has so much affected the upper classes.

As it is now fully thirty-five years since this community came into existence under the care of missionary societies, the time seems to have come for it to assume a self-existent position as a native institution, so that its members shall be no longer regarded as simply individual followers of foreign missionaries. In order to this the community must be fully recognized and its constitution sanctioned by the Imperial Government, on a basis of equality with other Christian bodies.

No doubt the Protestant Church, by virtue of its position in the civilized world, can claim religious equality here as a legitimate right. Moreover, the Protestant community should be recognized as entitled to civil equality, for no religious profession can have organized existence, much less prosperity, in this country, without the honorable civil status granted to “Millets.”

Since the Ottoman Sultan is the Khalif, he is the sovereign head, not of a race, but of those who hold the tenets of Islamism. The Ottoman body politic is the community of the faithful. Into this community, it is plain, non-Moslem subjects cannot be admitted. This is the constitution of Ottoman sovereignty, and the character of its nationality.

The Ottomans by settling in this country among the nations they conquered, put an end to the political existence of the latter. And, since these could not be incorporated into the new body or nation, they were organized into separate bodies. The Fatih Sultan, in order to recommend his rule to the nations whom he deprived of country and power, and at the same time to relieve himself of all responsibility towards providing for their social and religious wants, and as an instrument of defense to protect these feeble nations against the excesses of his own followers, granted these non-Moslem classes national existence upon theocratic principles like those of the Moslems, with entire freedom to manage their own internal affairs, with religious immunities, communal powers, and civil privileges, clothing their chiefs with judicial prerogatives and a representative character, entitling them to plead the cause of their people.

Like true theocracies, these new organizations were put under the jurisdiction of patriarchs of their respective creeds, and were designated “millets” or nations, distinguished by their religious profession.

It was on this principle of religious nationality that the Bulgarian and other races holding the orthodox Greek, faith were incorporated into the Greek “millet” or nationality. And for the same reason the Bulgarians, wishing to assert their national existence, sought to separate themselves from the jurisdiction of the ecumenical Greek patriarch.

The special duties of these millet organizations are to care for the educational and other moral wants of the people; to regulate their social and domestic relations; to settle family, religious, and other differences in the community; to maintain the stability of all communal institutions; and defend the rights and external relations of the “millet” individually and collectively.

Within the domain of these millet organizations there is ample protection for religious and civil existence, as far as such can be secured without political and military life; outside of it none. Conformity with the creed of the body is an absolute condition for membership; active diversity from it is unallowable. Religious freedom is therefore understood to be only freedom to pass from one non-Moslem community to another.

Still, it must be acknowledged that, but for this millet organization, Christianity would have been annihilated in this Islam empire, a fact recognized by Moslems with regret, and with gratitude by Christians.

This state of sectarian existence is not confined to non-Moslem subjects of the Sultan. The government itself holds the position of a military “caste,” and is the prototype of existing sectarianism. It must be remembered that the dominant body is composed of heterogeneous races, and that there is no more sympathy between its different sections than with the non-Moslems. Their common faith is the only bond of union, of which the center is the “Khalifate,” now personified in the Sultan.

Religious exclusiveness is of the very nature of the Ottoman rule—the vital force by which the system is sustained, the hope of its perpetuity, the corner-stone of the imperial edifice. Hence this spirit pervades every section and grade of the population. From the cabinet, and the judicial bench, down to the details of e very-day life, it is the ruling principle—the dividing line between man and man.

Within the last fifty-two years two millets have come into existence. The first was the Armenian Roman Catholic body, and the second was the Protestant. When those of the Armenians who had joined themselves to the Church of Rome were persecuted and excommunicated by their millet, they were, through the intervention of Roman Catholic powers, formed into a separate body by an imperial berat, on a footing of equality with the most favored millet.

When the followers of the Protestant reform were subjected to like treatment, their protection became a serious question with the friends of this movement. Since the object of Protestant missions established here was primarily the diffusion of evangelical principles and the reform of existing institutions, and not the establishment of a sect or the extension of an ecclesiastical jurisdiction, the formation of a Protestant millet on the usual basis was repulsive to the religious ideas of the promoters of the movement, as a system which secularized the church and added to their burdens. Besides, the withdrawal of the professors of this faith from their respective communal connections, into a new body, was unfavorable to the diffusion of enlightened principles among the masses. Efforts were therefore made to avoid it and obtain toleration within existing “millets;” but that could not be gained. Moreover, the establishment of evangelical churches and institutions was absolutely dependent upon the formation of a Protestant millet organization to legalize their existence. They were, therefore, through the kind offices of the British and the then Prussian embassies, formed into a body by an imperial firman, under the superintendence of the prefecture of the police, and represented by an agent called the vekeel of the “Protestant millet.”

This organization was provisional, as it was intended only to protect them from persecution by separating them from the jurisdiction of the other millets. Enough was, however, granted to form a basis of a new system of millet administration. The principal feature of this organization was that it was represented by a layman. The church, taking no part in the secular administration, was itself freed from secular intermeddling. The executive officer of the community, like a civil magistrate, has charge of the secular affairs of the people, and acts as a protector over the church and other institutions so far as to secure their civil rights. This organization, however, was deficient in this, that it was formally put under a government officer, which was tantamount to subjecting it to government surveillance; again, no administrative power was ever formally granted to it; and, lastly, the privileges and immunities granted to the institutions of other millets were not extended to those of the Protestants by right of a “berat.” In short, the millet autonomy for Protestants was not sanctioned by imperial berat or rescript, and, therefore, it had no civil status among the recognized millets. Hence, Protestantism, though hitherto tolerated, is not sanctioned in this empire. In fact, no berat* has ever been granted to the Protestants, nor have they any privileges registered in the imperial chancery, nor does their name appear among the religious bodies of the empire in the annual government gazette.

The promoters of the movement, having not much sympathy with secular establishments, took no care for the completion of the civil organization of the community, content with the little protection afforded by it as an agency allowed to assume powers never formally granted. This, certainly, was not enough for the efficiency of an administrative organization, which was to watch over and protect the external relations and interests of the community, to settle internal questions, and to regulate and direct the relations of a growing people, composed of many denominations and races, unlike to any existing institution, unique in every feature.

The sanction by imperial berat of its peculiar constitution and laws has been becoming more and more an indispensable necessity, especially since officials were growing less favorably disposed towards the community from observing its capacity to develop and exert, influence.

On the basis of the berats and constitutions granted to other communities, a constitution was framed, adapting to the wants of the Protestant community the provisions contained in those berats, and, after due examination by all concerned, the government sanction was solicited for it.

The Porte, however, issued a project of a constitution especially for Protestants, depriving them of millet organization and privileges connected with it by new restrictions, dividing them into local communities under the officious surveillance of the local authorities, whose principles, or rather whose too common want of principle, is so well known.

All efforts of the British and German embassies to put the then Protestant community on a recognized equality with other religious communities have failed, though official assurances that such was the position designed for it were liberally given, and perfect equality with other communities was all along professedly the position of the Protestants.

Those who know the nature of the relation existing here between the governing body and the governed, know that government officials of all ranks in general are far from being public servants. In this relation justice is a favor, or a thing taken by the violent; right is not, as a rule, sufficient to guarantee justice, or even respectable treatment, and since the existing antipathy, as well as difference of language between classes, prevents the population making common cause, the control of public opinion can scarcely be said to exist here.

In such a state of society the beneficial influence of a popular combination like the millet organization cannot be overestimated, an organization surrounded and protected by the hallowed associations of religion. The services rendered to the subject nationalities by the privileged heads of the organizations, are historical facts; and these heads are to this day the only efficient advocates who have a respectful hearing guaranteed to them. The possession of such as organization and representative head among people who seem to have no inviolable rights, is an indispensable necessity. The agents of the chief officers in the interior are the rallying centers of the oppressed. The high position in which these officers are kept by their people gives them the dignity so necessary here for efficiency, and saves them from the insults to which private parties are so much exposed among a rude population.

From what has been said it is plain that, both to secure a position of respect in relation to the government and to their fellow-subjects, and to enable them to carry out numerous objects of an educational, domestic, religious, and charitable nature among themselves, it is of essential importance that the Protestant community should receive from the Porte a formally sanctioned constitution and berat, such as are granted to the other religious bodies.

Hitherto the Protestant community has been deprived of the benefits of such officers as above described, and the organization of which these officers are the representatives, though, perhaps, more than all the rest, it stands in need of them, as from its character and its aggressive power it not unfrequently has to encounter the opposition of them all.

In conclusion, we would assure our friends that this document has not been prepared with any desire to disparage the reputation of the Imperial Government, nor is Oriental society so minutely depicted with any other intention than that of explaining the position occupied by the Protestant community, so as to show the absolute need of the complete millet organization for the Protestants of this empire. That organization, upon which so much has been shown to depend, so long sought for and so often promised, we trust may now at length be conceded.

HAGOSS MATTEOSIAN,
Vekil of the Protestant Community.
Constantinople, October 6, 1879.

* A berat is an imperial rescript granted to the officers of the communities, and securing them freedom of action independent of local authorities.

No. 607. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. No. 607.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, November 15, 1879. (Received Dec. 13.) No. 358.]

Sir: A dispatch from the Department of State, No. 71, of August 29, 1876, instructed the procurement at as early a day as practicable, for the use of the Secretary of the Treasury, of copies of the latest reports of life-saving institutions and societies in Turkey, with such other information as might be attainable.

Inquiry failed to discover any such reports, or any other information worth communicating. In the notes of my recent cruise around the Black Sea (dispatch No. 340, of September 10, 1879), I mentioned a life-saving station near the mouth of the Bosphorus and the death in April last year of Captain Palmer, who had charge of it. Beyond what is there stated I had obtained absolutely nothing. There has just been reproduced here a paper from a late English journal on “The Life-boat Service in Turkey,” which I inclose. It is from the pen of Sir George Thomas, an English gentleman who has resided several years in Constantinople, and is connected with the Imperial Ottoman Bank; and it may be relied upon as authentic.

For many miles each way from the entrance to the Bosphorus the shore of the Black Sea has no harbor and affords no shelter from the storm. In rough weather, vessels coming in are peculiarly exposed. There is, moreover, a point at no great distance, known by seamen as “the false Bosphorus,” where the coast line is very similar to that at the real channel. By the display of false lights the deception used to be complete and often fatal. Humanity and commerce alike demanded protection, and this article gives the result. I am aware of no similar establishment elsewhere in the Ottoman dominions.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure in No. 358.]

Sir George Thomas on the life-boat service in Turkey

the black sea life-boat and rocket service—a sketch and retrospect.

In a recent number of the Morning Post, under the heading of “Life-boat Service in Turkey,” there appears from the Constantinople correspondent of that journal the following graphic and interesting description of that service, more especially of the station on the European shore of the Black Sea mouth of the Bosphorus.

On a grassy headland some six miles from the mouth of the Bosphorus stand a couple of cottages, a beacon, and a flagstaff. At their feet the treacherous Euxine breaks with surging crash against the sharp-hewn rocks or sweeps quietly into the little sandy bays, whilst behind and around the pleased eye may rest on leagues of purple moor fringed with Belgrade’s dark sun-streaked forest.

The first glance at these tiny mansions and trim garden plots suffices to show that no native is master there, and quite prepares me for the hearty “Glad to see you, sir; what will you have after your ride?” which greets the ear as a splendid specimen of the Anglo-Saxon race runs down the steps and gives his hearty grip. This is Captain Palmer, once a skipper in the English coasting trade, now chief of the rocket and life-boat service on the European shore—a brave, frank-hearted sailor, who fears neither wind nor wave when duty beckons onward. The neat five-roomed house into which he leads me is a source of endless though modest pride to the honest tar, for, from foundation to roof, all, save locks and tiles, are the work of his own hands. His father before him had been content with the smaller, clumsier building in which his crew of fifteen Moslems now dwell, but “You see,” he explains, “the dear old man had not my mother out here, and I could not send for my wife till she had a comfortable place to lay her head, and the Turks would never have helped me.” So shortly before he had been named to his drowned sire’s post young Samuel Palmer buckled to the task, and soon could write to his bride—there she is, smiling welcome whilst bustling about “on hospitable thoughts intent”—to come out and cheer his new home.

I wonder what the simple Hampshire girl felt when first set down in this strange land. Besides her husband, not a soul within half a dozen miles can speak a word of English, for the village, which seeks shelter from the rough northern blasts behind, that fort-crested hill, is inhabited by Greeks and Turks only, and the sailor lads who run so willingly to serve her could do no more than try to guess her wants.

But Mrs. Palmer was not easily dismayed; her husband had picked up Turkish, and she could also, and is doing so fast. Still it is a lonely existence, and painfully exciting, too, when the man for whom she has left country and kin goes forth to snatch victims from the furious storm. Moslem wives and daughters made, it is true, overtures of friendship on her arrival, but at the beginning she could not understand them, and afterwards found their chattering so unsavory that the fair Khanums met with chilling reception and unmistakable hints not to intrude their society on the Giaour’s wife.

Over 32 miles of coast from Fanaraki to Carabounar reigns Captain Palmer. The latter and Kilia, being the two most important, are each supplied with a life-boat, as well as the rocket apparatus, which alone is furnished to the second-rate stations. Except Palmer himself, there is no foreigner in this service (a similar one under Captain Summers exists on the Asiatic side); his officers are Turks and so, or rather Mohammedans, are his men. Gallant fellows these, and smart and skillful, likewise, when carefully trained. They must be led and kept in order, and then all goes straight; a case of skulking is very rare, and for strength and endurance none can surpass them. In five minutes from the moment the warning rings out the life-boat is launched and ready, but in the rocket battery Palmer places his chief trust, owing to the fact that ships generally strike on jocks where no boat could get at them. To this point it would be well if ship-owners enforced greater attention among their masters and crews. The Black Sea is notoriously dangerous, and no part more so than the mouth of the Bosphorus, it being most difficult to hit in dirty weather, especially as its principal features are faithfully copied by one or two adjacent bays that lure numbers of vessels to destruction despite the excellent system of lights. Indeed, before the establishment of these stations, wreckers had fine pickings, and bitterly do the villagers of the coast still resent the interference with what they regard as their natural prey. Notwithstanding, however, the known perils of these waters, many officers of the commercial navies are evidently quite ignorant of the use of the rocket, and although to each is attachéd full directions in English, French, Turkish, and Greek, it is no uncommon thing to behold the first man who clutches the line onboard the stranded ship fasten it around his body and jump into the breakers. Of course he is dragged ashore dead, on account of the boiling surf and scraggy rocks. Others, on the contrary, seem utterly without notion how to secure the welcome rope, and. fumble it helplessly until some angry wave sweeps them far out of the reach of aid. Hundreds of lives have been lost for want of a little common foresight.

Extraordinary though it may appear, the official Turk does nothing to reward zeal and courage in this service. About 36s. a month are the wages of those who may at at any hour be called on to jeopardize their lives, and just now a poor fellow who had obtained a few weeks’ leave to visit his wife and family for the first time during seven years had his scanty pay stopped whilst absent. Such treatment has a very bad effect, as is proved by the frequent retirement of well trained and efficient hands, who find in the fisheries a more grateful and less perilous manner of earning bread.

Talking of bread reminds me of the trouble that Ramazan brings Palmer. Nine-tenths of the men persist in strictly observing that fast. It is vain to reason that they are similarly circumstanced to warriors in the field. No argument can persuade them to eat and drink between dawn and sunset. The result is that, through daily excessive abstinence and midnight feasting, they become weak and incapable of sustained exertions. An example of this occurs to me. One afternoon of the sacred month, a small craft was noticed in distress a little distance away. Instantly Palmer put off in the life-boat, but could not reach her, as his men absolutely broke down in the tug against wind and sea. Reluctantly Palmer turned back, as it happened the vessel just escaped, and did not fail to read the men a severe lecture on their folly. No permanent impression on their minds was, however, produced. Here the authorities might usefully influence their fellow Mussulmans.

But what can you expect from an admiralty which neglects to furnish these stations with telescopes and barometers, and even grumbles at every demand for a yard or two of rope? Indeed, but for Palmer’s determined energy, the life-boats now so admiramirably kept and ordered would not impossibly be rotten, worthless coffins.

Desolate and disheartening as such an existence may seem, it is not without its pleasures. A magnificent climate during two-thirds of the year, lovely scenery, abundance of cheap fish, game, poultry, eggs, and milk are not to be despised. During the Bosphorus season, too, Kilia is a favorite picnicking ground. A ride of less than, ten miles along the high coast carries one thither from Therapia, and it would be dim-cult to meet with a fairer gallop than back through the valley and shady beech groves. Then there is capital shooting. Thousands of plump quail light every autumn on the breezy heights, and you can do worse than tramp out at break of day to the scented heather and knock over the little brown birds as fast as your dog turns them up. Later on, huge flocks of teal and duck haunt the Lake Derkos, close to which lurk also woodcock and pheasant; and if you prefer big game, plunge inland amongst the high brushwood, with dogs and beaters, and both pig and deer will offer your rifle a chance. Shoot away and enjoy yourself, for the land here is free to all.

But far different guests to cock and longtails does winter too often bring to these dwellers by the sea. Then rage those fearful tempests which have stamped “black” on the turbulent Euxine. A grand, if terrible, spectacle may be at such times witnessed on this storm-lashed coast. Masses of seething foam dash far and wide, as the waves hurl themselves, with thundering roar against the trembling cliffs; trees are dragged up by the roots, huts leveled with the earth.

Night throws a horrid veil over the scene. Hark, to that gun! A ship on the reef. Loud peals the alarm, and at its first note the men are awake and stirring. Down the rocks, guided only by the white stones which mark the precipitous paths, they spring. “Quick, now, with the rocket! Ready! Fire!” And the line hisses clean across the sinking barque. “Bravo! She has it; gently now”; whilst a drenched sailor is hauled on shore. Up the cliff with him, to where warm blankets and hot grog will restore exhausted nature. “Out again with the basket”; again and again, till all are saved, and Palmer heaves a sigh of relief. “Is anybody left?” he once asked an Italian skipper. “Only a dog and canary.” Straightway the kind-souled tar plunged into the surf; and to this day the bird sings in his cottage and the spaniel licks his hand. It was during a gale that brave old Samuel Palmer ended his grand career. I had been talking to him but a short while before of the quiet English home in which, he was to rest from his toil. A sad, soft expression stole over the weather-stained face as he answered, pointing to the calm water, “My grave is there; I feel it.” It was the last time that honest hand shook mine, and within four months I stood by the open grave in Scutari’s famous cemetery, where he lies midst those who also fell in the hour of victory, for victory indeed crowned the close of that nobly-spent life.

The story is still fresh in my memory. On the morning of April the 23d, 1878, a large Turkish ship was observed close into Fanaraki Bay, which she had evidently mistaken for the mouth of the Bosphorus. Palmer was immediately sent for and by the time he had galloped over on his black pony the vessel had anchored. Troubled in his mind at this, for there was already a stiff breeze nearly right on shore, and every sign of much worse ere sunset, Palmer sent on board the Turk, which turned out to be a transport crowded with troops, invalids, and refugees, male and female, from the seat of war, advising him to get out of his dangerous position. The answer was that she had only auxiliary steam power, which could not make head against the wind. Not satisfied with the reply and growing more and more uneasy, as the tempest was evidently close on them, Palmer again implored the captain to try, contending that by combining steam with his jib he would probably just fetch round the point into the Bosphorus, an opinion shared by most professional men present. But the doomed ship did not stir. Another hour, and it was too late. The gale increased with fearful rapidity, and ere darkness set in a perfect hurricane was raging. The life-boat was miles away; she could never have been there, in time even if launching her were possible. All eyes were strained towards the ship, whilst Palmer stood ready with the rockets. Would the cables hold? A few moments of awful suspense; and— Then rose from sea to sky the wild farewell,

Then shrieked the timid and stood still the brave,

as the vast hulk was hurled with tremendous violence on the rocks. Wave after wave lifts her like a feather, only to dash her again on the cruel stones. She must breakup; the one agonizing question is, when? The saving ropes are already on hoard, the basket running backwards and forwards on its mission of mercy. “Into the surf, my lads, and up the rocks with them,” shouts Palmer’s, cheery voice, as he plunges, life-line in hand, into the boiling foam to assist the half-drowned men and women. Thirty-two has he himself drawn to land and passed up the cliff towards the refuge-house, when he noticed a soldier struggling hard by. Palmer springs towards him, clasps him firmly, and turns to the shore. It may not be; his task is done! A huge sea, mightier and more furious than its fellows, strikes the gallant sailor whilst thus incumbered, the life-line slips from his grasp, and he is seen no more till his body and that of the trooper are found by his son jammed together in the cleft of a rock. Close to the spot lies, plainly visible in the shallow water, the skeleton of the ill-fated ship, which had sunk shortly afterwards, carrying down with her all but the 96 souls that Samuel Palmer died to save.—(From the Daily Moniteur du Commerce, of November 14, 1879.)

No. 608. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. No. 608.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, December 2, 1879. (Received Jan. 3, 1880.) No. 361.]

Sir: I had the honor, in my dispatch No. 36, of November 15, 1875, to discuss at some length the financial affairs of the Ottoman Government, brought to my notice officially by the Sublime Porte.

Although alluded to repeatedly since, I have not had the subject so presented that it seemed necessary to treat it formally. This morning, however, I have a note from his excellency the minister of foreign affairs, which I am requested to bring to the attention of our countrymen at home and abroad, and which, with its inclosures, is transmitted.

The decree of October 6, 1875, suspending for five years the payment in money of one half the accruing interest on the public debt, and promising for the other half debentures bearing interest at 5 per cent., proved highly disastrous to the grand vizier who promulgated it (dispatch No. 322, of July 7, 1879), and had much to do in hastening the downfall of his imperial master. Yet, from that day to this no interest has been paid, either in debentures or in money, and the daily quotations of the Turkish securities, both here and in London and Paris, scarcely exceed one-half the accumulated arrears.

The operations of the imperial treasury meanwhile have been a series of temporary expedients to seek relief for the moment against ever-increasing embarrassments. Debts, except unavoidable payments, are left to the care of the future. Official salaries are greatly behind, and also the pay of the army and navy. Even the daily supplies for the soldiers are difficult to procure. Small sums of money, a few thousand, hundreds it may be, are a subject of negotiation. * * *

The financial question subordinates all others, and the question of reforms, especially is subsidiary to it. * * *

The Turks, in their fiscal troubles, have not lacked abundant counsel.

During the last four years there have come numerous advisers, self-appointed for the most part, with schemes of the panacea order, for the rehabilitation of the. Ottoman treasury. They have been received graciously, listened to attentively, entertained hospitably, and sent away loaded with promises, sometimes with a present or two. But as the plans of one side looked to the outstretched hands of the creditors, while the other side were thinking of their own empty stomachs and emptier pockets, nothing ever ripened. Experience pointed the Divan to a foreign loan as the readiest Way to replenish an exhausted treasury. Such a loan guaranteed by the great powers or by one of them could not fail of success, ample for domestic wants, and a small percentage for distribution among the creditors. Failing this, small sums have been borrowed from time to time of the Galata bankers, whose names appear in the recent transaction, and secured by a pledge of the different revenues. Such loans are simply ruinous; to the Turks if they are repaid, to the bankers if they are not. The new agreement, if I comprehend its scope, embodies a series of dealings and gives more satisfactory security to the bankers; and at the same time relieves the custom-house of certain incumbrances and turns its proceeds into the public treasury.

This source, though constant, is small. The duties are nominally eight percent. A gentleman having the best possible means of knowing, recently assured me they do not exceed three per cent., and that brokers would undertake for three per cent., to secure the delivery of goods. Efforts have been made to place the collection of the customs revenues, as well as of the others, in the hands of a commission of foreigners. This proposal the Turks resist if they do not resent, and I am persuaded they will never submit to it except as the last resort of despair.

In my dispatch No. 290, of November 25, 1878, I represented the condition of the currency. The table giving the rate of exchange between the different kinds of money is reproduced, adding the rate for this day, viz:

Relative value of Ottoman moneys.

Date. Gold. Silver. Copper. Paper. Beshlik or metallik.

December 18, 1876 100 104.5 150 124

November 25, 1878. 100 107 180 350

December 2, 1879 100 106.5 370 860 117,375

For the past eight months or more the paper money has been refused by the traders. It depreciated until by general consent the circulation was abandoned.

Various devices for retiring it have been adopted. Among them is one to receive one-fifth of certain taxes in paper at 25 per cent. of the nominal value. The Imperial Ottoman Bank superintended the issue, numbering, and registering of the notes, and the bank is now charged with the withdrawal. The latest report is up to the close of the last month and is a brief summary of this short-lived currency.

At first copper money took the place of the paper in the markets and the smaller retail trade. But for some unexplained reason it soon began to depreciate until it sunk to the level of the paper, and like it was discarded. This was not the result of increased coinage, for no copper had been coined during the last ten years. The only use made of it at present is in payment of tolls across the bridges between Galata and Stamboul. And as the bridges are constantly thronged, this use is considerable. Now the principal business is transacted with silver and an obsolete coinage called beshlik or metallik. The latter, of which none has been struck since about the fifth year of Sultan Medjid (1844), is silver with so much alloy as to disfigure it and to render the coins disproportionately large. A few specimens are inclosed. In considerable sums it is exchangeable for silver at fully ten per cent. discount. The smallest silver coin is a piece of twenty paras, a half piaster, equal in value to one English penny. There are also coins of one, of two, of five, often, and of twenty piasters, called the medjidieh, in honor of the Sultan Medjid, in the early part of whose reign it and the rest of the series were first coined. The five-piaster coin is called by the Turks sometimes the tcherek or quarter piece, sometimes the beshlik or piece of five; the others have no particular name, I believe.

The history of Turkish money would be instructive as illustrating the tendency generally prevalent to lower the value of the money unit. For years in Turkey the piaster has been the money unit; that is, the money of account has been reckoned in piasters. The piaster is divided into forty paras, and the latter was formerly subdivided into three aspers. In the fifteenth century the asper was a silver coin of considerable value. (See Gibbon, chapter lxv, where mention is made of an annual pension of 300,000 aspers, and the notes on the passage, Milman’s edition.)

Persons not very old remember to have heard their fathers describe the asper as a piece of money which in their early days was current in small traffic. The para was coined in silver at a comparatively recent period, and I have in my possession specimens of it. But this, like the asper, was debased until its value was too small to be reckoned in trade. The smallest piece now current is one of five paras, equal to a half a cent of our money, and, like the half-cent piece of our early coinage, of little use. In 1801, the reign of Sultan Selim III, the piaster contained 95.7 grains of pure silver, value $0,258, but during the reign of Sultan Mahmoud II, from 1808 to 1839, the coin was rapidly debased. In 1818 the piaster contained but 67.7 grains of pure silver, value $0.18¼. At length silver was supplanted by the adulterated beshlik, or metallik, just mentioned. Finally, when the coinage of silver was restored by his son and successor, Sultan Medjid, the piaster had fallen to $0.0.43 in value.

The restoration of the currency to a metallic basis has not counteracted the disorder in the public finances. On the other hand, the burden of the government seems to rest heavily on the general community. Although trade is stagnant, prices have increased enormously. Bents, food, fuel, and service of all kinds have risen in many instances forty per cent. higher than they were three years ago; and the cost of living is greatly enhanced. In a word, those who do not pay contrive to be supported at the expense of those who do. Many persons believe the end draws nigh. I think not yet.

I am, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 361.—Translation.]

Sawas Pasha to Mr. Maynard

Sublime Porte, Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
December 1, 1879.

Sir: With the double object of meeting the pressing demands upon the imperial treasury and of resuming as far as possible the payment of the interest on the public debt, domestic and foreign, and in conformity to the positive wish of His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, the Sublime Porte has just taken the following measures: 1. An arrangement has been made between the state, the Ottoman Bank, and other bankers, in relation to the collection, the administration and appropriations of the revenues from certain branches of the excise.

2. The Sublime Porte has made a decree which does not ask the holders of the security of the public debt, domestic and foreign, to give up any of their rights, but guarantees to them a fixed annual amount, which will be sensibly increased at no distant date.

These two acts which give force to each other being naturally interesting to a great number of foreigners, I have the honor to communicate a copy of them to you herewith, and request you to bring them to the knowledge of your countrymen, both in the empire and abroad.

Accept, &c.,

SAWAS.

[Translation of the foregoing report.]

Imperial Ottoman Bank, Stamboul Office (Djizairli Kha).

[undated]

redemption of the caïmé.

Amount of the caïmé withdrawn and canceled up to November 30, 1879 (evening).

Piasters.

Source of receipts:

Flour tax 20,719,319

Liquor tax 3,200,000

23,919,319

Gift from His Imperial Majesty the Sultan 5,000,000

Gift from the province of Kossow 29,758

Gift from different provinces 67,283,845

72,313,603

Monthly allotment of £50,000 45,163,608

Payments over the counter on change 35,253,687

Payments over the counter at Djizairli Khan 82,729,905

Payments over the counter received from the bakers 63,190,528

181.174.120

Sent from the malié, from the treasuries of the ministries and provinces

Do. Do., proceeds of the fifth of the taxes

340,002,282

Total piasters caïmé 662,573,352

N. B.—The total amount of the caïmé issued represented a nominal sum of 1,600,000,000

Redemption effected up to the present time amounts (as above) to 662,573,352

Still in circulation or on hand on the evening of November 30, 1879, according to the registers of the bank 937,426,648

For the Imperial Ottoman Bank:
C. C. LA FONTAINE.

Certified as agreeing with the accounts:
ART. SCHAMITOT.

No. 609. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. No. 609.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, January 10, 1880. (Received February 9.) No. 374.]

Sir: Several times in these dispatches I have made reference to the Armenians. These ancient people have a hard history. Their present existence, though in greatly reduced numbers, illustrates the difficulty, if not the impossibility, of exterminating a whole race. Their geographical situation, on the eastern confines of Asia Minor, exposed them to the earliest incursions of the Turcomans, first under the Seljuks, then under the Osmanli Turks. They appear at once to have accepted their fate, and to have subsided into abject servitude, without much amelioration prior to the middle of the present century, particularly those who remained in their native land.

About thirty years ago, or a little more, the missionaries from the United States directed their efforts to the uplifting of this downtrodden people. Here, as in every other part of Turkey, they have been sedulously protected in their labors by this legation. The results are summed up by a late English writer of rare power and opportunities for observation: The Armenians have advanced hut a very little way on the road of education. * * * A wish for instruction is everywhere beginning to be shown, and it has received a strong and most salutary impulse from the numerous American missionaries now established throughout Armenia. The untiring efforts of these praiseworthy and accomplished workers in the cause of civilization and humanity are beginning to bear fruit, especially since education has become one of their principal objects. They are working wonders among the uncivilized inhabitants of this hitherto unhappy country, where mission-schools, founded in all directions are doing the double service of instructing the people by their enlightened moral and religious teaching, and of stimulating among the wealthy a spirit of rivalry, which leads them to see their own ignorance and superstitious debasement, and raises a desire to do for themselves, by the establishment of Armenian schools, what American philanthropy has so nobly begun to do for them.

The moral influence that America is now exercising in the East through the quiet but dignified and determined policy of its legation at Constantinople, curiously free from political intrigues and rivalry, is daily increasing, and has the most salutary effect on the country. It watches with a jealous care over the rights and safety of the missionaries, who are loved and respected wherever they settle, and make their influence felt in the remotest corners of Turkey. Next to Greece, whose educational efforts are naturally greater throughout the country, it is America that will be entitled to the gratitude of the Christian for her ready aid in elevating the ignorant masses to the dignity of civilized beings. (Twenty Years’ Residence among the People of Turkey. Chapter V. Harper & Brothers, 1879.)

Recent events have stirred to life this the most torpid of the subject races in the Ottoman Empire. On the one hand the operations of the war intensified their misery and added a new badge of inferiority to their inherited lot; on the other, the Anglo-Turkish convention of June 4, 1878, awakened their hopes, and the example of their fellow-subjects in Bulgaria and other European provinces stimulated them to effort.

I have received to day from the Armenian Patriarch of Constantinople copies in pamphlet of a memoir on the Armenian question, addressed to the great powers of Europe, and just published; it is inclosed.* The relief sought is very moderate—incommensurate, certainly, with the evils complained of.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

* Omitted from the present publication, owing to its length.

No. 610. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. No. 610.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, February 19, 1880. (Received March 16.) No. 381.]

Sir: I have already had the honor to convey such information as I have found obtainable, touching the life-saving measures for the benefit of navigation in the Black Sea. (Dispatch No. 358, of November 15, 1879.)

This subject has come again under consideration. Ten days ago there was a meeting called at the British embassy to discuss it, at which were present the diplomatic representatives of the several maritime powers. It was shown that the service had become greatly demoralized. Although the money for its support had been regularly collected and covered into the Ottoman treasury, it had been difficult, practically impossible, to obtain even the smaller and less expensive apparatus, such as lines and rockets; while the men had been paid nothing for the last six months except the contributions mentioned in dispatch No. 375, of the 12th January last. Consequently the life-saving service threatened to resign in a body, and mid-winter though it was, the service would, for the time at least, come to naught.

A second meeting yesterday resulted in a collective note to the Sublime Porte, of which a copy is inclosed, another chapter in the history of this beneficent establishment, but not, I hope, the final one.

I am, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure in No. 381.]

Translation of the collective note, of the foreign representatives to the Porte

February 19, 1880.

Sir: The undersigned deem it their duty to call the attention of the Sublime Porte to the present condition of the life-saving service and of the light ship in the Black Sea, at the entrance to the Bosphorus. The Sublime Porte is aware that in 1871 the international commission of the Bosphorus, called together under the presidency of the prefect of the Porte, decided to increase from 15 to 20 paras the small tax paid by every merchant ship passing through the Bosphorus, to maintain these services. At the same time certain reductions were made and certain arrangements were effected by which the sum so raised should be sufficient to meet the necessary expenses and the reimbursement of the capital.

For some years the life-saving service has been conducted, the undersigned are pleased to learn, with great regularity and perfect success, under the direction of Captain Palmer, who, as the Sublime Porte has not forgotten, lost his life two years since in a courageous attempt to rescue the crew of a wrecked Turkish ship. The crews of the life-saving stations on the Black Sea have succeeded in rescuing from death a great number of lives and in giving most valuable aid to a multitude of vessels in peril.

For the past two years the wages of the employés in this service have been irregularly paid, or paid in caïmé (debased coinage), although its value was greatly depreciated, and notwithstanding that the tax was collected in midjidiés (silver).

Frequent remonstrances have been addressed on this subject to the admiralty, and regard was given to them for a time. But the undersigned regret that they are obliged to inform the Sublime Porte that for some time the wages of these devoted men, whose conduct in performing their difficult and perilous duty is above all praise, have been irregularly paid and subjected to reductions so considerable that they are no longer sufficient for their maintenance, and that the most necessary food and clothing are wanting to them. No longer able to endure the hardships to which they are exposed, the crews of the life-saving stations have declared in writing that they will resign in a body unless their wages are paid at their original rate, and measures are taken to assure them, for the future, regularity in their pay-days. If these conditions are not complied with the important mission which they fill will be abandoned, to the great detriment of navigation in the Black Sea, and at the risk of seeing perish a large number of shipwrecked men.

The undersigned have also learned that the apparatus, such as rockets, ropes, &c., for saving imperiled crews, for some time past has not been furnished at the Black Sea stations, in spite of the pressing and repeated demands made to the imperial authorities. But the tax of 20 paras, which the governments of the undersigned authorize to be levied on their merchant marine, is expressly set apart for the special purpose of maintaining in a proper state of efficiency the life-saving service and the light ship in the Black Sea.

Therefore, it is incumbent upon the undersigned, as the Porte will readily admit, to see to it that the funds so collected are devoted solely to this purpose, for which they would amply suffice the undersigned are convinced, if they were honestly and regularly administered under a well-organized management.

The undersigned have, then, the honor to request that the tax in question of 20 paras be collected in the future by the international council of health, which shall have the power to punctually pay the wages of all the employés in the life-saving; service and on the light ship, and to procure the necessary apparatus.

The undersigned, moreover, propose that if, after the payment of wages, the purchase of the necessary apparatus, and the reimbursement of the capital in cases where the capital has not yet been reimbursed, there remains a balance, it shall be employed for rewarding those men who shall distinguish themselves in rescuing the shipwrecked or in succoring imperiled vessels, and for forming a fund for assisting the widows and orphans of those who perished in the performance of their duty, or for such purpose as shall afterwards be determined.

In view of the urgency of the subject of which it treats, the undersigned have the honor to request that an immediate reply may be given to their communication.

(Signed by the ambassadors of England and France, the ministers of Greece, Italy, Sweden and Norway, the United States of America, Spain, Austria-Hungary, Holland, Belgium, Servia, Roumania, and the chargés d’affaires of Russia and Germany.)

No. 611. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. No. 611.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, March 5, 1880. (Received March 29.) No. 2.]

Sir: Lieutenant-Colonel Kummeran, the military attaché of the Russian embassy, whilst riding with Mr. Onou, the Russian chargé d’affaires, on the 27th of February, in the vicinity of Pera, was fired at by a Bosnian Mahometan and wounded in two places. He died on the 3d instant and was buried yesterday afternoon.

The funeral was attended by the diplomatic corps in uniform, a battalion of the imperial guard with the Sultan’s military band, the crews of the Russian and Austrian stationaires and a following of some 10,000 persons.

The assassin was arrested, with his two companions. He offered a desperate resistance and was severely wounded in the struggle.

This incident, which is attributed to a plot of the Nihilists, has occasioned some excitement, as it is supposed that it was the intention to shoot Mr. Onou, who indeed had a narrow escape, a ball having passed through his coat.

I am, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’Affaires.

No. 612. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. No. 612.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, March 26, 1880. (Received April 19.) No. 4.]

Sir: I had the honor to inform the Department in my dispatch No. 2, dated March 5, that Colonel Kummeran, the military attaché of the Russian embassy, had been murdered on the 29th of February last, whilst riding on the highway near Pera, by Veli Mehemet, a native of Bosnia, and that the murderer was arrested after a long chase and strenuous resistance, in which both he and his captor, a captain of the police force, were severely wounded.

The preliminary inquiry into the circumstances attending the murder having been completed, the trial of Veli Mehemet and his comrades, Khalie and Osman Aghas, for their part in that crime, was referred to a military court or court-martial, in accordance with the state of siege which still exists in the capital.

The tribunal consisted of Field Marshal Ali Saïb Pacha, president, six members, and a recorder. Three of the members of the court are Christians, viz, Admiral Hobart Pacha, Brigadier-General Vitalis Pacha, and Brigadier-General Muzzafer Pacha (Tehaikoffsky).

The court has been in session since the 13th instant. In consequence of the line of defense set up by Veli Mehemet, a committee of seven physicians was appointed to examine into his mental condition. In the preliminary examination made by the police authorities no signs of insanity were observed, and he not only did not deny that it was his intention to shoot Colonel Kummeran, but appeared to take pride in the act. Later on, however, his fanatical excitement having calmed down, and recovering from the wounds he had received in resisting capture, which were at first thought to be mortal, he changed his manner and acted and spoke as if insane, and it was then that the commission of physicians was appointed to examine him. The first medical examiners not having been able to arrive at a positive conclusion, a second commission, consisting also of seven doctors, was appointed, whose report, however, was equally vague and inconclusive.

There is a strong feeling throughout all classes of the Mohammedan population against Veli Mehemet being sentenced to death. They are at all times extremely averse to the execution of a Mohammedan for the killing of an infidel 5 and, if the assassin is proved or even suspected to be deranged, it becomes a far more serious matter. An insane person is believed to be inspired by a higher power in all his acts. When the Almighty deprives a man of his reason it is to make him his passive instrument; he is therefore not only irresponsible but holy and privileged, and to put him to death for killing an infidel would be looked upon as a sacrilege.

Sir Henry Layard, the British ambassador, called a meeting of the foreign representatives yesterday afternoon. The meeting was held at the British embassy, all the representatives being present except the Spanish and Servian ministers and the Russian chargé d’affaires.

The British ambassador states that he had called the meeting to consider what should be done in view of the finding of the court-martial on Veli Mehemet. He was informed that a verdict of guilty having been found against Veli Mehemet, he had, in consequence of the doubts entertained as to his mental state, been sentenced to imprisonment for life, which might be considered as virtually an acquittal. As this sentence would probably receive the immediate approval of the Sultan, he had requested Hobart Pasha, the English member of the court, to obtain a short delay in sending it to the Palace. A note from Hobart Pasha was brought in informing Sir Henry that the delay asked for was granted, and that the finding of the court would not be sent to the Sultan until Saturday the 27th.

Count Corti, the Italian minister, produced copies of the reports of the two medical commissions that examined Veli Mehemet and read them. They were extremely vague, and left the question of his mental condition undecided. They stated that to pronounce upon such a question would require much more time than was allowed them, and that although there were symptoms of insanity in the case, they had found it impossible to decide whether they were real or feigned. After these papers were read and discussed, it was agreed to draw up a memorandum, copy of which, with a translation, is inclosed, and that Sir Henry Layard should hand it to the minister of foreign affairs. In presenting it, he was requested to state in emphatic language in the name of the foreign representatives present, the danger they apprehended from the approval of a sentence of imprisonment, which is equivalent to an acquittal, for a crime of so atrocious a character as that of which Veli Mehemet had been found guilty.

The British ambassador then made the following proposition: That the Sultan be advised to sentence Veli Mehemet to death, and to transmit the sentence, with the record of the proceedings of the court and all the accompanying documents, to the Emperor of Russia, and to leave it to him to decide whether the extreme penalty of the law shall be carried out. There was not much discussion on this proposal, nor was it put to a vote, and if the British ambassador acts upon it, it will be, I presume, in his own name, and not in that of the other representatives. It would, indeed, be surprising if the Sultan were to accept so extraordinary a suggestion. Whatever else he might think of it, he would fear the effect it might have on his people, who would look upon this abdication of one of the highest prerogatives of the sovereign, the right of life and death, as an act of vassalage to their hereditary enemy.

The murder of Colonel Kummeran and the anticipation of the assassin’s escaping punishment have caused much comment and excitement. Veli Mehemet was a follower of an Imaum, who gave great trouble to the Austrians when they occupied Bosnia, and at the earnest solicitation of Count Zichy, the Austrian ambassador, the Sultan ordered the Imaum to Constantinople, where he came, accompanied by fifteen desperadoes, of whom Veli Mehemet was one. He and some of his comrades found employment as gardeners, grooms, &c., in the Sultan’s palace, Two of his brothers were killed in the late war, and he had sworn to avenge their death on a Christian. As fate would have it, the first one on whom he was able to wreak his vengeance was the unfortunate Russian colonel.

I am, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

[Inclosure in No. 4.—Translation.]

pro-memoria.

The chiefs of mission met yesterday to take into consideration the facts relative to the trial of the assassin Veli Mehemet.

Information had reached them that there was about to be pronounced against him a sentence of hard labor for life, instead of capital punishment, alleging that the reports of the physicians, without recognizing insanity, still left some doubts as to his mental condition. This information has caused a feeling of deep anxiety to the chiefs of mission for the future security of their fellow-countrymen residing in the Ottoman Empire. This feeling will be shared by all the nations they represent. They request, in consequence, to call the serious attention of the Sublime Porte to the fatal consequences of such a sentence, should it be rendered.

Pera, March 25, 1880.

No. 613. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. No. 613.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, March 30, 1880. (Received April 19.) No. 5.]

Sir: I had the honor to transmit in No. 4, dated 26th instant, a copy of the memorandum to the Sublime Porte, drawn up at a meeting of the foreign representatives at the British embassy on the 25th, in relation to the sentence of Veli Mehemet, the murderer of Colonel Kummeran, military attaché of the Russian embassy. They met again yesterday to consider the reply of the Porte.

A copy of this paper, as well as of a second pro-memoria of the heads of missions in answer to it, is inclosed. I send also inclosed slips from the Levant Herald of the 27th and 30th instant, bearing on the same subject.

I am, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’ Affaires ad interim.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 5.—Translation.]

pro-memoria.

In answer to the pro-memoria of their excellencies the chiefs of missions in relation to the criminal suit against Mehemet the Sublime Porte hastens to declare that no sentence has as yet been rendered by the court-martial which was appointed to try him.

The Sublime Porte declares at the same time that for the purpose of throwing light upon the decisions of the law, and to secure the guarantees that are due to every accused person, as well as the vigorous repression of crime, it has decided that the person of Mehemet shall be submitted to the examination of a commission composed of the physicians of the foreign missions, to whom will be joined the doctors who have already examined the mental condition of the accused, and other medical notabilities of the country; that this commission, which shall have every power and every facility to examine the accused in the manner it shall consider best, shall make its opinion on the mental state of Mehemet known in a report addressed to the Sublime Porte; that finally this report shall be transmitted to the court-martial, which, according as the conclusions of the report shall establish that Mehemet is of sound mind or afflicted with mental alienation, shall pronounce his condemnation to capital punishment or his acquittal.

The Sublime Porte believes it has the right to protest against the intention of screening a guilty person from a deserved punishment, and to declare that it has ever sought and continues to seek the truth; that it is as far from wishing to frustrate the ends o justice as it is anxious to prevent a madman from being smitten.

March 27, 1880.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 5.—Translation.]

pro-memoria.

The chiefs of foreign missions have received with satisfaction the information that the sentence of Veil Mehemet, such as it was reported to them, has, as a matter of fact, not been rendered. They continue, nevertheless, under the apprehension that they expressed in their first pro-memoria in regard to a trial which interests in the highest degree the security of foreigners residing in the empire, as regards the information that the Sublime Pone has been pleased to furnish on the subject of the ulterior examination to be made into the mental condition of the person accused, the chiefs of missions wish to declare that it is not their intention to intervene in any way in the acts of the procedure, nor to assume the least responsibility in its results. In consequence, no physician belonging to the foreign missions will be authorized to attend at the examination of the person accused. When the sentence, which the chiefs of missions consider as urgent, shall have been rendered they will take it into consideration and communicate it to their respective governments.

Constantinople, March 29, 1880.

No. 614. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. No. 614.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, April 22, 1880. (Received May 10.) No. 13.]

Sir: There is good authority for stating that telegraphic dispatches were sent by the ministry of foreign affairs on the 20th instant to the Ottoman ministers at Washington, Stockholm, and Brussels to notify them that those legations were discontinued.

These measures have been dictated by the necessities of the treasury.

I have, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

No. 615. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. No. 615.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, May 8, 1880. (Received May 31.) No. 392.]

Sir: Shortly before I set out on my late journey, a painful report came of the capture and abduction of Col. H. Synge, an Enlishman, who had been engaged in distributing the charities of his countrymen among the needy subjects of the Sultan. Few particulars were received, excepting that he had been taken from his own house in Thessaly by a band of brigands, at the head of which was a certain notorious character named Niko.

Colonel Synge was well and favorably known, and much interest was taken in his fate. For a long time nothing was heard but disquieting rumors; at length, about three weeks ago, it was announced that he had been ransomed and set at liberty.

I inclose an account of the outrage from Colonel Synge’s own hand. It is not a comfortable narrative—an Englishman of character seized under his own roof and kept a prisoner in the mountains until his captors are pleased to release him, and this not only with impunity, but exacting great reward. The ransom, I need not remind you, exceeds $50,000 of our money, exacted in gold, counted and inspected piece by piece, enough to enrich that whole region of the empire. I do not hear of any effort or purpose of redress. It is a high premium on brigandage, and henceforth no stranger will be safe wherever in the empire the facts become known.

The instigation Colonel Synge alludes to proceeded, very likely, from a wish to involve the British Government in the question of the Greek frontier. Viewed in any light it is a bad business.

I have, &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

[Inclosure No. 1 with dispatch No. 392.]

Colonel Synge’s account of his captivity

On Friday, February 13, I returned to Saloniea, after a month’s absence in the north of the province, where I had been engaged in assisting the refugees. On the following Tuesday I left for my farm at Tricooista. My servant being somewhat late for the train, left a portion of my baggage behind, among other things my rifle cartridges. There being no train until the following Thursday, on that day I sent to the Topsin Station, but my man did not return the same evening.

On Thursday night, between ten and eleven o’clock, sitting in my arm chair, I was startled by shots rattling in at the windows, and blows at the granary door below. My house is a solid brick building, the ground floor forming a granary which had no interior communication with the rest of the house. The front is occupied by a large verandah.

I had nothing ready. My guns had been packed away, when I went up-country, and I had not got them out. There were no cartridges for my rifle. I broke open a gun-case, put a gun together, got out some cartridges, went up to the top of the house, and opened fire with small shot where I saw the flashes of the rifles. They were all around, banging away, and the bullets smashing up everything. The Albanians who occupy a house across the farm-yard about 100 yards off, also opened fire, but the brigands were all under cover. Getting through the granary door, they collected some planks and straw, and setting lire to the heap, the house was soon full of smoke and untenable, and I had to give up.

As they afterwards told me, they left the forest, situated about half a mile off, shortly after dark, sent two of the band in advance with meat, with which they silenced the watch dogs, and then the remainder advanced to reconnoiter. First they looked after the Albanians. Going up into the verandah of the house, they saw them through the windows and took note of their arms. Leaving some of the band to hold them in check, they next proceeded to reconnoiter the house. First they contemplated making a ladder and assaulting from the verandah, but fearing to expose themselves they considered that setting fire to the building from the outside would entail less loss. After trying unsuccessfully, they determined to burst in the granary door and set fire inside. Two guns were told off to each window on that side of the house, with orders to keep up a continual fire; four men were sent to the door, two with axes and two with rifles, and the signal was given.

On my surrendering they took two of my saddle horses from the stable. I was mounted on one and Niko, the chief of the band, on the other. The workmen were called to look after the fire, and I was told to send word that if any troops were sent in pursuit I should be murdered.

I was then marched off towards Mount Olympus. The night was pitch dark, with sleet and snow. About an hour and a half’s journey south there is the river Vistritsa (Heliacmon) to cross. Arrived at the ferry, Niko, with one companion, went to the ferry-hut, in which were three Albanians and a Christian boatman; one of the Albanians was an old friend of Niko’s, and he counted on his passing him over the river without opposition. Knocking at the door, he said, “Don’t you know me? I have come from Verrea, and must pass over to-night.” The Albanian replied, “Wait until I blow up the fire a bit,” and then opened the door. Whether Niko was not recognized, or whether, seeing he had only one man with him, the Albanians thought he would be an easy capture, I cannot say, but one of them, Niko’s friend, calling on his companions to shut the door, drew a revolver from under his pillow and fired three shots, wounding Niko’s companion in the shoulder, but missing himself. Niko drew his yataghan and cut down the man with the revolver, breaking his yataghan with the thrust, which disabled the second Albanian. The third was shot by one of the band through the window, and some of them rushing in the boatman was wounded, but was made to work the ferry across.

The wounded Albanian was brought down to the boat, and though I begged hard for his life and offered to ransom him, he was shot, and I was told that were they not in a hurry he would have been tortured. Having crossed the river and the plain between it and the mountains, it was a steady ascent, the snow getting deeper and deeper. About dawn there was a halt among some rocks and the day passed there. At night, on again. Until late on the third night the unfortunate horses got nothing but some dry beech leaves to eat and no water, as it was all frozen. Alter the fourth night they disappeared and afterwards turned up at Caterina.

On the third day I was dictated a letter demanding 10,000 liras ransom, besides gold watches. This letter was not delivered to Consul General Blunt until some ten days afterwards, and then accompanied by one from Niko demanding 15,000 liras, about £13,500 sterling. He also demanded the release of some friends and relatives in prison in Turkey and Greece, and for some of his family to be sent to Greece.

After five nights’ traveling about, I was taken into a cave, and five of the band under Niko’s brother were left as a guard over me, the remainder scouting and looking after supplies. In the cave I was kept until the negotiations were completed. For food, there was bread and goat, sometimes bread without the goat; sometimes goat without the bread; generally wine and coffee. Great caution was requisite in procuring supplies, as they feared that their tracks in the snow should be followed. I knew that whilst negotiations were pending Consul-General Blunt would prevent troops being sent in pursuit, but the brigands were always suspicious. Once they got an idea that other brigands had been put on to capture Niko, with a view to exchanging him for me, and they were rather mad; they told me that had such an attempt been made, and Niko had lost his life, they would have made me a jacket á la franca, i. e., removed the skin off the upper part of the body and then roasted me á la broche. I very well knew that such a scheme would only be resorted to as a last resource, and assured them they were mistaken. However, on the occasion, I was dictated another letter demanding 15,000 liras, gold watches and chains, gold rings, amber cigar-holders, amber beads, Martini rifles and cartridges, revolvers and cartridges, a field-glass, and fifteen trumpets; if all these were not sent within five days my ears would be sent in, in eight days my nose, and in ten days my head.

On three occasions Mr. Blunt sent me some newspapers, with a few cheery words scattered cautiously about among the printing.

After a weary time in the cave (for it was bitterly cold, and they rarely lit a fire in the day time unless the weather was foggy or with snow falling), I was told that all had been arranged. Taken out blindfolded, mounted on a mule, and sometimes picking my own way, I was brought down to the vicinity of Caterina. I had to write a third letter, relative to the movements of the troops escorting the ransom, also saying that if there was any bad money among the ransom the amount would be doubled.

On the day of my release, the scouts reported early that the trumpets had sounded in Caterina for the troops to fall in. Shortly after that, they had marched out, and after a time they approached, accompanied by Consul-General Blunt, and were halted. Mr. Bizzo, the dragoman of the consulate, who had personally carried on the negotiation between Mr. Blunt and Niko, accompanied by some of his own men (he has two large farms near Caterina), a Turkish officer and Hassim Agha, the carass of the consulate, brought up the ransom.

Now I learned for the first time that 12,000 liras was the real amount, for the brigands had always told me that it had been arranged for 2,000 liras. I believe they gave out that amount to mislead other bands of whom they were in dread. Mr. Blunt, too, had very wisely concealed the amount from everybody. It was generally understood that he had raised £2,000 for me by mortgage, and so judiciously had he concealed the other £10,000 that Niko, who knew everything that went on at Salonica, sent word not to try to deceive him; he knew well that Mr. Blunt had only 2,000 liras ready, and it was necessary to get a spy to inspect the full sum to reassure him. Nor were these precautions unnecessary, for we afterwards learned that Darelli, another chief, of a band numbering some thirty, had formed a project for carrying off the ransom, but was misinformed as to the day of payment. We being seated round in the forest, the bags of money were laid out and three of the band inspected each coin to see that there were no marks which might give a clue to their whereabouts afterwards. One bag was counted, and the others weighed against it. They had withdrawn their demands for the other things mentioned in the letter, except the watches, a Martini, and revolver. A Martini rifle offered them was accepted, but the revolver was not good enough and they preferred waiting for a new one. Satisfied with the ransom, they shaved me and gave me a cup of water, according to their customs; returned five liras they had borrowed from me in the cave, as also a revolver they had taken from me.

It is unusual to release a captive before nightfall, but it was successfully arranged by Mr. Bizzo, and I was set at liberty. When taken, I had some thirty odd liras in my pocket. Of this sum they borrowed for their expenses, but did not touch the rest.

In a few minutes I was able personally but very inadequately to thank Consul-General Blunt for his energetic action and able efforts which had led to my release, to contribute to which he had left nothing unthought of or to chance.

Had troops been allowed to pursue the brigands whilst I was in their hands, owing to the snow on the ground offering facilities for tracking and the open state of the forest, the risk to me would have been very great. Mr. Bizzo worked very hard and at considerable personal risk, and I am greatly indebted to him. On his first interview with Niko, the opening words of the latter were, “How many pairs of shoes have I worn out looking after you!” Niko had attacked a farm of Mr. Bizzo’s last year and had been pursued in consequence, so bore him a grudge.

The band is under the leadership of Niko, assisted by his brother Basil and his brother-in-law, Kalesh. Another, Groigi, is chief of a second band, numbering only eight. A third brother is in prison at Lamice, in Greece. Of Niko’s band six are deserters from the Greek army. Those with Niko and his relatives are armed with the “Gra” or Greek service rifle, which they prefer to all others. The remainder of the band are armed with the Martini and “Nilonar,” an old Greek service weapon. One of the deserters had served at the time of the Marathon murders, and was well up in the events of that time. One had been a monk at Mount Athos. All made the sign of the cross before and after eating. All had taken part in the last raid in Thessaly. I fear I shall never learn who were their instigators and accomplices, but I cannot believe that the attack originated with the brigands.

According to the brigands’ cartridge account they fired 382 rounds in the attack, and my windows, ceilings, and walls, bear witness to numerous hits. What a difference between the ragged ruffians who formed the brigand bands when I first came to this country—five or ten men armed with old flint guns which would not go off at all in wet weather, and were a nearly equal source of danger to the shooter and “the shooter.” In fine, now bands of 50 to 150, armed with the best of modern weapons, go about requisitioning towns and villages, and carrying people off to ransom.

May every Englishman and foreigner whose misfortune it may ever be to fall into those brigands’ hands be as fortunate as I was in having those to look after their interests who spared neither pains nor trouble, nor left anything unthought of until the sought-for end was attained.

H. SYNGE.

No. 616. Mr. Heap to Mr. Payson. No. 616.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Payson.

Consulate-General of the United States,
Constantinople, June 10, 1880. (Received July 6.) No. 89.]

Sir: I called yesterday on Abeddin Pasha, the newly appointed minister of foreign affairs, and presented to him the compliments of the minister resident.

I had received the evening previous a letter from Mr. Maynard, by which he instructed me to see the minister of foreign affairs and communicate to him the substance of the Secretary of State’s telegram in cipher, received here the 22d May last, in reference to the withdrawal of the Turkish mission at Washington. I gave the minister a translation in French after reading it to him, for although he can speak that language with tolerable facility, he does not seem able to read it.

Abeddin Pasha said he was so new in his office that he was not informed of the case, but would give it immediate attention. I related to him how the Ottoman missions at Washington, Brussels, and Stockholm had been simultaneously suppressed, and how, upon the request of the Kings of Belgium and Sweden, they were at once restored. My government therefore had every reason to hope that the wish expressed in the Secretary of State’s telegram would meet a favorable response.

His excellency did not seem to be acquainted with the name of the Ottoman representative at Washington. On informing him that it was Aristarchi Bey, he remarked that the withdrawal of the mission could only have been for economical reasons.

I am, &c.,

G. H. HEAP.
Consul-General.

No. 617. Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts. No. 617.
Mr. Maynard to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, June 22, 1880. (Received July 12.) No. 398.]

Sir: On returning from Alexandria, yesterday, I found that during my absence a change had occurred in the imperial ministry. It seems that on the 10th of this month His Highness Saïd Pasha, late prime minister, since the 20th of October last (dispatch No. 350, of October 20, 1879), and His Excellency Sawas Pasha, minister of foreign affairs, were succeeded by His Highness Kadri Pasha and His Excellency Abeddin Pasha, the former as prime minister, and the latter as minister of foreign affairs.

I lost no time in making calls of congratulation and explained why I had not done so earlier. Their manner, as usual with high Ottoman officials, was polite and even kind, regretful that I am soon to leave Turkey and at the same time complimentary touching the occasion of it. Both are comparatively young men and new to service in the ministry. No significance or importance appears to be attached to the change. Perhaps it was an easy way to dispose of the complaints which had accumulated against the retiring ministers from abroad and at home by the numbers dissatisfied with the administration of the Sublime Porte.

Frequent change of ministry has been the rule for years, and perhaps always. Since my arrival, in May, 1875, there have been ten grand viziers and four prime ministers, while in the foreign office there have been nine changes.

* * * * * * *

I have. &c.,

HORACE MAYNARD.

No. 618. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. No. 618.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, July 19, 1880. (Received August 9.) No. 2.]

Sir: On the 14th instant, shortly before Mr. Maynard’s departure, a deputation of American citizens residing in Constantinople called on him and presented to him an address, of which I have the honor to inclose a copy. The communication was delivered in suitable terms, and Mr. Maynard expressed his deep appreciation to his countrymen for this evidence of their very high esteem.

I am, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

[Inclosure with dispatch No. 2.]

Testimonial from the American colony in Constantinople to Mr. Maynard

Hon. Horace Maynard:

Sir: In behalf of the American citizens in Constantinople, we desire to express their sentiments in view of your retirement from the post of representative of our government to the Sublime Porte.

Congratulating you and our country on the call which you have received to preside over one of the important Departments in our national administration and to assist the President as a member of his cabinet council, we yet deeply regret your withdrawal from the position which you have occupied for five years so much to the advantage of American interests and the satisfaction of American residents in Turkey.

The duties of diplomatic representation in relations with the government of this empire are so peculiarly delicate and difficult that a change sacrificing the benefit of experience gained seems to us very undesirable. We gladly bear testimony to the dignity, courtesy, fidelity, and success with which the embassy has been conducted in your hands. Personally and officially you have maintained the honor of the American name, and done much to increase American influence with the government and among the people.

We have especially rejoiced that your sympathy and personal interest have been sufficiently broad to include not only the commercial and material relations subsisting between America and Turkey, but also the higher moral and benevolent aims of American enterprise in these lands. We have highly prized the pleasant social intercourse which has been our privilege and that of our families with yourself and your highly esteemed and beloved family. Under varying dispensations of Divine Providence we have been sharers together in sorrow and in joy. It is to us no small affliction that we can have little expectation of again seeing here Mrs. Maynard and yourself.

Be assured, dear sir, that our fervent prayers will follow you that richest blessings for time and eternity may be given to you and yours. To some of us, perhaps to all, our next meeting with you will be in that unseen but most real world to which we all are very near. There may we enjoy a fellowship of unending and perfect blessedness.

With our cordial salutations to Mrs. Maynard and your whole family circle, we are, dear sir, most truly and respectfully, yours,

George Washem.

Albert S. Long.

E. M. Vittum.

M. K. Hitchcock.

C. H. Brooks.

W. H. Belden.

I. F. Pettibone.

Edwin M. Bliss.

Geo. W. Wood.

Elias Riggs.

Edwin E. Bliss.

Isaac J. Bliss.

Joseph K. Greene.

T. L. Byington.

C. S. Nash.

Constantinople, July 15, 1880.

No. 619. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. No. 619.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, August 1, 1880. (Received August 23.) No. 3.]

Sir: I received information this morning that Rev. Mr. Parsons, an American missionary, and his servant, residing at Baghchijuk, a village near the Gulf of Ismid, Sea of Marmora, were found murdered at a distance of five hours’ travel from that village. They were murdered, it is stated, on the 28th ultimo, but their bodies were not discovered until yesterday.

As Mr. Parsons had been for some time past active in the distribution of succor to the sufferers by the famine in the district of Ismid, and as this duty, together with the sale of books, obliged him to be frequently on the road, it is believed that he was engaged in this work of charity when he was assassinated.

As soon as the information reached me this morning I went to Scutari, the residence of Bev. Dr. Wood, who had received the telegram from Ismid giving the news, in the hope of obtaining further particulars, but he had already left for Ismid to attend the funeral of Mr. Parsons. I then proceeded to the Sublime Porte to see the minister of foreign affairs.

The cabinet was in council, but on sending my card to Abeddin Pasha he came out at once. He expressed much concern at the information I gave him, and promised that energetic measures should be taken to discover and apprehend the murderers. Unless the caïmacam of the district has already put his police in pursuit, I fear that the length of time that has elapsed will enable the murderers to get beyond their reach.

I telegraphed to the Department in cipher on my return from the Porte as follows: Mr. Evarts,
Secretary of State, Washington:

Mr. Parsons, missionary, and servant murdered on 23th, near Ismid, Marmora. Just seen minister of foreign affairs, who promised energetic search for murderers. Parsons was carrying succor to starving people. Vessel of war would be desirable here.

HEAP, Chargé.

The presence of a vessel of war is desirable because of the moral effect it would have. It would be evidence of the solicitude of the United States Government for the protection of its citizens abroad. The sending of the Despatch and Alliance to Volo to demand redress for the comparatively trifling insult to Miss Leyburn, was a convincing proof to the authorities there that not even small offenses would be allowed to pass unredressed.

The Rev. Mr. Parsons had been a resident of the district of Ismid for thirty years. His age, sixty years, his character, zeal for the welfare and compassion for the miseries which have fallen on the people of that region, had made him widely known and greatly beloved and respected.

I am, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

No. 620. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. No. 620.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, August 9, 1880. (Received August 30.) No. 7.]

Sir: The minister of foreign affairs telegraphed to me on the 3d instant that three of the murderers of the American missionary and his servant had been arrested, and that they had made a complete admission of their crime (avœux eomplets), and that the police was in search of the fourth one.

This one has since been captured. As far as is known, three men only were concerned in the murder, and they have fully acknowledged their crime.

They were brought up for examination before the mutessarrif of Ismid on Thursday the 6th instant, and I instructed Mr. Gargiulo, the interpreter of the legation, to proceed to that place to watch the proceedings.

It appears from their depositions that Mr. Parsons, accompanied by an Armenian servant named Garabet, was returning from a journey into the interior, when towards nightfall on Wednesday, the 28th July, he stopped for a few minutes at an encampment of Yuruka or Turcomans. On leaving them he proceeded about a mile farther, and as it was growing dark and he was still some fifteen miles from Baghchijuk, the village where he lived, he decided to rest for the night under some trees near the road.

Soon after he left the Yuruk encampment, three young men, named Ali, Eyoub, and Soliman, were sent by the chief in search of some cattle that had strayed, and in passing near where Mr. Parsons was resting they stopped to light their cigarettes at his lire. After leaving him, the suggestion was made by Ali to kill them in their sleep for the money they might have about them. Ali was armed with a pistol and Soliman with a double-barreled gun. Eyoub and Soliman were unwilling, they assert, to commit murder, but Ali, who, although the youngest, seems to be the most hardened of the party, took Soliman’s gun from him, saying that if they feared to kill the ghiaours he did not.

After spending some time in this discussion they returned to the spot where they had left Mr. Parsons and his companion, and found them asleep. Creeping up to them, Ali presented the gun at Garabet’s breast and pulled the trigger; the cap exploded without igniting the charge. Garabet awoke and was rising, when Ali fired the second barrel, and the ball passing through his body, Garabet uttered a cry and fell dead.

The explosion and the cry aroused Mr. Parsons, who, sitting up, stared at the murderers. Ali snatched his pistol from his belt and fired it. Mr. Parsons having raised his arm instinctively in self-defense, the ball passed through it, his body, and his other arm on which he was resting, and he fell back without uttering a sound. The Yuruks then proceeded to strip the bodies and drag them under some bushes, where they left them.

The prolonged absence of Mr. Parsons caused anxiety at Baghchijuk, which was increased when an Armenian, who had gone to look for a horse he had lost, returned with those of the absent travelers, which he had found straying in the mountains. A party of Armenians was sent in search of Mr. Parsons on Saturday the 31st, and soon found the bodies, which were brought to Baghchijuk. Notice had been sent to the mutessarrif of Ismid, who at once sent a party of police to find the murderers. They went directly to the Yuruk encampment, but these people affected entire ignorance of the affair, and it was only when the officer in command of the police ordered his men to bring the whole tribe, men, women, and children, to Ismid, that they pointed out two of their young men, Cara-Veli-Oglon Ali and Eyoub as the murderers. These acknowledged at once that they were present at the killing of Mr. Parsons and Garabet, but declared that it was Soliman, their companion, who was absent, who had committed the deed. They were manacled and brought to Ismid, showing the utmost indifference and callousness, and relating freely to any one who questioned them all the details of the murder,, insisting, however, that it was Soliman, not they, who had committed it. Soliman was soon after found and arrested, and on being confronted with the other two, Ali acknowledged that he had killed Mr. Parsons, but denied the killing of Garabet, while both Soliman and Eyoub declared he had done it in the manner related above.

Both the mutessarrif and his police have acted with commendable promptness, energy, and judgment, and so far everything has been conducted in a satisfactory manner. I have taken occasion in a communication to the minister for foreign affairs to express my appreciation of their conduct.

Mr. Gargiulo was informed at Ismid that the prisoners were to be brought here for trial. They are Mohammedans, and I forsee that efforts will be made to save them from capital punishment. It is several years since a Mussulman has been executed for the crime of killing a Christian, not since the execution of the murderers of the French and German consuls at Salonica, I think. Veli Mehemet, who shot Colonel Kummeran, the military attaché of the Russian embassy, on the 29th of February last, is still unpunished, although the Department is aware of the strenuous efforts made by the collective diplomatic corps to obtain the execution of his sentence; nor has sentence been passed on the two Mohammedans for the murder of Christian Steward, of Robert College, in June last. I do not speak of the numerous assassinations of Christian rayahs by Mohammedans.

The Turkish tribunals are very lenient to Mohammedan murderers of Christians, and either acquit them, or, if the evidence is too patent to be ignored, sentence them to short terms of imprisonment. I cannot vouch for the fact, but it is the prevalent belief that even when sentenced to a number of years or to life imprisonment they are only kept a few weeks or months in confinement. Men are frequently arrested by the police for burglary, robbery, or murder, who had been sentenced a short time before for similar crimes to long terms of imprisonment.

In the case under consideration we must be prepared not only for every delay that the law allows, but, if sentence of death is passed, to meet determined opposition on the part of the highest authorities of the empire to the execution of the murderers. The killing of the “old ghiaour preacher and his ghiaour servant” is already spoken of as a “boyish freak.”

Mr. Parsons had resided in Turkey, principally in the district of Ismi, for thirty years; his age was between fifty-five and sixty. He was much beloved for his benevolence, kindliness of character, and activity in doing good. To show the sort of man he was, I will relate an incident that happened some years ago in one of his numerous journeys. Being stopped by some highwaymen and ordered to deliver his money, he told them that he had only books for sale. Finding that he had told the truth, the robbers were about leaving him, when he called them back and said to them that the books he had with him were good and holy, and if they would read them they would see how wicked and sinful their ways were. One of the robbers asked him the price of the book he held in his hand which was a Bible, and bought it.

Mr. Parsons leaves a widow and two children.

I have, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

No. 621. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap. No. 621.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap.

Department of State,
Washington, August 21, 1880. No. 264.]

Sir: Since the receipt of your telegram of the 1st instant, announcing the murder of Dr. Parsons and servant, near Ismid, on the 28th ultimo, nothing has been received from you giving more detailed particulars of his death. Your telegram, however, as the Department’s instruction No. 260 of the 5th instant stated, gave it to understand that you had acted promptly and decisively, as far as the circumstances of the affair would then justify, and it is not doubted that you will have followed up your representations to the Turkish authority, looking to the speedy and just punishment of those charged with so heinous an offense against the person of a citizen of this country.

From information which the Department has received since the recent murder, the Rev. Dr. Justin W. Parsons, D. D., was a missionary of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, located in Boston, and one of the many missionaries of whom there are nearly one hundred scattered throughout that empire, sent under the auspices of that board, and at present engaged in their humane and Christian duties. In the existing state of lawlessness in those regions, peopled by semi barbarians, not only those Christian people who have gone forth upon their mission of charity, but as well travelers thither, are in constant danger of sharing a like fate with the late Dr. Parsons. It is, therefore, of the utmost importance, with a view to the protection of American citizens, that firm and decisive steps should be taken for the conviction and exemplary and immediate punishment of the murderers. In the lawless state of things prevailing in that country, only the severest methods are adequate, and, consequently, justifiable, in order to serve in any considerable degree the purpose for which they are intended.

In view of such circumstances as the Department has been able to gather from your telegram and subsequent correspondence with other persons in connection with the recent murder of Dr. Parsons, you are instructed to at once bring the subject again to the attention of the proper Turkish authority in such manner that it will understand that the Government of the United States demands the immediate and condign punishment of the murderers of this gentleman, and that this government also expects of Turkey that it will adopt and enforce such precautionary measures as may be required for the full security and protection of American citizens within its territory, and to prevent a recurrence of such murders in the future.

You will give the matter your earnest personal attention, permitting no opportunity to escape whereby the perpetrators of so atrocious a crime may be speedily, severely, and justly punished, should they not have been already promptly dealt with by the Turkish Government, and report the result of your proceedings to the Department.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 622. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap. No. 622.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap.

[Telegram.]

Washington, August 23, 1880.

Urge upon government prompt and condign punishment of the murderers, and energetic measures to protect other American missionaries and citizens in the disturbed region.

EVARTS, Secretary.

No. 623. Mr. Hay to Mr. Heap. No. 623.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Heap.

Department of State,
Washington, September 2, 1880. No. 268.]

Sir: I have to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatch of the 9th ultimo, No. 7, furnishing the details in regard to the murder of the late Dr. Parsons and servant, near Ismid, in July last, and the action so far of the Turkish Government in respect to the murderers, together with what seems to you probable and likely, owing to the infrequency of the execution by that government of sentences imposed upon Mussulmans for the murder of Christians, to be expected in the present case.

It would seem, however, from your dispatch, that you were giving the matter every possible attention, and it is sincerely hoped that your efforts may be crowned with success, and that the rule which seems apparently, heretofore, to have actuated that government in the infliction of merited punishment upon its subjects, in cases of this kind, may not prevail in the present instance, to defeat the ends of justice, and that the offenders and murderers may be made to suffer just and speedy punishment for their crime. You will watch the proceedings closely and omit no means within your power to secure the full and complete vindication, if possible, of the murder of Dr. Parsons.

Agreeably to your request for a vessel-of-war of this government to be near you, I have to state that the Navy Department informs me, under date of the 31st ultimo, that Bear-Admiral John0. Howell, United States Navy, commanding the United States naval force on the European station, has, under date of August 31, been instructed by cable to send a vessel as desired, to cruise in Turkish waters. The commander of such vessel will, it is not doubted, render you such aid and assistance in your representations to and demands upon the Turkish Government for its just and prompt action toward the murderers, as the presence of an American man-of-war may make proper.

While upon the subject of the recent murder of Dr. Parsons, it is proper to add that the Department has, since his death, received several communications from the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions, of which the deceased was an active member, containing information in regard to his death. With a letter of the 26th ultimo, from the secretary of that board, are three communications, dated at Constantinople, respectively, the 2d, 4th, and 5th of August ultimo, and signed by J. F. Pettibone, J. K. Greene, and Edwin E. Bliss, which letters these gentlemen had addressed to the secretary of that board, Dr. Clark, and which relate to the murder of Dr. Parsons. The letters referred to contain in effect information almost identical with that found in your dispatch, and for that reason it has not been deemed necessary to forward to you copies thereof, as no doubt you may have already seen the originals. If, however, you have not, and these gentlemen could be of any service to you, they living in Constantinople, and the Rev. Mr. Pettibone, one of the writers, having already been referred to in a former dispatch, they would, it is thought, if desired, willingly furnish you with such information as they might possess.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 624. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. No. 624.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, September 13, 1880. (Received Oct. 2.) No. 16.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatches numbered 263, 264, 265, 266, and 267, the last dated the 26th ultimo. In reference to dispatch No. 264, dated the 21st ultimo, I have to state that the three prisoners charged with the murder of the Bev. Dr. Parsons and his servant were transferred to Constantinople last week and are now confined in the central prison awaiting their trial. The preliminary examination of the depositions taken at Ismid will be made to-morrow by the attorney-general (procureur général), when the day for their trial will be fixed.

My dispatches on this subject have kept the Department fully informed of the steps taken to bring about this result, The fast of the month of Ramazan being over there is reason to hope that no more unnecessary delays will be interposed.

I am, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

No. 625. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Heap. No. 625.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Heap.

Department of State,
Washington, September 15, 1880. No. 272.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 10, of the 24th ultimo, has been received. It relates to the measures which, under the Department’s instructions, you have pursued with a view to having the authorities of the Ottoman Government inflict speedy and condign punishment upon the murderers of the late Dr. Parsons and servant, near Ismid, in Turkey, in July last.

Your efforts are appreciated, and your action, as reported in your above dispatch, is approved. It is the desire of the Department that you should continue your urgent pressure for the trial and punishment of the murderers, which should not be relaxed until every means promising possible hope of success shall have been exhausted. Every consideration of justice demands, as you seem to have appreciated and understood, that these criminals shall be made to suffer the severest punishment for the horrible crime which they have committed 5 and you will say to the minister for foreign affairs that the Government of the United States expects, while it is due to its citizens, the American missionaries who are zealously laboring in those regions for the good of mankind, and to travelers, no less than to the internal peace, order, and security of Turkey herself, that she will with all convenient dispatch inflict exemplary and condign punishment upon both those who have already confessed the crime and upon those who, after a fair and impartial trial, may be adjudged guilty and implicated therein.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

No. 626. Mr. Hunter to Mr. Heap. No. 626.
Mr. Hunter to Mr. Heap.

Department of State,
Washington, September 22, 1880. No. 273.]

Sir: Your cipher telegram, dated at Constantinople the 17thinstant, has been received. It reads as follows, viz: Legal counsel necessary prosecution of murderers. Do you authorize it?

Upon the 20th instant the Department replied thereto as follows, viz: You are authorized to employ counsel.

These telegrams are understood to relate to the case of Dr. Parsons and servant recently murdered near Ismid, in Turkey.

I am, &c.,

W. HUNTER,
Acting Secretary.

No. 627. Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts. No. 627.
Mr. Heap to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Constantinople, October 11, 1880. (Received Oct. 30.) No. 31.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your dispatches numbered 272 and 273, dated the 15th and 22d of September respectively, relating to the trial of the persons charged with having murdered the Rev. Dr. Parsons and his servant in July last near Ismid.

I have to inform the Department that the three Turks, Ali, Eyoob, and Soliman, accused of these murders were brought up for trial on Saturday last, the 9th instant. Ali, who was convicted of murder in the first degree, was sentenced in virtue of the last paragraph of article 174 of the Ottoman penal code, to death by hanging, and Eyoob and Soliman, as accomplices, were sentenced to fifteen years imprisonment with hard labor, in conformity with article 175 of the same code.

I sent a telegram in cipher to the Department last evening informing it of the result of the trial, which was not communicated to me officially until then.

I was with the judges for two hours before the beginning of the trial, which was appointed to commence at twelve o’clock, but was delayed until two, on account of the difficulty of conveying Ali from the prison to the court-room. He alleged that he was unable to walk or be removed and was finally brought in a carriage. I abstained from any pressure on the judges, stating only that all the United States Government desired was a fair and impartial trial of the accused and their sentence to the penalties provided by the Ottoman criminal code for the crimes of which they might be convicted. After the trial, which lasted about two hours, the judges retired to the chamber of consultation (chambre des déliberations), and asked me to remain with them until the verdict was rendered. I thought it proper, however, to leave them to deliberate freely.

It is very satisfactory to state that the trial was conducted with perfect decorum, order, and solemnity. The court was composed of the president and four associate judges. After the public prosecutor had read the indictment, the prisoners were interrogated in turn by the presiding judge, and they made a full avowal of their guilt. Ali related minutely how he had first killed Garabet, the servant, and then Dr. Parsons. Eyoob and Soliman had stood by and witnessed the murders without taking an active part in them. They divided the plunder and helped to conceal the bodies.

The counsel for the prisoners made an appeal in their defense, laying stress on their youth.

Messrs. Ede and Tinghir, the counsel employed by this legation to watch and assist the prosecution, were allowed to address the court and made eloquent and convincing arguments.

The prisoners looked extremely wretched and appeared to fully realize their awful position. They have the marsh fever, contracted at Ismid during their confinement at that place, and are in a pitiable state.

The cipher telegram I sent on the 10th reads as follows: Murderers of Dr. Parsons and servant tried yesterday. Ali sentenced to he hung; his two accomplices to imprisonment at hard labor for fifteen years. October 10.

I shall transmit copies of all the correspondence with the Turkish authorities and other papers relating to this case as soon as I can have translations made.

At an interview with the minister of foreign affairs on the 7th instant I endeavored to impress on him that the Government of the United States would not be satisfied with anything short of the condemnation of the parties found guilty of this horrible crime to the severest penalty of the law, and that if the Ottoman courts failed to satisfy this reasonable demand it would cause a very painful impression in the United States, where this murder had created strong doubts as to the security of foreigners in the Ottoman dominions, and that the Turkish authorities owed it as much to themselves as to us to see that justice was done on the criminals. Assim Pasha promised to speak to the minister of justice the same day and to advise him to allow no further delays and to see that the accused were tried in strict accordance with the law. The impartiality of the trial may be attributed to this timely injunction of Assim Pasha.

In conclusion I have to bear testimony to the energy and intelligence of Mr. Gargiulo, the first interpreter of the legation, which have contributed in a large measure to the satisfactory result of the trial.

I am, &c.,

G. H. HEAP,
Chargé d’Affaires ad interim.

No. 628. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap. No. 628.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Heap.

Department of State,
Washington, October 15, 1880. No. 278.]

Sir: I had the pleasure to receive, on the 11th instant, your telegraphic message, in cipher, dated at Constantinople the 10th instant, in the following words, viz: Murderers of Dr. Parsons and servant tried yesterday. Ali sentenced to be hung; his two accomplices to imprisonment at hard labor for fifteen years.

Upon the 13th instant, I caused to be sent to you, likewise in cipher, the following telegram: Congratulations on successful efforts in Parsons’ case. Pursue matter till sentence executed.

Your message contains gratifying intelligence, and while this government recognizes in the present action of the Ottoman authorities that spirit of justice which should characterize a friendly foreign power, jealous of its good name, in dealing with the perpetrators of such an unprovoked and brutal murder, the Department attributes, in no small degree, the good results thus far attained, to your attentive, patient, and vigilant consideration for the rights of American citizenship, and to a faithful interpretation of its instructions in the premises. Your dispatches have kept the Department advised of the successive steps taken from time to time, before the trial, of the delays incident thereto, and of the apparent disregard of the Turkish Government for the sentences imposed by its courts in criminal cases, even under more than ordinary circumstances. The Department appreciates, therefore, notwithstanding the criminals have been duly convicted and sentenced, the uncertainty of the speedy execution of the respective sentences thus imposed; if, indeed, they shall be practically and faithfully carried out. It is confidently hoped, however, that the Ottoman Government will not shrink from the responsibility of strictly enforcing the sentence of one of its courts, in doing which not only the majesty of the law will be maintained, but the death of an American citizen, deliberately and cruelly murdered, will be thus far avenged, a reparation which, in strictest justice, this government has a right to expect and demands. Besides this, summary action in dealing with these criminals will, while showing Turkish condemnation of such atrocious acts, give, implicitly, greater protection to the numerous American missionaries and travelers temporarily sojourning in that country, who have a right to expect and should receive the most perfect protection the Ottoman Government can guarantee or afford.

You will, therefore, continue your judicious efforts looking to the fulfilment by the Turkish Government of the sentences in each case, and should occasion arise to demand energetic measures, you will plainly intimate to the minister for foreign affairs of that government, that the Government of the United States expects a rigid compliance, unless for sufficient reasons to the contrary, with the letter of the sentence and nothing less.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

II.—Egypt.II.—Egypt.

[629] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comanos.

Department of State, Washington, August 1, 1879.

[630] . Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, October 8, 1879. (Received November 3.)

[631] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States, Cairo, Egypt, November 13, 1879. (Received December 4.)

[632] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, November 27, 1879. (Received December 17.)

[633] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Payson.

Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, November 28, 1879. (Received December 17.)

[634] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State, Washington, December 5, 1879.

[635] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State, Washington, December 30, 1879.

[636] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, February 14, 1880. (Received March 15.)

[637] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, March 8, 1880. (Received. April 3.)

[638] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State, Washington, March 24, 1880.

[639] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, April 5, 1880. (Received April 28.)

[640] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, April 8, 1880. (Received May 3.)

[641] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, April 22, 1880. (Received May 17.)

[642] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, May 5, 1880. (Received May 31.)

[643] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt, Cairo, May 22, 1880. (Received June 19.).

[644] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States, Cairo, Egypt, June 17, 1880. (Received July 10.)

[645] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States at Cairo, June 22, 1880. (Received July 14.)

[646] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State, Washington, June 28, 1880.

[647] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States at Cairo, June 29, 1880. (Received July 24.)

[648] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States, Cairo, Egypt, July 13, 1880. (Received August 5.)

[649] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Farman.

Department of State, Washington, July 20, 1880.

[650] .

[Cable message, received at Washington July 23, 1880—6.55 p.m.]

[651] . Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States, Cairo, Egypt, August 2, 1880. (Received August 26.)

[652] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State, Washington, August 7, 1880.

[653] . Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States. Cairo, Egypt, August 20, 1880. (Received September 16.)

No. 629. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comanos. No. 629.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Comanos.

Department of State,
Washington, August 1, 1879. No. 136.]

Sir: Referring to Mr. Farman’s correspondence with the Department in regard to the presentation by His Highness the late Khedive of an obelisk to the city of New York, I have now to inform you that, at the request of the citizens of that city interested in securing this munificent gift of His Highness for the adornment of their native city, the Secretary of the Navy has granted to Lieutenant-Commander Gorringe, of the United States Navy, leave of absence for any requisite time for the purpose of superintending the transportation, from Alexandria to New York, of the obelisk known as “Cleopatra’s Needle.”

This dispatch will be handed to you in person by Lieutenant-Commander Gorringe, who is about to proceed to Egypt in fulfillment of the interesting and responsible task intrusted to him. I desire to bespeak for him all proper official and personal aid you can render him in his undertaking, and especially that you will accredit him to the Government of the Khedive as the person authorized on behalf of this government to receive, in the name of the city of New York, and to convey thither, His Highness’s generous gift.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 630. Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. No. 630.
Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, October 8, 1879. (Received November 3.) No. 340.]

Sir: In his dispatch No. 310, of July 3, 1879, Mr. Farman submitted to the Government of the United States, for its approval, the draft of a decree, composed of two articles, which the Government of the Khedive proposed to issue, with the assent of the powers signatory to the treaties of Egyptian judicial reform, and which related to the non-seizability, from the 1st of February, 1870, of the real properties mortgaged and given in pledge to the Messrs. Rothschild, for the so-called domanial loan of £8,500,000 contracted for on the 31st October, 1878. Mr. Farman at that time recommended that our government give its assent, and he requested a telegraphic reply.

In a private note to me, dated the 1st of October, 1879, of which I herewith inclose translation, His Excellency Mustapha Fehmi Pasha, the present minister of foreign affairs, refers to the above-mentioned draft of a decree, incloses the draft of an additional or third article—of which I herewith transmit copy and translation—and urgently requests me to solicit the United States Government to communicate to me its decision upon the draft of decree as composed of ali three articles. His excellency also says he has reason to believe that England, France, and Italy will at once approve of the proposed decree, if the third article be added to it.

I therefore beg you to inform me by cable what reply to give to the Egyptian minister of foreign affairs on this subject.

In addition to what Mr. Farman has already remarked in his dispatch No. 310 referred to above, the following statement, taken by me from the Phare d’Alexandrie, a semi-official paper, will set forth the straits in which the Egyptian Government is placed by reason, partly, of the steady refusal of Messrs. Rothschild to pay the balance of the loan in question without an international promise to respect the validity of the mortgage made in their favor.

I. The floating debt of Egypt will, by the end of October, 1879, amount approximately to the sum of £12,500,000, composed thus: Owning to the great syndicate £4,500,000

Owning to Greenfield & Paponot 1,000,000

Salaries, pensions, and a part of the civil list of the Khedive 1,100,000

European creditors:

(a) Judgments rendered up to end of August, 1879 3,200,000

(b) Pending claims, upon which judgment is sure to be rendered by end of October, 1879 300,000

(c) Balance of debt not having judgments 400,000

Private native individual creditors 400,000

10,900,000

Owing to the Daïras, to the civil list, &c 1,600,000

Total floating debt 12,500,000

II. Available, i. e., assets:

Unified debt bonds deposited (nominal value) £6,600,000

Value of original shares of founders of Suez Canal 800,000

Price of water works of Alexandria city 300,000

Balance still unpaid on the Rothschild or so-called domanial loan 3,200,000

10,900,000

To be deducted: Difference between nominal and market value of the £6,600,000 of unified debt bonds (not worth more than 50 per cent) 3,300,000

Total available 7,600,000

Deficit, October 31, 1879 4,900,000

12,500,000

III. But if Messrs. Rothschild do not pay the balance of the domanial loan (i. e., £3,200,000) this deficit will be £8,100,000—and they do refuse to pay any part of that balance until all the powers signatory to the treaties of judicial reform in Egypt signify their formal assent to the issuing of a Khedival decree that shall secure the validity of the mortgage to them of the real properties ceded by the Khedival family to the Egyptian State, and by it given in pledge to secure the said loan.

Since receiving the private letter of Mustapha Fehmi Pasha, I have seen him personally, and he begged me to earnestly solicit the Government of the United States to give its early attention to this question, and to telegraph me its decision.

I am, &c.,

N. D. COMANOS,
Vice-Consul-General in Charge.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 340.—Translation.]

Private letter from Egyptian minister of foreign affairs to Mr. Comanos

Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Cairo, October 1, 1879.

My Dear Comanos: The Government of the United States has as yet given us no information as to its views upon the Rothschild decree, which we submitted for its approval in our circular of the 2d of July last.

It is nevertheless a matter of most serious interest to us that this question receive a solution as early as possible, and the creditors of the floating debt have therein an interest not less than our own.

I have reason to believe that England, France, and Italy will forthwith give their approval if to the two articles of the proposed decree that was presented to the powers a third article be added, a copy of which I now send you.

I shall be greatly obliged if you will urge upon your government the necessity of notifying me as early as possible the decision it shall have arrived at as to the addition of the third article.

Accept, &c.,

MUSTAPHA FEHMI.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 340.—Translation.]

Article 3.

In order to give a guarantee that the available balance of the domanial loan will be entirely employed in regulating the Egyptian debt, the Egyptian Government delegates, from now on, to the commission of the public debt, all its rights over the sums that it may still dispose of out of the product of the domanial loan, in execution of the conventions agreed to by it (the government) and by the Rothschild houses.

Consequently Messrs. Rothschild shall accept as good and valid discharges the receipts that shall be given them by the commission of the debt in exchange for the payments which they shall be able to make to it (the commission) in the execution of their contract.

The commission of the public debt will hold the sums thus paid over by MM. Rothschild as a sequester, not to be disposed of save according to the instructions that shall be given to it by the commission of liquidation that shall be constituted by virtue of an international agreement, and, in default of this latter commission, according to the instructions that shall be given to it by the Khedive with the concurrence of the powers.

No. 631. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 631.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States,
Cairo, Egypt, November 13, 1879. (Received December 4.) No. 344.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the work preparatory to the removal of the obelisk at Alexandria is progressing satisfactorily. The constructions for lowering, moving, and placing it on board of a steamer arrived a few days since, and I have obtained an order to let them pass the custom-house free of duty. The government has also given orders that the same facilities and privileges be given to Lieutenant-Commander Gorringe that were given to Mr. Dixon in the removal of the obelisk taken to London two years ago.

In the prosecution of his work the commander has excavated a pit about the obelisk and extending from it to the sea in which to construct a float on which the obelisk is to be placed and taken to the port of Alexandria, about a mile distant in a straight line, but three or four miles by way of the sea.

The pit is 95 feet long and 40 feet broad at the end next to the sea, and 30 at the other, and has an average depth of 16 feet. There is also a side pit 12 feet square for receiving the pedestal. The total amount of the excavations is 54,920 cubic feet. The surface of the ground was also covered with hewn stone, which had to be removed. Their estimated quantity was 54 tons.

The foot of the obelisk, before the excavations were commenced, was buried in the sand and earth. This is now brought to view as well as all the foundations on which it rests.

The obelisk stands on a pedestal which is 9 feet 2 inches square and 6 feet 11 inches in height. The foundations of the pedestal consist of three marble steps, well preserved and resting on masonry. The lower surface of the lower step is only 18 inches above the level of the sea, It is quite evident that at the time of the erection of the obelisk in its present position, a little over eighteen centuries ago, the surface of the earth was but a little above the level of the sea. Since that time there has been an accumulation of earth and sand to the depth of 13 or 14 feet, burying the marble steps, the pedestal, and finally the foot of the obelisk. The vertical height of the three steps is 4 feet 9 inches, and the height of the summit of the obelisk above the lower surface of the lower step is 81 feet 2½ inches.

The pedestal weighs 43 tons of 2,240 pounds each, and the obelisk, if it were as originally cut, would weigh 199 tons; but it is estimated that it has lost, from various causes, about 3 tons.

I am indebted to Commander Gorringe tor the weights and measurements given in this dispatch. He expects, in case of good success in his work, to be ready to lower the obelisk within ten days.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 632. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 632.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, November 27, 1879. (Received December 17.) No. 351.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith copies of a dispatch received from his excellency Mustapha Fehmi Pasha, minister of foreign affairs, and of a decree made by His Highness the Khedive, under date of the 15th instant, relating to the Rothschild loan.

This decree does not ‘differ in principle nor in any important particular from the draft or proposed decree which I inclosed to you with my dispatch No. 310 of July 3, 1879, to which you replied by telegram under date of October 12, 1879, as follows: “This government makes no objection to the proposed decree respecting the domanial loan.”

Article 3 only relates to the disposition to be made of the balance of the proceeds of the loan, and article 4 simply makes more certain and definite the evident intent of the first part of article 2.

After the conversation I had with you in New York and your subsequent telegram above mentioned, I did not think any further correspondence on the subject of the decree necessary. I knew you did not wish to enter into any question of details such as those relating to the manner of applying the proceeds of the loan, and that you had no objection to the Egyptian Government’s making such regulations or laws as it thought necessary or expedient in respect to such matters.

I therefore felt authorized, when Mustapha Fehmi Pasha came to this consulate, as he did on the 13th instant, to confer with me on the subject, to state to him verbally, and afterwards to confirm this in writing, that the Government of the United States made no objection to the proposed decree relating to the Rothschild loan.

The other great powers had, as he informed me, already assented, and he wished to have the decree issued immediately for reasons that were evidently very important.

I inclose a copy of my dispatch on this subject which I sent, accompanied with its translation into French, to his excellency, on the 21st instant.

I was careful to follow both in the verbal statement and its written confirmation the words of your telegram, “this government makes no objection,” &c. I thought perhaps you intended to make a distinction between making no objection and consenting.

Hoping that what I have done will meet with your approval, I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 351.—Translation.]

Mustapha Fehmi Pasha to Mr. Farman

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Cairo, November 16, 1879. No. 802.]

circular.

Sir: As a sequel to the circulars that this ministry has had the honor to address you on the 2d of July and 20th of September of this year, concerning the Rothschild loan, I hasten to transmit you a copy of the decree issued by His Highness the Khedive, under date of yesterday, after an understanding between the powers and his government.

As you will not fail to observe yourself Mr. Agent and Consul-General, the changes that have been made in the last drafting of this decree consist in the addition of a fourth article and of the word “exclusively” in the first sentence of Article III.

I also believe it my duty to call your attention, Mr. Agent and Consul-General, to the fact that it remains well understood that the employés and the pensioners of the government, to whom are due arrears of pay, form a part of the creditors of the non-consolidated debt, and will be treated in conformity with the principles established by the commission of inquiry.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

MUSTAPHA FEHMI,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 351.—Translation.]

decree.

We Khedive of Egypt:

Whereas, upon the 31st day of October, 1878, a loan for the sum of £8,500,000 was contracted, in the name of the state, through Messrs. de Rothschild & Sons, at London, and Messrs. de Rothschild Brothers, at Paris;

Whereas, in order to carry out the decree of the 26th of October, 1878, and respond to the common intent of the parties, there is need of making the necessary provisions with a view to reserving the properties ceded by our family for the special and exclusive guaranty of this loan;

Our council of ministers being heard;

Do hereby decree:

Article 1. Until the complete payment (amortissement in the French) of the domanial loan the properties ceded by our family to the state shall be unseizable, and shall not be alienated but by the commissioners of the domains under the conditions fixed by the conventions executed or to be executed between the government and Messrs. de Rothschild.

Art. 2. After the satisfaction of the judgment liens (inscriptions hypothécaires) anterior to the liens taken by Messrs. de Rothschild on the 2d and 3d days of February last, these properties shall be and shall remain released from every action, “résolutoire” or “en revindication,” and from all real rights of what nature soever, except those conferred upon the subscribers to the loan, to remain especially and exclusively set apart for the guaranty of the interest and payment (amortissement) of the said loan.

Art. 3. In order to give a guaranty that the available balance of the domanial loan will be entirely and exclusively used in paying the non-consolidated Egyptian debt, the Egyptian Government delegates (intrusts) from the present time to the special commissioners of the public debt all its right to the sums that it may still dispose of out of the product of the domanial loan, in execution of the conventions executed between itself and the Rothschild houses.

Consequently, Messrs. de Rothschild shall accept (are authorized to accept) as good and valid discharges the receipts that shall be given them by the special commissioners of the public debt for any payments that they shall make to them (the commissioners) in the execution of their contract.

The special commissioners of the public debt shall hold the sums thus paid by Messrs. de Rothschild as a sequester, not to be disposed of save according to the instructions that shall be given them by the commission of liquidation that shall be constituted by virtue of an international understanding (accord); and in default of this commission, according to the instructions that shall be given them (the commissioners) by us with the concurrence of the powers.

Art. 4. The full exercise of the rights appertaining to the creditors holding judgment liens registered prior to the 2d and 3d days of February, 1879, namely, prior to the dates of the record of the mortgages taken by Messrs. de Rothschild is and remains expressly reserved.

Art. 5. Our minister of finance is intrusted with the execution of the present decree.

Done at the palace of Abdin, the 15th November, 1879.
MEHEMET TEWFIK.

By the Khedive:
Riaz,
President of the Council of Ministers,
Minister of Finance ad Interim.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 351.]

Mr. Farman to Mr. Mustapha Fehmi Pasha

Agency and Consulate of the United States,
Cairo, November 21, 1879. No. 809.]

Sir: I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your excellency’s dispatch No. 802, of the 16th instant, inclosing a copy of a decree made by His Highness the Khedive, under date of November 15, 1879, and relating to the Rothschild loan.

In an interview that I had the honor to have with your excellency on the 13th instant, I stated that the Government of the United States made no objection to the issuing of this decree, the draft of which, in the form in which it now appears, had been presented to me.

Yesterday your excellency requested me to confirm in writing what I had verbally stated in this interview. Incompliance with your excellency’s request, I have the honor to hereby state that the Government of the United States make no objection to the decree above mentioned.

Accept, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN,
United States Agent and Consul General.

No. 633. Mr. Farman to Mr. Payson. No. 633.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Payson.

Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, November 28, 1879. (Received December 17.) No. 352.]

Sir: You will remember, when I had the pleasure of seeing you last, that I mentioned that the United States bad no prison in Egypt, and desired to know in what prison any person that should be sentenced by the United States consular court in Egypt to imprisonment for a term of years, could be confined.

Will you please give me instructions in this respect? I should like also to be informed as to whether or not the prison for such purpose has facilities for providing the convicts with labor, so that they can be sentenced to “hard labor” as well as confinement.

I would thank you to send me an answer to this by the first mail.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 634. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman. No. 634.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State,
Washington, December 5, 1879. No. 147.]

Sir: The dispatch of Mr. Comanos, numbered 340, of the 8th of October last, respecting the proposed decree for insuring the validity of the mortgage of certain lauds to the Messrs, Rothschild, has been received. In reply to his request for instructions, I have to inform you that a telegram upon the subject was sent on the 11th of October last, the text of .which is as follows: Comanos,
Vice-Consul, Cairo, Egypt:

This government makes no objection to the proposed decree respecting the domanial loan.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 635. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman. No. 635.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State,
Washington, December 30, 1879. No. 152.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 352, of the 28th ultimo, requesting to be advised in what prison a person sentenced by the United States consular court in Egypt to imprisonment for a term of years could be confined, and also whether the prison for such purpose has facilities for providing the convicts with labor so that they can be sentenced to hard labor as well as confinement, has been received.

In reply I have to state that the convicts should be sent to the United States prison at Smyrna; that it is presumed from the very limited appropriation that the facilities for modern prison discipline are extremely primitive, and that the term hard labor is to be used there technically as expressing the theocratical grade of the penalty in its effect on the convict’s civil status, rather than practically as a means of discipline or prison revenue. The matter would seem to rest in the discretion of the marshal there.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 636. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 636.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, February 14, 1880. (Received March 15.) No. 371.]

Sir: I have the honor to transmit herewith a copy and a translation of a dispatch dated February 8, 1880, which I have received from His Excellency Mustapha Pasha Fehmi, minister of foreign affairs.

His excellency asks my intervention in obtaining the assent of the Government of the United States for the immediate and full payment, from the balance of the funds remaining from the Rothschild loan, of the arrears of the tribute and the arrears of pension and pay of the government employés in such cases as the annual amount of such pensions or pay does not exceed the sum of £1,000.

On referring to article 3 of the decree relating to the domanial loan, a copy of which I inclosed with my dispatch No. 351 of November 27, 1879, you will notice that it was therein decreed that the balance of the money remaining from this loan be devoted entirely and exclusively to the payment of the non-consolidated debt (floating debt) and intrusted to the special commissioners of the public debt, with the proviso that it should not be disposed of by them except according to the instructions that should be given by the commission of liquidation that should be established by virtue of an international understanding, or, in default of this commission, according to the instructions that should be given them by the Khedive with the concurrence of the powers.

These provisions were inserted in the decree on the demand of certain European governments.

No commission of liquidation has as yet been constituted, and the Egyptian Government, expecting soon to receive the balance of the Rothschild loan, ask the assent of the powers to apply a portion of these funds in the manner above stated.

There has been paid since the making of said decree from the proceeds of this loan £1,150,000 upon judgments which had become liens upon the mortgaged lands prior to the record of the Rothschild mortgage, but there still remains in the hands of these bankers about £2,200,000 ($11,000,000).

The amount of arrears of tribute is £280,000, and the arrears of pension and pay of the classes named £500,000. If these amounts are paid in Ml from the £2,200,000 it will leave only £1,400,000 to be paid to the ordinary creditors, or about 25 cents on a dollar of their claims.

Several of the European powers have already signified their assent to the payment from this fund of the sums due on account of arrears of pension and pay. Some have also given their assent to the payment of the arrears of the tribute from the same source. One or two powers who are opposed to thus paying their arrears of the tribute have given their agents and consul-general instructions to act with the majority, and it may be that all the European powers will finally give their consent to the payment of all these sums as asked by the Egyptian Government.

Knowing as I do the position taken by our government in relation to this country, and its reluctance to interest itself in, or have anything to do with, the details of its internal affairs, I should consider myself authorized to state that the Government of the United States have no objection to the application of the funds in the manner mentioned, if it did not seem to me entirely unjust to pay in full from the source named the arrears of tribute. The object of this is to keep intact the funds that are pledged to the payment of the interest on the bonded debt. The two controllers general, one English and the other French, who now virtually govern Egypt, so far as relates to its finances, are only or principally interested in the payment of this class of indebtedness.

The proper manner to dispose of the whole question would be by a commission of liquidation, but as yet no definite arrangement has been made in relation to such a commission, for the reason that the English and French do not wish to share in any manner the financial control, now exercised by them, with the other powers. It however now looks, from the complications that have arisen, as if they would be compelled to do so.

It is evident that the commissioners of the public debt will have no right on its receipt to dispose of the money mentioned without the assent of the powers, including the United States.

I was asked by the minister of foreign affairs, as you will notice in his dispatch, to obtain an answer from my government by telegraph, but I did not think it expedient or necessary to telegraph you on this subject, as it may yet be some time before moneys are obtained from the Rothschilds on account of the difficulties mentioned in the commercial report which I have just sent to the Department.

I would, however, thank you to send me, on the receipt of this dispatch, a telegram stating whether or not you have any objection to the application of the funds by the Egyptian Government in the manner specified. I see no objection to this, so far as relates to the back pay and pensions.

His excellency the minister of foreign affairs in transmitting to me the domanial decree, stated in his letter, a copy of which I also sent you, that he believed it to be his duty to call my attention to the fact that it remained well understood that the employés and the pensioners of the government to whom were due arrears of pay formed a part of the creditors of the non-consolidated debt and would be treated in conformity with the principle established by the commissioners of inquiry. This principle was that this class of creditors was to be considered as privileged and to be paid first and in full.

Hoping to receive an immediate answer by telegraph, so that I may not be embarrassed in case all the other powers give their assent as requested, I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 371.—Translation.]

Mustapha Fehmi to Mr. Farman

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Cairo, February 8, 1880. No. 104.]

Sir: Article 3 of the decree relating to the Rothschild loan, signed on the 15th November of last year, prescribes that the special treasury of the public debt, which As intrusted with receiving the sums paid by the contractors of the said loan, shall, not dispose of these funds, in case there be no commission of liquidation, except in accordance with the instructions that shall be given it by His Highness the Khedive with the concurrence of the powers.

It is in conformity with this last clause, and pending the general settlement relating to the payment of the whole of the floating debt, that I apply to your obliging intervention, Mr. agent and consul-general, for obtaining the assent of the Government of the United States in favor of the full and immediate payment of the arrears of the tribute, which constitutes one of the first charges upon the Egyptian Government, and also in favor of the payment of those salaries and pensions of which the annual amount does not exceed £1,000 each.

The complete settlement of this part of the floating debt being in conformity with the views expressed by the commission of investigation, and having been confirmed, so far as relates to salaries, by the sentences of the mixed tribunals, I have the hope that you will, in view of these circumstances, obtain a telegraphic reply from your government.

I offer you in advance the expression of my thanks, and reiterate, Mr. agent and consul-general, &c.,

MUSTAPHA FEHMI,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

No. 637. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 637.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, March 8, 1880. (Received. April 3.) No. 372.]

Sir: Since my return to Egypt I have not sent to the Department any dispatch on the subject of the proposed commission of liquidation, for the reason that until the last few days nothing of importance relating to such commission has taken place.

The contents of your telegram of the 28th of August, 1879, to Mr. Comanos were communicated by him to the Khedive, as reported in his dispatch No. 332 of September 1. As this communication was verbal, I thought it best on my arrival to confirm it in writing, and I did so in a dispatch that I addressed to the minister of foreign affairs on the 19th of November last, in which I also asked his excellency to inform me whether it was then the intention of His Highness the Khedive to establish such commission.

No official reply has ever been given to this dispatch, though the minister has often talked with me concerning it and the proposed commission of liquidation. In these conversations he has always stated that his government desired such a commission, but that the matter was in the hands of the European governments, and that the Khedive could do nothing until these governments agreed upon some plan. He said he knew nothing officially about the negotiations that were being carried on in Europe in relation to the commission, but that he had learned from unofficial sources that the matter was under consideration at Paris and London.

The Franco-English control was established about the 1st of December, and since then the government has been virtually in the hands of the controllers; For a long time it was evidently not their intention to have a commission of liquidation, especially so on the part of France; but various complications have arisen that now make such a commission an imperative necessity. Without it the decrees which the controllers have exacted cannot be executed, and their plans will be in a great measure defeated. It has, therefore, been decided to establish a commission, but care has been taken that it be of such a character as to be simply an instrument to carry out the projects that have already been decided upon.

A week ago the French Government, through its consul-general, communicated to the Egyptian Government, for its approval, a draft of a decree drawn up in Paris establishing the proposed commission, and defining its duties and powers and fixing the time of its duration. According to this project, which has been accepted by the council of ministers, the commission is to consist of eight persons, of whom two are to be French, two English, one German, one Austrian, one Italian, and one Egyptian; four of these commissioners are to be the four commissioners “de la caisse,” who receive certain specified revenues, being the taxes of certain provinces and the railway receipts, &c., and hold them for the payment of the interest of the bonded indebtedness. Though nominally recommended by their governments, they are in fact the mere agents of the bondholders. Mr. Rivers Wilson is to be a fifth commissioner; and a private secretary of M. de Blignières, the French controller-general, is to be a sixth. So that six of the eight commissioners can be counted upon to act as a unit in carrying out the plan already agreed upon by the controllers. It is said that this plan has been reduced to writing and approved in Europe. While I have no proof of this statement, I have no doubt of its truth. The only important matters left undetermined are those relating to the Rothschilds and the Daïras Sanieh bondholders. These are open questions between the English and French themselves.

* * * * * * *

Up to to-day no official communication has been made to the Egyptian Government except the one I have mentioned as made by France, though it is understood that Austria and Germany have given their assent to the proposed commission. The German consul-general had had no communication from his government up to this morning, and knew nothing about the negotiations. It is probable that Italy, though much dissatisfied, will also give her consent. Russia, the United States, and all the small powers are to be left out, though France promises, in submitting the plan, to ask the other governments to consent to the decisions of the commission. There are some of the smaller powers that have a larger interest in Egyptian claims and bonds than either Germany, Austria, or Italy, so that the question of representation has not wholly been determined by the amount of interest.

At the time our government asked to be represented in the commission the Egyptian Government was in the hands of the Khedive and the ministers of his choice, and I had been given to understand that such a request would not only be favorably received, but that Egypt was desirous that the United States should be represented. I am informed by the Russian consul-general that it was in pursuance of a similar understanding that his government asked a representation in the commission.

The situation has now wholly changed. Egypt is virtually in the hands of representatives of France and England, and the negotiations in relation to the commission have been carried on in Europe instead of Egypt.

* * * * * * *

The commission is to take into consideration the resources of the country, and determine what amounts it can pay, and fix the amounts to be paid and the time of payment in accordance with such determination, and is to finish its work in three months. Its official functions and powers are to cease at the end of that period.

It is evident that no examination of the resources of the country is intended, for it could not be made either in three months or in six months. The object of the commission is simply to help the controllers out of the difficulties in which they have already become involved by giving legal effect and an international sanction to the plans they have elaborated and in part attempted to execute, including the system of taxation described in my commercial report for 1879.

* * * * * * *

The commission will undoubtedly reduce the interest on the unified debt to 4 or 4½ per cent., for this is an absolute necessity. To continue it at a higher rate would only be to increase from year to year the amount that would remain unpaid. But this is not simply four per cent. on the amount of money actually loaned, but four per cent. on the nominal amount of the bonds, on which Egypt has not received over sixty per cent., and a large proportion of this has already been paid in usurious interest. The interest on the privileged debt will be continued at five per cent.

It is the holders of the floating debt who will suffer most. France has taken care through her controller, before consenting to the commission, to have, so far as possible, her claims of this class paid. On the 15th of February, only three weeks ago, there was still owing, as a part of the floating debt of Egypt, to the grand syndicate at Paris about $17,000,000. This sum was then paid in full, including interest at the rate of eight per cent. This was done by the sale of Egypt’s right of 15 per cent. in the net profits of the Suez Canal at £700,000 and the sale of £4,583,920 of unified bonds held in pledge by the syndicate, and also £1,000,000 other unified bonds. It is true that in the purchase of these bonds the syndicate paid something over two per cent. more than their market value, but, considering the interest at the rate of eight per cent. that it had received for a number of years, this was no sacrifice on its part.

A large sum was also lately paid on the principal English floating-debt claim, that of Messrs. Greenfield & Co.

Last fall the German and Austrian Governments refused to consent to the commission of liquidation on account of the judgment liens in which they were principally interested. These, amounting to nearly $0,000,000, having now been paid, they have little further interest in this class of debts.

The remaining portion of the floating debt, amounting probably to something over $40,000,000, is largely owing to citizens of the smaller powers, particularly that of Greece, and to Egyptians. Many of these Egyptians are, however, under the protection of some foreign power.

As near as I can estimate, there are belonging to citizens of the United States and other persons under the protection of our government, who are here in precisely the same position as its citizens, Egyptian bonds and claims, most of which are undisputed, amounting to not less than $1,000,000.

* * * * * * * *

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 638. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman. No. 638.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State,
Washington, March 24, 1880. No. 158.]

Sir: Your dispatch No. 371, of the 14th ultimo, transmitting a copy of a note from the minister of foreign affairs, urging upon you the necessity of obtaining the assent of the Government of the United States in favor of the full and immediate payment of arrears of tribute, pensions, and pay of employés out of the balance of the Rothschild or domanial loan, has been received, and as you seemed to be in doubt as-to the exact construction to be placed upon the telegraphic instruction of October 12, 1879, I have now to state that as both tribute and salaries seem to come within the description of floating debt, and as there would appear to be no provision in the terms of the decree of November 15, 1879, for pro rata payment, or indeed for specific payments of any sort, and as the simple non-objection on the part of this government seemed to hardly meet the requirements of this case, I have now to inform you that the Government of the United States hereby gives its assent to the proposed payment, and that this assent has already been conveyed to you, according to request, in a telegram of the 22d instant, couched in the following language: Three seventy-one received; give desired assent.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 639. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 639.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, April 5, 1880. (Received April 28.) No. 381.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 372, of the 8th ultimo, I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a decree of His Highness the Khedive, instituting a commission of liquidation.

It will be noticed that by the decree this commission is to take as a basis of its action the conclusions of the commission of inquest, but that the conditions of the Rothschilds’ loan are not to be in any way modified.

I am, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 381.—Translation.]

decree.

We, Khedive of Egypt:

Considering the report of the superior commission of inquiry dated April 8, 1879—

Whereas the decree of April 6, 1876, extending the time of the payment of the debts of the Egyptian Government, diminished the interest thereon, and declared the necessity of coming to a financial arrangement with the design of settling the Egyptian debt;

Whereas the commission of inquiry, in its report dated April 8, 1879, recognized the impossibility of meeting at once all the amounts falling due of the consolidated debt, and of paying in full and immediately the non-consolidated debt;

Whereas the commission equally recognized that, in order to be able to proceed to an equitable distribution of available resources among the creditors of the government, it was necessary that the law of liquidation should be binding upon all creditors and be so recognized by the tribunals of the reform;

Whereas Germany, Austria, Hungary, France, Great Britain, and Italy have declared that they accept in advance the law that shall be prepared by the commission constituted by virtue of the present decree, and have engaged to bring collectively such law to the knowledge of the other powers who have taken part in the establishment of the mixed tribunals in Egypt and invite them to adhere thereto;

The favorable opinion of our council of ministers being taken;

We decree: Article 1. A commission of liquidation is instituted. After having examined, in its entirety, the financial situation, and after having heard the observations of the parties interested, this commission shall prepare, taking as a starting point the conclusions of the superior commission of inquiry, and without modifying the conditions of the domanial loan, a draft of a law regulating the relations of the government as well as those of the Daïrns Sanieh and Khassa with their creditors, and determining the condition and the forms under which the liquidation of the non-consolidated debt is to be brought about.

Art. 2. The commission shall determine the resouces that can be placed at the disposal of the creditors of either the consolidated or non-consolidated debt, but it must first of all take into account, with the assent of the council of ministers and controllers, the necessity of reserving to the government the free disposal of the sums indispensable for ensuring the regular working of the public service. To this end communication shall be made to it (the commission) of the budget for the year during which it shall exercise its functions, and also of the budgets for the preceding years that shall be needed by it for taking into exact account the needs of the Egyptian treasury.

Art. 3. The controllers-general shall furnish to the commission such documents and supplementary explanations as shall be of a character to give it information in the accomplishment of its task. It shall transmit through them, either to Us or to Our ministers, the observations that it shall have to make to the government.

Art. 4. The commission shall have the right to superintend, together with the controllers-general, the enforcement of the provisions that shall have been fixed upon by it; and the duration of its powers, after the publication of the decree of liquidation, may be prolonged, to this end, for a space that shall not exceed three months. At the expiration of this space of time the commission shall, in any event, be by rights dissolved.

Art. 5. The law that shall be prepared by the commission shall be clothed with Our sanction and published by Us. From the time of its publication, this law shall be binding and without appeal, notwithstanding the provisions of the “Règlement d’Organisation judiciaire” and the codes of the reform (tribunals).

Art. 6 This commission shall be appointed by decree. It shall be composed of two commissioners designated by each of the Governments of France and of Great Britain, and of one commissioner designated by each of the Governments of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and Italy. The Egyptain Government shall cause itself to be represented by a delegate in this commission.

Art. 7. The credit necessary for the labors of this commission shall be opened by Us, in conformity with the report that shall be presented to Us for this end by the president of the commission.

Art. 8. Our ministers are intrusted, each in so far as concerns him, with the execution of the present decree.

Done at the palace of Abdin, the 31st March, 1880 (20 Rabi-el-Akker, 1297).
MEHEMET TEWFIK.

By the Khedive:
The President of the Council of Ministers:
Riaz.

No. 640. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 640.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, April 8, 1880. (Received May 3.) No. 388.]

Sir: Referring to my dispatch No. 372, of the 8th of March last, and also to that of April 5, No. 381, I have the honor to inclose herewith, in French and in an English translation, the Khedive’s decree of the 5th instant, appointing the members of the commission of liquidation, and the declaration of the 31st of March last made by the consuls-general of Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, Great Britian, and Italy, in relation to the said commission.

I have already reported upon the composition of the commission of liquidation and upon the object aimed at by the declaration of the live consuls, in my dispatch No. 372, mentioned above, to which I beg to call your special attention.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 388.—Translation from the “Phare d’ Alexandrie,” April 6, 1880.]

news of the day.

We publish here below the decree appointing the members of the commission of liquidation instituted by the decree of March 31.

decree.

We, Khedive of Egypt:

Considering Our decree of the 31st of March, 1880, instituting a commission of liquidation:

We decree—

Article 1. The following are appointed members of the commission of liquidation: Sir Rivers Wilson, president, Messrs. Baravelli, Bellaigue de Bughas, Colvin, De Kremer, Liron d’Airoles, De Treskow.

The government delegates Boutros Bey Ghali to represent it before the commission.

Art. 2. The deliberations of the commission of liquidation shall be taken by a majority of votes.

Done at the palace of Abdin, this 5th day of April, 1880 (25th Rabi-el-Akher, 1297.)
MEHEMET TEWFIK.

By the Khedive:

The President of the Council of Ministers:
Riaz.

declaration.

Whereas by a decree dated March 30, 1878, a special commission was intrusted with opening an inquest upon the financial condition of Egypt and with gathering together the elements for a general regulation; and whereas, by a new decree, the text of which is hereto annexed, His Highness the Khedive proposes to constitute a final commission of liquidation composed of German, Austro-Hungarian, French, English, and Italian members; the governments of Germany, Austria- Hungary, France, Great Britain, and Italy have agreed to give their assent to the said decree.

The aforenamed governments consequently engage to accept as obligatory and without appeal the decision that shall be given concerning the obligations and debts of the Egyptian Government, as well as concerning those of the Däiras Khassa and Sanieh, by the commission of liquidation established by virtue of the said decree.

They thus consent to this that the decisions of the commission constituted by virtue of this decree be recognized by the tribunals of the Reform as an obligatory law as soon as they shall be officially published by the government of His Highness the Khedive.

The Governments of Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, Great Britain, and Italy engage, furthermore, to collectively bring this declaration to the knowledge of the powers who have taken part in the establishment of the mixed tribunals instituted in Egypt and to invite them to adhere to it.

The undersigned, M. Jean Antoine, Baron de Saurma-Jeltsch, councillor of legation, consul-general of His Majesty the Emperor of Germany; M. Ignace Chevalier de Schaeffer, minister resident, agent, and consul-general of Austria-Hungary; M. Maximilian Napoleon Theodore, Baron de Ring, minister plenipotentiary, agent, and consul-general of France; M. Edward Baldwin Malet, minister plenipotentiary, agent, and consul-general of Her Britannic Majesty; M. Joseph de Martino, agent and consul-general of Italy, furnished with the necessary powers, declare by these presents that their respective governments take, one toward the other, the engagements related here above.

In faith whereof the undersigned have signed the present declaration, and have hereto affixed the impression of their arms.

Made in live original documents, at Cairo, on the 31st day of March, 1880.
A. J. SAURMA.

SCHAEFFER.

N. de RING.

EDWARD B. MALET.

J. de MARTINO.

A true copy.

Cairo, April 4, 1880.
The Secretary-General of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (of Egypt),
[l. s.] TIGRANE.

No. 641. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 641.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, April 22, 1880. (Received May 17.) No. 391.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that the Russian consul-general, in accordance with instructions received from St. Petersburg, presented this morning to the Egyptian Government a note in which he stated that his government made a formal reserve as to any action that might be taken by the commission of liquidation. This note has not been made public, but it has been read to me by the consul-general, M. de Lex. This is intended, in connection with what has taken place, as a polite protest to the manner in which the commission has been formed.

Some time since the Russian Government sent to the five great powers of Europe a circular in which it stated, in substance, that it had not heretofore taken any prominent part in the affairs of Egypt, but that as it was now proposed to form a commission of liquidation to regulate Egyptian finances, and to give to the acts of such commission the force of law, it would be necessary, in the opinion of the imperial government, that all the powers that participated in the formation of the new tribunals should be represented.

Notwithstanding this circular, the Khedive, under the advice of England and France, issued his decree of the 31st ultimo, establishing a commission to be constituted only of the representatives of the five powers, and giving to France and England a majority of the members, and, consequently, full and absolute control of the action of the commission.

* * * * * * *

The opinion of the Russian consul-general is that his government will leave it entirely to each of its citizens having claims against Egypt to decide for himself whether he will accept the conditions that maybe offered by the commission or resort to the tribunals.

A decision just rendered by the international court of appeals at Alexandria very much diminishes the present necessity for a commission of liquidation, and if it were not already formed I doubt whether it would be.

As I have heretofore had the honor to inform you, the government paid in May last only 2½ per cent. instead of 3, the amount of its semiannual interest as fixed by the Khedival decree of November, 1876, Issued under what is usually known as the Goshen-Joubert contract, and in November last only 2 per cent.

An action was lately brought in the court of first instance at Alexandria to recover £10,033, being balance of one-half per cent. unpaid on coupéons of May last on £694,200 bonds and 1 per cent. balance unpaid on coupéons of November on £656,240 of bonds, and the court held that it had under the Egyptian codes no jurisdiction in such a case, and yesterday the court of appeals confirmed this decision.

This leaves the government free to reduce its interest on its consolidated debt at its pleasure, without any interference on the part of the courts.

The commission may, however, in this new and unexpected phase of the case, become very important to the bondholders by fixing the interest at a certain per cent., thus making a kind of international agreement of which the courts could take cognizance, according to principles they have already enunciated.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 642. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 642.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, May 5, 1880. (Received May 31.) No. 399.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that 35 Arabs, charged with being slave-dealers, were last week apprehended at Assioût, and have just been brought to Cairo, together with 68 slaves that were found with them. These slaves are all quite young, and many of them children. There are 29 boys from five to eighteen years old, and 39 girls from eight to twenty.

Assioût is on the west bank of the Nile, 230 miles above Cairo, and is the principal city of Upper Egypt. The valley is here very narrow, the Lybian range advancing to a point very near the river, and one of of its projecting mountains rises up close behind the city on the west.

In this mountain are a large number of grottoes or tombs, chambers -cut in the limestone rock, which once served as burial places for the inhabitants of the very ancient town of Lycopolis, “city of the wolves.” Some of these grottoes are very large, consisting of a succession of chambers and passages, while others in various parts of the mountain are comparatively small, and still others only of a sufficient size for a body.

Some of these tombs are said to have been occupied by the early Christians as dwelling places, either on account of their safety or their solitude. More recently they have been from time to time the refuge and homes of thieves and other outlaws, who have often been enabled by means of these excavated recesses, resembling catacombs, and their hidden passages, to evade the vigilance of the officers of the government.

The mountain constitutes the border of the desert at this point and is wholly destitute of verdure, but it overlooks the rich green valley and the city with its lofty minarets.

From time immemorial caravans have come from Central Africa, generally from the vicinity of the province of Darfour, across the desert to this point, a distance of over 1,000 miles. They bring with them the products of that distant region, ivory, ostrich feathers, tamarinds, and slaves, and also natron found on the way and take back such articles of merchandise as are considered most desirable in their country, consisting mostly of showy prints and other highly colored cotton cloths. Latterly, since the slave trade was prohibited by the late Khedive, Ismail Pacha, they have ostensibly brought only the other articles named, but have nevertheless continued more or less clandestinely their traffic in slaves.

These caravans have been in the habit of encamping just outside of the city, on the border of the desert, at the foot of the mountain I have mentioned, and there carrying on their negotiations with the merchants and other people of the town.

Two weeks ago a caravan arrived and encamped in the usual place. A gentleman who visited the encampment soon after the arrival informs me that he counted 600 camels and 280 persons, the latter number not including any slaves. On being interrogated as to whether they had any slaves, they answered in the negative. It appears from what was afterwards learned that they hid, during the day, a part of the slaves in the tombs I have mentioned, and the balance in their low tents, and at night made their sales and introduced them blindfolded into the town.

The fact that such a caravan had brought a large number of slaves, which were being sold to any one who wished to buy, could not have been any secret among the leading natives of such a town. No secrecy would be required, except as to a few Europeans and converted Copts, and had it not been for the zeal of a young man by the name of Roth, a native of Switzerland and a teacher in the American mission school at Assioût, the caravan would in the course of a few days have sold its slaves as well as its other merchandise, bought its goods and necessary supplies, and disappeared among the mountains of the desert.

This young man visited the caravan for three days in succession without discovering any indication of slaves, but on the third day he saw two children in the town being led by a servant of the French consular agent, one of the principal Copts of Assioût, and he at once recognized them by their language and the manner in which their hair was dressed as negroes lately from the region whence the caravan had come. He undertook to get possession of the children, but he was soon surrounded by a crowd of natives, and the consular agent himself came and took them away.

Being somewhat aroused by this incident, and learning from a freedman, who had been brought as a slave from the same country and could speak its language, that the caravan had with it a considerable number of slaves, Mr. Roth came the next day to Cairo to give information of what he had ascertained, and having learned that the English Government had a treaty with that of Egypt prohibiting the slave trade, he went to the English consul-general and stated to him the facts.

The consul general went with him to the president of the ministry, Riaz Pasha, and the next day 300 soldiers were sent to Assioût by rail to arrest the supposed slave-traders. The train stopped a little before arriving at the town and the soldiers marched in and surrounded the camp at three o’clock in the morning, and found the 68 slaves I have mentioned. Thirty-five Arabs, supposed to be the pretended owners, were also found with, them and arrested. The next day an examination was made of some of the tombs of the mountain, on information of the slaves that had been kept in them, but although the places where they had been detained were recognized, no more slaves were found. If they had not already been taken into the town, they had, on the camp being surrounded, been hidden or hastened away among the mountains of the desert. There is sufficient evidence that a considerable number had already been sold.

From the stories of the children and the number of camels it is thought that there were originally nearly 1,000 slaves in the caravan. A few of them are supposed to have been sent to points higher up on the river, and the rest had been sold or secreted at Assioût before the arrival of the soldiers. It would be perfectly easy to secrete in a city like this a very large number of slaves. The privacy of the harem is sacred, and it is very rarely that even an officer of the law can enter the woman’s apartments of Mussulmans. I have also reliable information that some of the slaves had already arrived in Cairo and been there sold previous to the departure of the soldiers for Assioût.

The arrested slave-dealers are now in prison, and the slaves have been given papers of manumission and are being placed in the families of such persons as desire to have them.

The caravan occupied about one hundred days in its journey from El Fasher, in Darfour. It came by a camel route, long used by the Arabs, which is from 50 to 400 miles west of the Nile and nearly parallel with the general course of the river. The whole distance is but a barren waste of mountainous desert. There is occasionally, but very rarely, an oasis, which generally consists of a depression of the earth’s surface, in which, by the sinking of wells, water can be obtained in quantities sufficient to sustain a few palms and sometimes a little other vegetation. Some of the larger ones have running water, which comes from springs and runs a short distance and again disappears. Along the whole route there is nothing but these oases to relieve the eye from the ever repeating scenes of hills, valleys, and mountains of rock, gravel, and sand.

The slaves sometimes walked and sometimes were permitted to ride on the camels, and they frequently suffered for want of water, the supply of which was always scanty. At one part of the route for fifteen days no water is found, and from Assioût to the first oasis it is five days’ travel. They give various statements as to their homes and capture. Some say they were sleeping in their huts and these people came and took them; others that they were stolen in the fields while watching the sheep and cattle. Some of the girls say that they were married in their native country and were stolen from their husbands, and still others that they were already slaves and were bought. Nearly all this class of slaves are originally kidnapped, but sometimes when so young that they have no recollection of the event.

The Arabs of this caravan belong to a trading tribe known as Zaidiahs, who live in the desert regions of Darfour, and have long been habituated to traffic in slaves.

I have heretofore had occasion to say that as long as there is in Egypt, Syria, and other parts of the Ottoman Empire a market for this kind of merchandise that market will be supplied. After a temporary check that was put upon the slave trade while Gordon Pasha was governor-general of Soudan, it now appears, either from the increased demand or the diminished restraint, to have recommenced with new vigor.

A few days since Captain Burton and a friend of his were visiting the natron lakes that are in the edge of the desert southwest of Alexandria, and not far from the sea, and he saw two caravans with slaves. This is a favorable point for their introduction into Lower Egypt. Some are also taken to the sea, and thence in small sailing vessels to Syria, Asia-Minor, and other parts of Turkey. Many are taken across the Red Sea from a point near Suaken and landed in Arabia, and taken thence with the caravans to various parts of western Asia.

No very materially different state of things can be expected as long as slavery is permitted in all these countries, and those whose business it is to prevent the slave trade are themselves among the buyers. The importation of slaves into Egypt could be easily prevented if the governing classes desired it should be done; but, unfortunately, they are the very persons who are among the principal patrons of the slave-dealers. There are slaves in the house of every Mussulman in Egypt who has the means to buy them, and the same is true of the Copts, the Syrians, the Armenians, and many other Christians The number of any class that raise their voices against this system is very limited, and this may also be said of that dominant class of Europeans who virtually govern Egypt. These persons are just now even making serious complaints against the president of the council of ministers for having given the peasants the idea that they are free. One of the charges against the ex-Khedive was that of the corvée, a system by which, as was claimed, the fellahs were compelled to work on the great estates, and for the sheiks and other persons in authority, gratuitously or for a nominal price. So much had been said and written on that subject that Riaz Pasha, who is minister of the interior and of finance, as well as president of the council, felt compelled, as the chief of the “reform ministry,” to issue a circular, by which the peasants were informed that they were free, and not obliged to work for any one except under contracts voluntarily made. This was done but a few days ago. The result was that they stopped work at once, and those interested in the Daira and Rothschild mortgages, as well as the holders of estates, complain that the fellahs will not now work. The fact simply is that they will not work for the sheiks or other persons in power gratuitously, nor for the Daïra or Domain administrations for two piasters (ten cents) a day, boarding themselves, as they have heretofore done.

There is a great commotion on this question among the interested Europeans. They say the people of Egypt are not ready for any such reforms. In their opinion a fellah who is not willing to work for 10 cents a day and furnish his own food in a country where provisions are as high in price as in the United States is not yet prepared for liberty. “If labor is not to be obtained for this price, how is the interest to be paid on the mortgages given by the government and the ex-Khedive?” asks the holder of mortgaged bonds; “and how am I to pay the taxes demanded?” asks the landed proprietor. The result will probably be that the minister will be compelled to modify his circular by some explanatory orders or lose his place.

While such ideas are dominant among the governing class, not only native but European, what hope is there for any real, bona-fide, energetic action for the suppression of the slave trade? The government is, of course, under its treaty, compelled to take notice of any case of traffic in slaves that is formally brought to its attention; but the officers of the law never have any knowledge on the subject other than that which is imposed upon them by some zealous European in such a manner as to leave no opportunity for evasion.

As to the character of slavery in Egypt and the condition of its slaves, I beg leave to refer you to my dispatch No. 235, of June 8, 1878.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 643. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 643.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States in Egypt,
Cairo, May 22, 1880. (Received June 19.). No. 403.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform you that soon after the writing of my dispatch No. 399, of the 5th instant, 20 slaves were rescued at one of the railway stations of Cairo, on a train that came from Assioût. They were a part of the slaves that had come from Darfour with the caravan mentioned in my dispatch.

A few days since a portion of another caravan was surprised and taken on the desert three or four days distant from Assioût and about half way between that city and the oasis of El-Khargeh, which is about six days’ travel west of ancient Thebes. This oasis is on the great cavaran route from Darfour, and in going to it either from Thebes or Assioût, the whole distance traversed is a mountainous desert. It is a convenient point for caravans on their way from Central Africa to stop arid send their slaves in small bodies to Assioût, the Natron lakes, and other places along the border of the Lybian Desert, whence they can easily be secretly taken to the towns and villages of the valley and delta of the Nile.

The second caravan had been some time expected, and a body of soldiers were sent out on the desert to meet it, and succeeded in surprising and capturing a portion of it and rescuing 90 slaves. The caravan is supposed to have brought many more, the number being variously eatmated at from 400 to 1,000. Those that were rescued have been liberated.

The circumstances connected with the capture of the first caravan, and the conduct of the governor of the province of Assioût and several other functionaries, were such that these persons have been dismissed and are to be tried by a court-martial. They will be regarded by every native Egyptian as unfortunate rather than guilty of any crime, for no complaint would have been made against any one, and the whole matter of the sale of the slaves would have passed off without notice, as I stated in my previous dispatch, had it not been for the zeal of the teacher in the American school, Mr. Roth.

As soon, however, as the facts were brought to the notice of the English consul-general, he regarded it as his official duty to demand that vigorous measures be taken. At his request an Italian, Count Sala, has been appointed controller-general for the suppression of the slave trade. He is to reside at Assioût, and a small number of cavalry has been assigned to him with which to scour the borders of the desert for slaves that are supposed to be kept concealed in the mountains. For the moment the government appears to be acting vigorously, and its action will undoubtedly have good results. It must, nevertheless, be admitted that however great the zeal or earnest the desire of the Khedive to end this nefarious system of stealing children from their homes in Central Africa and transporting them one or two thousand miles across the desert, subjecting them to privations and sufferings which no pen can describe, and of which many of them die, His Highness has difficulties to overcome that are almost insuperable, and will remain so until slavery is actually abolished, not only in Egypt, but throughout all the Ottoman Empire.

The people are in favor of the system of slavery, or at least have no objection to it. And simply on the west of Egypt, from the sea to the first cataract of the Nile, there are 700 miles of territory to be guarded, which borders on a mountainous desert, traversed only by half nomadic Arabs, who are more or less interested in the slave trade. The province of Darfour, which is one of the principal sources of slaves, is at present only under the most nominal rule of the Egyptian Government. Its inhabitants are more than semi-barbarous, and largely engaged in pillage and in the kidnapping and selling of children into slavery.

There is supposed to be a considerable number of slaves now secreted at El-Khargeh or in the mountains in its vicinity, the larger part of whom will very probably, sooner or later, be brought into the Nile Valley and sold.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 644. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 644.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States,
Cairo, Egypt, June 17, 1880. (Received July 10.) No. 410.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a circular dated the 30th ultimo, which I have received from His Excellency Mustapha Pasha Fehmi, minister of foreign affairs. It relates to the question of the continuance for another period of five years of the tribunals of the reform.

His excellency says that the Government of His Highness the Khedive desires such continuance, but that experience has demonstrated that certain modifications both of the “Règlement d’organisation judiciaire” and of the provisions of the codes are necessary. He therefore begs of each of the agents and consuls-general to ask of their respective governments the necessary authority to take part in a commission that it is proposed to have instituted at Cairo under the presidency of the minister of justice to elaborate such modifications as are mutually considered necessary.

Each commissioner is to have the right to be aided by a delegate or assistant commissioner having the right of discussion but not of voting.

A meeting of the consuls-general was held at Cairo on the 5th instant, to consider the proposition contained in this circular. Twelve powers were represented: France, England, Germany, Austria, Italy, Russia, the United States, Spain, Greece, Holland, Denmark, Sweden and Norway.

The consuls-general were of the unanimous opinion that in the interest of all parties concerned the tribunals of the reform ought to be continued, but that certain modifications in the codes and the “règlement d’organisation judiciaire” were absolutely necessary. It was also their unanimous opinion that the work of a commission, should one be formed, could not commence before the 1st of November next, as nearly all the consuls-general, as well as the judges, certain of whom would probably be added to the commission as delegates, were about to depart on leave of absence, and that even if they remained no serious labor could be performed between the 1st day of July and the 1st day of November.

They were also mostly of the opinion that the revision of the codes would be too great a work to be completed and accepted by the powers as soon as the 1st day of February next, at which time the period of five years for which the courts were instituted would expire; and, as the conditions of the treaties with most of the European governments were such that the powers of the courts would cease at that time unless continued by mutual consent, it was thought that it might be necessary to ask such continuance under the present codes for a period of not exceeding one year.

After a full discussion the conclusions of the meeting were reduced to writing. The translation of this writing reads as follows: The members of the reunion mutually agree to solicit of their respective governments powers in conformity with the propositions of the Egyptian Government, and instructions authorizing them— 1st. Not to constitute themselves into a commission before the 1st of November next.

2d. To decide in one of their first sessions that in case their labors cannot be terminated within the necessary time, the règlement d’organisation judiciaire, now in force, and the codes known as the codes of the reform, shall be continued for the period of one year.

No action on the part of the United States relating to the continuance of the courts is necessary.

The President is authorized at any time to terminate, so far as relates to our citizens, the jurisdiction of the tribunals of the reform, but until this is done such jurisdiction will continue.

The President will have a right to designate new judges to act in the tribunals on the part of the United States, if he desires. In a conversation lately had with the minister of justice upon this subject, his excellency stated that there could be no doubt of the right of a government to designate new judges if it desired, and that such designation would be respected.

In case the Department has any intention of making any change in the personnel of the judges, it would perhaps be well to have a definite understanding with the Government of His Highness on the subject, and such change should be made to take effect on the 1st day of February; otherwise there might be, in case of a judge holding over, an implied contract that would compel the Egyptian Government to pay his salary for a certain period.

The judges generally made contracts on their arrival in Egypt to serve for a period of five years. This period has in most instances already expired. Some of the judges were here for nearly a year before the opening of the courts. All, with two or three exceptions, have consented to remain until the 1st of February next, and they will probably be willing to remain as long as their services are required.

I would recommend the Hon. George S. Batcheller, judge in the tribunal of first instance at Cairo, as a proper person to be associated with the consul-general of the United States as assistant commissioner, in accordance with the proposition of the Government of the Khedive, and I ask the Department to appoint him to that position or to authorize the agent and consul-general at Cairo to do so. The judge is willing to accept such appointment.

This dispatch was commenced immediately after the meeting of the consuls-general, but I was compelled to go to Alexandria before it was finished and could not return until yesterday.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 410.—Translation.]

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Cairo, May 30, 1880.

Mr. Agent and Consul-General: The period of five years for which the tribunals of the reform were instituted will end the 31st of January next.

The Government of His Highness the Khedive, impressed with the idea of the service that this institution has rendered to Egypt, desires to assure its continuance during a new period of five years.

It is of the opinion, however, that the experience acquired has demonstrated the necessity of making certain modifications, as well in the règlement d’organisation judiciaire as in the provisions themselves, of the codes, and it desires that these modifications be studied and elaborated mutually by it and the powers that have accepted the reform.

The Government of His Hghness has therefore the honor, Mr. Agent and Consul-General, to beg you to be so kind as to ask of your government the necessary powers to take part in the labors of an international commission to assemble at Cairo under the presidency of his excellency the minister of justice.

Each member of the commission might be authorized by his government to procure the assistance of a delegate or assistant commissioner having a right of discussion but not voting. It will be lawful, moreover, for the commissioners to appoint a committee, whose composition and powers it will determine, to prepare in whole or in part the drafts of the modifications to be submitted to its deliberations.

I have no need, Mr. Agent and Consul-General, to ask you to advise your government of the importance of the commission in question commencing its work within a time that will permit its termination before the epoch at which the powers of the tribunals of the reform will expire.

Accept, Mr. Agent and Consul-General, the assurance of my high consideration.

MUSTAPHA FEHMI,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

No. 645. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 645.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States at Cairo,
June 22, 1880. (Received July 14.) No. 412.]

Sir: I have the honor to inclose herewith a copy of a dispatch, dated the 18th instant, which I have received from Mustapha Pasha Fehmi, minister of foreign affairs, asking the “adhesion” of the Government of the United States to the decisions of the commission of liquidation.

The work of the commission is nearly completed, and it is desired to give the force of law to its decisions immediately on their promulgation, in order to enable the government to pay its floating-debt creditors and to stop the accumulation of interest upon this class of debts, which, at the rate now paid, amounts to a considerable sum each day. It is claimed that, in order to give validity to these decisions, the assent of all the powers who took part in the formation of the new tribunals is necessary.

The minister informs me that all of the powers except the United States, Russia, and Greece, have already given such assent. As to the United States, his excellency has received information that the government at Washington, on an application made on the part of certain European powers for its “adhesion” to the decisions of the commission, was kindly disposed, but declined to act except on a direct application of the Government of Egypt.

Although the commission of liquidation was not originally formed as it should have been, it seems that the better influences have prevailed in its councils, and that its conclusions are, in the main, satisfactory.

The interest on the unified debt is to be reduced to 4 per cent., while that of the privileged is to remain at 5. About 30 per cent. is to be paid down on the floating debt, and the balance in privileged bonds at par. These bonds are now worth 88 and a fraction, so that those who wish to realize immediately will lose only about 8 per cent. Considering the rate of interest they have received this will be a small sacrifice, and will be willingly sustained. A certain amount is to be set aside annually to pay an annuity to those who have paid the mokabalah.

While justice will not be strictly done as between the native and the foreigner, it will be more nearly so than I had expected, and the latter will most certainly have nothing of which to complain. It is the inhabitants of the country, the native creditors and the tax-payers, who will suffer the most, and it is very doubtful in my mind whether, with all their other burdens, they can possibly pay the amount of interest that has been agreed upon.

Under all the circumstances I, however, think it better for the country and its creditors that the decisions of the commission be adopted, and I do not see that any injury can result therefrom to any American interest. In fact our interests have been exceptionally well taken care of in advance.

I informed you by my dispatch of yesterday, No. 411, of the telegram I had sent relating to the subject no winder consideration. I sent this telegram not only as requested by the minister in his dispatch, but in accordance with his personal solicitation, as well as that of Riaz Pasha, the minister of finance and of the interior, and president of the council of ministers.

On the receipt of this dispatch, if you have not already done so, I would request that you send me a telegram giving such instructions as you deem advisable.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 412.—Translation.]

Mustapha Fehmi to Mr. Farman.

Ministry of Foreign Affairs,
Cairo, June 18, 1880.

Sir: Upon the occasion of the promulgation of the decree of His Highness the Khedive relating to the institution of the commission of liquidation, the representatives of Germany, Austria-Hungary, France, Great Britain, and Italy, signed, upon the 31st day of March last, a declaration by which their governments bind themselves to accept as obligatory and without appeal the decisions that shall be rendered by this commission so far as the obligations and debts of the Egyptian Government and of the Daïra, Sanieh, and Khassa are concerned.

The adhesion of the Government of the United States and of the other powers that have taken part in the judicial reform being necessary in order that the decisions of the commission he recognized by the mixed tribunals as an obligatory law so soon as they (i. e. the decisions) shall have been officially published by the government of His Highness the Khedive, I now solicit, through your kindness, the support of the Government of the United States in favor of the declaration in question, being convinced that the Washington cabinet will recognize the advantages that will be afforded to all parties interested by the settlement of the Egyptian debt brought about through a common agreement.

The delay that would be naturally occasioned by asking for this adhesion by letter, leads me, Mr. Agent and Consul-General, in view more especially of the near termination of the labors of the commission, to appeal to your wonted courtesy and ask you to kindly transmit by telegraph the request that I have the honor to address to you in the name of the Government of His Highness, and beg you to solicit of the cabinet of Washington a reply by telegraph also.

Be pleased to accept, &c.,

MUSTAPHA FEHMI,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

E. E. Farman, Esq.,
Agent and Consul-General of the United States.

No. 646. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman. No. 646.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State,
Washington, June 28, 1880. No. 170.]

Sir: The project of a commission of liquidation to take control of the finances of Egypt has had careful consideration in view of your dispatch No. 372 of March 8.

This government has been approached by that of France, in the sense of obtaining our adhesion to the scheme, but without any favorable respéonse. I have, in fact, replied to the representations of Mr. Outrey, the French minister, that this government could not agree to accept, in advance, as binding upon our citizens, the action of a commission in which we were to have no part.

I have now to instruct you to say to the officers of the Khedive’s Government with whom you may have occasion to discuss the matter, that, although it is not considered necessary, for the protection of American interests, that this government should participate in the organization of the commission and be represented therein by an American commissioner, yet it is regarded as proper to leave undecided, for the present, the question of the acceptability of such action as that commission might hereafter take, so far as concerns its operation upon the rights of citizens of the United States. Not, therefore, being disposed to accredit, by anticipatory action, the dispositions of a mixed administration, in which we have no share, and which may yet affect the material interests of their citizens, the United States reserve their relations to the Egyptian Government in the matter in case they should have any interests to protect calling for diplomatic representation.

Your telegram, informing me that the Russian Government has made a somewhat analogous reservation of right, has been received. You may, if it should appear necessary, make, in like manner, formal notification to the Government of His Highness the Khedive, of the present reserve maintained by the United States, as above explained to you.

The clause of your recent telegram, received on the 21st instant, relating to this subject, has been duly considered. With every disposition to favor the wishes of the Khedive in any matter important to Egyptian interests, it is not perceived that the position above taken should be regarded as interfering with the entire freedom of that government to make any administrative adjustment of its financial relations with nations which are represented in such administration. If the Government of His Highness should point out to you any such embarrassment, I shall be ready to consider it with the most favorable disposition towards the Egyptian Government.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 647. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 647.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States at Cairo,
June 29, 1880. (Received July 24.) No. 416.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform, you that I sent you on the 12th instant, from Alexandria, the following telegram: Secretary Evarts, Washington:

Commander Gorringe sailed two o’clock to-day with obelisk. Will call at Gibraltar.

FARMAN.

A telegraphic dispatch received on the 23d instant from the commander from Gibaraltar informed me of his arrival at that place, and that everything was working admirably well. The steamer was in good condition on her departure, and I have no doubt will have arrived in New York before the receipt of this dispatch.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 648. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 648.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Agency and Consulate-General of the United States,
Cairo, Egypt, July 13, 1880. (Received August 5.) No. 431.]

Sir: I have to inform you that on the morning of the 9th instant, Friday last, five negro slaves came to this consulate-general and asked my assistance in procuring their freedom. They were fine, intelligent looking young men, the four elder being in appearance from twenty to twenty-five years of age, and the youngest about sixteen. They said they belonged to Prince Hassan Pasha, a brother of the Khedive, who is now living in exile in Italy. * * * They stated that they had always been well treated by the prince, but that since his departure a little over a year ago they had been unkindly treated by his wakil (superintendent).

On questioning them I found that they were born free in Central Africa, south of Darfür; that about eight years ago an Egyptian general, whose name I refrain from mentioning, as he is still occupying a high position in Egypt, was carrying on a war in their country and subduing all the tribes in that region; that he burned the villages, and killed and drove away many of the inhabitants, and that they with others were taken and made slaves. They served for some time in the army as porters, and about four years ago were brought to Cairo and given to Prince Hassan.

Four of them had marks upon their faces—three lines, each between one and two inches in length, on the right cheek—being the scars of gashes cut with a sharp instrument. I asked them how they came to be marked in this manner, and they all replied that when they were made slaves the general had them marked so that if they ran away they could be known. I asked how it was done, and they said with a knife. The youngest of the five had no marks. They said at the time they were taken he was too young to run away, and they indicated with a gesture of the hand his height at that time, showing that he was a small boy. I frequently see on the faces of the negroes of Cairo marks of the character of those mentioned, and have been told, not by the persons themselves, but by others, that they were marked in this way when children to keep off the influences of the “evil eye.” This may be true in the case of certain tribes of Arabs and Nubians, but so far as I can learn there is no such habit among the tribes of Central Africa. When taken and reduced to slavery they are marked as a herdsman marks his animals.

I sent the men with my cavass and a note in Arabic to the bureau for the liberation of slaves. In the note I asked that they be liberated in accordance with the law and custom in such cases, and that they be returned to the consulate.

It is necessary to take the precaution of having them returned, otherwise it is always a question of doubt as to what is ultimately done with them. In two or three hours my cavass returned without the men, but with a note from the official in charge of the bureau saying they had been liberated.

The verbal explanation given to the cavass was that they must be put into the army; and, as he learned, they had been sent to prison, the common Arab jail. I was not wholly satisfied with this manner of freeing slaves. To give them their papers of manumission and at the same time send them to jail, was not a very pleasing solution of the difficulty, even if the real intention was to put them in the army.

To enter the army in Egypt means going into perpetual servitude. Sometimes levies are made for special objects and the soldiers discharged when their services are no longer needed, but hitherto those who were put into the regular army have been retained as long as their services were of any value, those only being dismissed who have become infirm by sickness or age. The government has applied the system adopted by Said Pasha, who once said he could not see the economy of dismissing an experienced and trained soldier and supplying his place with a recruit who for a considerable time would be good for nothing. When a young man is taken for a soldier in Egypt his name is stricken from the roll of his village, and he is mourned by his female relatives as if he were dead. There is practically no pay for military service, and no slave, however badly treated, would be willing to change his condition for that of an Egyptian soldier.

All the ministers were at Alexandria on Friday, where the Khedive is now stopping, and they did not return till late Saturday evening. I took occasion on Monday morning, yesterday, to call upon Riaz Pasha, minister of interior and president of the council of ministers, and stated to him the case. I, of course, talked very courteously, but in the course of the interview I stated to his excellency that it appeared to me very unjust that these young men, who seemed to have more than ordinary capacity for persons of their class, having evidently been selected for the prince on account of their brightness and fine physical condition, should have been taken from their homes and brought two thousand miles to a strange country as slaves, and then, after being held for a number of years, should, on asking to be liberated, be given papers of manumission, it is true, but be, nevertheless, sent to jail in order to be afterward transferred to the army. Much other conversation was had, which resulted in the Pasha giving an immediate written order for their liberation.

I sent my interpreter and cavass with the order, and the men were found in jail, but it was said they were about to be transferred to the army. It was the fourth day that they had been confined with common criminals. They were at once set free and came to the consulate. After a conversation with them as to how they expected to obtain a subsistence, and in which they said they were instructed in various kinds of work and could readily get employment, they went away to seek places. They all expressed many times, in their own simple manner, their gratitude for the kindness I had rendered them, and agreed to come back from time to time and inform some one in the consulate of their success.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

No. 649. Mr. Hay to Mr. Farman. No. 649.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Farman.

Department of State,
Washington, July 20, 1880. No. 174.]

Sir: Since the Department’s instruction to you, No. 170, of the 28th ultimo, in regard to the desired adhesion of the United States to the commission of liquidation was written, your dispatch No. 412, of June 22d, and your later telegram, undated, but reaching here on the 13th instant, have been received and considered.

The explanations you give as to the working of the commission and its plans for the liquidation of the debt, joined to the insistance with which the Government of the Khedive asks the adhesion of this government to the scheme, led the Department to change its decision abandoning the attitude of strict reserve maintained in the instructions sent to you on the 28th ultimo, and in compliance with the Egyptian minister’s request that you should be instructed in the premises by telegraph, the following dispatch was sent to you on the 17th instant: Give the adhesion if Egyptian Government regards it material to the scheme.

EVARTS.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

No. 650. No. 650.

[Cable message, received at Washington July 23, 1880—6.55 p.m.]

To Secretary Evarts, Washington:

Commission liquidation finished and adjourned: all powers adhered.

FARMAN.

No. 651. Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts. No. 651.
Mr. Farman to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States,
Cairo, Egypt, August 2, 1880. (Received August 26.) No. 441.]

Sir: I inclose the leading article of the Egyptian Gazette of the 13th ultimo. This journal is published at Alexandria, and is especially devoted to English interests. The article, however, gives one of the principal causes of the debt of Egypt, and contains other very important truths.

Heretofore two ideas relating to the embarrassed financial condition of this unfortunate country have been kept prominently before the European public. First that the debt of Egypt arose from the building of palaces and the other personal extravagances of its ruler; and, second, that the country was rich and abundantly able to pay all its nominal, as well as real, indebtedness, together with the high rate of interest that had been stipulated. Now, it is frankly admitted, that these extravagances “are but drops in the ocean.”

The same journal published, a few weeks since, Judge Morgan’s article on the cost to Egypt of the Suez Canal, with commendatory remarks in relation to its truthfulness. Little by little the correct history is being written, and when it shall have been completed it will be found that the debt of Egypt is principally due to the official and officious interference of certain foreign powers and of their subjects sustained by official influence.

It is the moral force of the English navy that has for many years kept this country in subjection to the Ottoman rule. Egypt could at any time free herself from Turkey with the utmost ease, were it not for the support that the latter would receive, or at least would at any time heretofore have received, from England and France.

There have been two reasons on the part of these powers, principally on the part of the former, for holding Egypt in subjection to the Porte. First, to strengthen the Ottoman Empire as a bulwark against Russian power and influence in the Orient; and, second, because the tribute was really payable to Turkey’s English creditors.

Now that there is a disposition on the part of Turkey to disregard even the wishes of England, an English paper suggests the injustice of the tribute to which it ascribes one-half of the debt of Egypt. No suggestion of this character would have come from a similar source one year ago.

It is emphatically true, as stated, that the fellah has for many years served as a permanent burnt offering to the Moloch of Egyptian finances. It is quite as true that he still serves as such. Himself, his body and soul, his family and lands, cattle and savings, his past, present, and future, “have been and are impartially and mercilessly sacrificed to whom it may concern”—that is, at the present time, to the bondholders. It is difficult, however, to see what sacrifice has been made by this class of creditors. There are very few of them who have not doubled, within five years, the capital they have put in Egyptian securities, and the more unfortunate have at least received very high interest. The sacrifice is, however, to be continued on the part of the fellah, and so far as can now be seen, on the part of no one else. A faint cry may sometimes be raised in his behalf by the humanitarian, but there are too great pecuniary interests involved to permit him to be heard by the statesmen of England and France. There are also potent political reasons for the continuance of the present system of control The future of Egypt is indeed dark, and unless relieved by some great upheaval that shall revolutionize all the governments of the Orient, its inhabitants must continue for an indefinite period, in the future as in the past, to labor without the right of enjoying either the fruits of their property or toil.

I have, &c.,

E. E. FARMAN.

[Inclosure in No. 441.—From the Egyptian Gazette, Saturday, July 31, 1880.]

the tribute.

In the various proposals suggested and adopted for the rehabilitation of Egyptian finance, we have heard much of sacrifices demanded on all sides. The fellah for many years has been a permanent burnt offering; himself, body and soul, his family, lands, cattle, and savings; his past, present, and future have been impartially sacrificed for account of whom it might concern, and it was only when this peculiar form of sacrifice, which required no more learned priest than the late Muffetish, became exhausted that Ismail Pasha bethought him of European augurs and invoked the services of Mr. Goschen for the sacrifice of the creditor. But the creditor deemed that even the pleasures of self-sacrifice should not be indulged in to excess, and the commission of inquiry appeared as an awful Nemesis and suggested sacrifice even to the viceroy himself. In turn Nubar Pasha, two consuls-general, the European ministry, the ex-Khedive, Cherif Pasha, and a host of minor celebrities have been sacrificed to the Moloch of Egyptian finance. The country, the nation, the creditor, the state, the ruler have all made sacrifices. Is there no one else from whom some sacrifice is due?

Egypt is groaning under her debt of a hundred millions; a great portion of all that can be ground out of the country is going to the foreign creditor. It is too late to recover the millions that have been squandered, but it is not too late to profit by the lessons which the past teaches.

What has become of those hundred millions? We hear talk of palaces, of expensive yachts, of personal extravagances; these are but drops in the ocean. One-half the indebtedness of Egypt is money paid to a foreign power with which Egypt has but a nominal connection, from which she derives not one iota of benefit, and to which she may yet be called upon to sacrifice her whole future. Two millions a year for the past fifteen years is the most moderate estimate that can be formed of the amount paid to the sublime Porte; if we add to this the cost of the Egyptian contingent during the late war and charge the whole amount with compound interest at the exorbitant rates which the government has had to pay, we shall exceed fifty millions.

It is sufficiently hard that Egypt should still be weighted with the interest on this enormous sum, that she should have to pay yearly interest upon an amount which she has barely fingered, but surely the time has arrived when she should be relieved from any further exaction in the form of tribute.

Tribute may be defined as either the penalty of conquest or a payment for protection rendered. It ceases, logically, when the sovereign state has no power to enforce it, or when no protection is rendered in exchange.

Taking the latter point first, it will hardly De contradicted that Turkey gives no protection whatever to Egypt; on the contrary, Egypt gives such protection as she can to Turkey. And we maintain that Turkey, in her present condition, has no power, to enforce the tribute; during the late war a blunt refusal to pay would, so far as the Porte is concerned, have met with simple acquiescence. Why, then, has it never been refused? Simply because it is no longer payable to the Porte, but to its creditors. In other words, Egypt is independent of the Sultan, but tributary to certain gentlemen on the London and Paris bourses.

It is time that these gentlemen should be called upon to take their turn on the sacrificial altar, and that Egypt should be relieved from a payment made, for no consideration, to people with whom she has no connection, and from whom she derives no benefit.

Candor, however, forbids us to overlook the fact that the continued existence of slavery as a domestic institution is a stumbling block in the way of the recognition of the independence of Egypt. Till this blot on civilization is removed, we question very much if the European powers would recognize the existence of Egypt as an independent state. We think we are justified in saying that when this happy day arrives one condition of our government would be the immediate and unconditional abolition of slavery. England would be false to all her traditions if she did not make this condition a sine qua non of her recognition of Egypt’s independence.

No. 652. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman. No. 652.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Farman.

Department of State,
Washington, August 7, 1880. No. 17.]

Sir: Referring to the instruction sent to you on the 28th of June last, No. 170, and to your No. 412 of the 22d of the same month, and the answer made thereto on the 20th ultimo, in relation to the commission of liquidation organized by certain of the European powers for the adjustment of the obligations of the Khedive’s Government toward its foreign creditors, I have now to transmit for your information copy of a note received from the British minister at this capital on the same subject,* and of the reply which I have made thereto,† acquainting him with the views and final action of this government in the premises. Notes, identical with the British communication, have also been received from the representatives of Austria-Hungary, Germany, France, and Italy, and to each the same answer has been made.

I have also communicated a copy to the Russian legation in respéonse to its communication to me of the attitude of reserve assumed by the Imperial Government.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

* Sir Edward Thornton to Mr. Evarts, June 12, 1880. (See page 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], supra.)

† Mr. Evarts to Mr. Drummond, July 30, 1880. (Ses page 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], supra.)

No. 653. Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts. No. 653.
Mr. Comanos to Mr. Evarts.

Consulate-General of the United States.
Cairo, Egypt, August 20, 1880. (Received September 16.) No. 444.]

Sir: In continuation of Mr. Farman’s dispatches No. 399, of May 5, No. 403, of May 22, and No. 431, of July 31 last, concerning the slave trade, I have the honor to inform you that Mr. Azar Abd-el-Malûk, our consular agent at Khartoum, the capital of the equatorial provinces,-reports, under date of July 19, 1880, as follows: Nothing new has occurred of late for me to write about, except that two days before the date hereof certain Sonakinites were arrested in the district of Berber, in the Soudan governorship, and with them were found about 130 human male individuals, negroes; and the governor of the said region reported their case to his excellency the governor-general. The report gives the names, and the names of the partners of the aforesaid Sonakinites who dwell in Khartoum. The government at once ordered their places of business and their dwellings to be put under sequester; and whatever was found of the nature of enslaved persons, merchandise, and hard money, was seized also. And the aforesaid were put into prison with irons. The necessary investigation was commenced, but it has not yet been terminated; and it is rumored that their case will be submitted by his excellency the governor-general to the precious feet [scil of the Khedive]. Whatever happens further I shall report to you.

On the 7th instant Mr. Yan Dyck was instrumental in obtaining free papers for a bright negro named Mûsa, and on the 10th instant he successfully interested himself to the same end in behalf of a eunuch, by the name of Rûsim, who belonged to Hassan Pasha’s slave-staff, mentioned in Mr. Farman’s No. 431 of the 13th of July last.

I herewith inclose an excerpt from the London Times of Wednesday, the 28th of July, anno currente. It has special reference to slave-traffic as carried on between Africa and Arabia across the Red Sea. From this excerpt and from the foregoing report of our agent at Khartoum, it will be seen that Sonakin and the Sonakinites play a prominent part in this hateful business, and that consular agents are especially needed at that port for stopping it.

* * * * * * *

I beg, sir, to refer the Department to Mr. Farman’s unnumbered dispatch, dated at Warsaw, N. Y., on the 17th of September, 1879, and to his unofficial letter to Mr. Payson, dated at Cairo on the 29th of November, 1879, in which letter he expresses the hope that he will soon receive instructions to conclude the convention for the suppression of the slave-trade proposed in his No. 297 of May 1, 1879. I also refer to my suggestions contained in paragraph 7 of my dispatch No. 329 of August 19 of last year concerning white Circassian and Georgian female slaves for concubinage, and respecting the suzerainty of the Sultan.

If we have had no part in the liquidation of Egypt’s debts for the benefit of European creditors, it is all the more fit and proper that our best efforts be here in this land thrown in with those of Great Britain in the cause of freeing the enslaved.

The translation herewith inclosed of a circular letter addressed by his excellency Riaz Pasha, in his character of minister of the interior, to the district governors of Egypt, on the subject of slave dealers and purchasers of slaves from the dealers, shows the good that is resulting from the Anglo-Egyptian convention of August 4, 1877.

I have, &c.,

N. D. COMANOS,
United States Vice-Consul-General in Charge.

[Inclosure 1 in dispatch No. 444.—From the London Times of Wednesday July 28, 1880.]

slave trade in the red sea and africa.

To the Editor:

Sir: Our correspondent in Djeddah, writing on the 30th of June, gives a deplorable account of the increase of the slave trade in the Soudan and the Red Sea since the departure of Colonel Gordon. If you can find room in the Times for the extracts it will do more to enlighten the English public and to alarm the Egyptian and Turkish officials than anything short of action in Parliament. The Times is a power in Egypt, and is feared by pashas and their underlings more than all the laws enacted by their own government against this iniquitous traffic.

I have drawn a veil over some of the horrors related to us, as they cannot be even named in civilized countries. Our correspondent thus writes:

“No one can be more utterly disgusted than I am at the state of affairs at present, and I sincerely regret that Colonel Gordon has gone from the country where he was working such good. He has gone, and I do not think there is a respectable inhabitant of the Soudan that is not sorry, and may look back to the times when justice and law reigned in the country under his rule, and wish that he or some other Englishman were again appointed as governor of the African dominions of Egypt.

“The slave trade is just as brisk as ever it was; and I am convinced that expeditions have already started for slave raiding. As now the Soudan is split up again into different pashalics, each pasha only being respéonsible for the country he governs, there is no supreme head to put a stop to lawlessness, and the few soldiers and the utter want of police and preventive service make it an easy matter for the slave-dealers to get their slaves down to the coast and ship them.

“The soldiers on the coast of the Soudan are mostly Egyptians, who, having been convicts, have worked their time out and now serve in the army; they are underpaid, underfed, and underclothed. If when on duty they come across a slave caravan, is it likely they would stop it and conduct it to the authorities, who would likely enough say nothing about it and take backsheesh from the owners themselves? Would they not much more probably pocket a reasonable bribe and allow the slave-dealers to wend their way to the coast and never report to their officers what had taken place?

“The slave trade is being carried on in the most open way, and every steamer that leaves Sonakin has slaves on board. In the steamer Yembo, in which I crossed the sea, there were nineteen, eighteen of whom, however, had liberation papers. A man from Mecca, whom I know very well by sight, and a noted slave-dealer, had five with him, four boys and a girl, who were supposed to be his domestic slaves. To my certain knowledge this man goes backwards and forwards nearly every month. He can carry on his trade with impunity, and he is only one of the many that do the same. He goes to the governor or official in charge, and says: ‘I have so many slaves that I have bought, I want them liberated.’ Papers are made out for them; he leaves for Djeddah, passes the slaves at the quarantine, Walks them into the town, destroys the papers of liberation taken out at Sonakin, sells the slaves, and returns by next steamer to Sonakin to buy more. There is no law to touch him, no treaty with England whereby he does an illegal act, and he can snap his ringers in the faces of the officers of our cruisers. This sort of thing is done weekly, not only to Djeddah, but to Suez from Sonakin, and from Massowah to Hodeidah, and from Hodeidah to Djeddah. This is the easiest way for slave-dealers to work, but still the majority are carried by buglas. I have a well authenticated case of 800 slaves being ‘run’ from Shiek Barghut, just north of Sonakin, to Djeddah, about ten days ago. The three buglas that took them away were partly loaded with mother-o’-pearl, and also took cargo that belonged to the slave-dealers.

The present governor of Sonakin is the same man that told me in 1876, when I was vice-consul, that the slave trade did not exist and there were no slaves in Sonakin. He is a bigoted, fanatical, old reprobate, and he ordered a man to be tortured quite lately to try to make him say he was implicated in a murder that took place. He had him strung up by his thumbs till they were cut to the bone, and the man had witnesses to prove that he was nowhere near the place when the murder was committed. I tell you this just to show you the specimen of men that now have power in the Soudan as soon as Gordon has left.

The African slave trade, and especially the Soudan traffic, is a disgrace to the civilized world in general, and that the Turks and Egyptians should be allowed to carry it on, now they have been so many years in intercourse with the European powers, is inexplicable to me. The very rulers and officials of Turkey and Egypt that conduct the affairs of state with foreign powers have all of them slaves and eunuchs in their houses, and are more to blame than the slave-dealers themselves, who only pander to the lust of those who buy what the slave-dealers have stolen. I dislike the sight of a well-fed and sleek pasha, and I think every Englishman ought to hate them, not for their dishonesty and corruptness alone, but for owning servants and small boys that are unsexed, and therefore being accessory to the crime of murder, mutilation, and every brutality that a strong race can use against a weaker one.

I do not believe it is known by many in England that hundreds of boys that are taken in slave raids every year are subjected to the barbarity that is inflicted on them. The operation is performed unskillfully, and the poor children are buried in the sand to prevent extensive bleeding. What percentage of them lives no one knows, but it is said to be very, very small.”

After discussing the proper steps to be taken to put down the enormities that now exist, our correspondent continues:

“I think a very good thing would be to start a colony of slaves under English missionaries in some of the healthy places in the Soudan, say the Bogos country, or on the highlands adjoining the Abyssinian frontier. There is not a single establishment of the Church Mission Society in the Soudan, and the places I have mentioned are quite adapted to Europeans, as they are healthy and the soil is good.

“A good English agent is required at Siout, or at one of the towns on the Nile, to report what goes on there to the consul-general in Egypt, and one consul to be appointed to the Soudan, with a roving commission and residence at Khartoum, to protect commerce and watch the slave trade. Khartoum is now not out of the world; it is only eighteen days by post from England, the post going every week, and it is in direct telegraphic communication with Cairo. An agent or trading-consul for Sonakin and Massowah is likewise needed, to be also under the consul-general in Egypt, with residence at either post which he might think fit. I should say Sonakin, as there is most trade there and it is only thirty-six hours between the two posts.

“You may make any use you like of this letter, if you think fit.”

Can I make better use of this letter than by requesting its insertion in the Times?

I am, sir, yours, faithfully,

CHARLES H. ALLEN, Secretary.

British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society,
27 New Broad Street, E. C., July 23.

[Inclosure No. 2 in No. 444.—Translation from the Moniteur Egyptien of Tuesday, August 3, 1880.]

Circular letter addressed to all the mudirs (provincial governors).

Official Part, Ministry of Interior.

In spite of the rigorous measures taken with a view to stopping trade in slaves, and regardless of the punishments prescribed in respect to importers (djellabes, i. e., bringers, merchants), who dare still to carry on this traffic, these latter do not hesitate to undertake the bringing of persons as slaves.

It is not to be disputed that importers (djellabes) continue this commerce only because they find purchasers who buy their goods, and who thus keep up, for their benefit, a source of considerable profit. When there is no demand there will be no supply, and without buyers the importers (djellabes) would have long ago given up this business, and the government would not have found itself under the necessity of overcoming many difficulties and being at so much expense. The application of the heavy punishments that fall upon the importers (djellabes), and upon others, to the end of completely suppressing the slave trade, would also be thereby avoided.

Consequently, and in consideration of the terms of the convention stipulated between the Government of Egypt and the Government of Her Britannic Majesty, whereby every person that shall take part in the traffic of individuals, brought under the aforementioned conditions, is considered as an accomplice of the importer (djellabe), both as to the crime itself and as to the penalty it carries with it, it has been deemed necessary to give notice that every person who shall buy slaves, brought and fraudulently sold by the importers (djellabes), is subject to the same punishments that fall upon the latter by virtue of the regulations relating to the suppression of the slave trade.

The present notification is given to the public in order that it may be known by all that every person who shall render himself liable for having committed the crime here above mentioned will draw down upon himself the application of the same penalty that is prescribed towards importers (djellabes).

Cairo, July 31, 1880.
The minister of interior:
RIAZ.

III—Tunis.III—Tunis.

[654] . Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate, Tunis, July 8, 1879. (Received July 26.)

No. 654. Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter. No. 654.
Mr. Fish to Mr. Hunter.

United States Consulate,
Tunis, July 8, 1879. (Received July 26.) No. 44.]

Sir: I have the honor to inform the Secretary of State that on the 4th instant the United States flag was displayed at this consulate, and that at each of the foreign consulates in this city the flags of the respective governments were displayed in commemoration of the one hundred and third anniversary of American Independence. During the day the representatives of foreign governments residing here, presented their congratulations. At 10 o’clock a.m., the Bey sent General Si Haïda, governor of El Arad; General Si Mohammed Rechid, attached to the new ministry; and Mr. Gabriel Valensi, interpreter, to present His Highnesses congratulations and assurances of continued amity towards the government of the United States. And he especially desired that his compliments and assurances of friendship and good will be presented to the President.

I am, &c.,

GEO. W. FISH,
United States Consul, Tunis.

UruguayUruguay

[655] . Mr. Caldwell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Montevideo, March 20, 1880. (Received May 24.)

No. 655. Mr. Caldwell to Mr. Evarts. No. 655.
Mr. Caldwell to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Montevideo, March 20, 1880. (Received May 24.) No. 44.]

Sir: On the 13th of this month Colonel Latorre resigned the presidency of this republic. This step was taken without consultation with his ministers, or political or personal friends, and persisted in, in spite of efforts made from every side to induce him to withdraw his resignation and continue in the exercise of power.

I inclose his letter of resignation, and his proclamation to the inhabitants of the country, with translations of each.

Congress immediately met, and, finding all efforts to make Colonel Latorre reconsider his determination unavailing, elected as his successor for the unexpired term of three years Dr. Francisco Vidal, president of the Senate.

President Vidal has nominated the following ministry: Edward McEachen, minister of interior; Joaquin Requena y García, minister of foreign relations; Juan Peñalva, minister of hacienda (treasury); Col. Máximo Santos, minister of war and marine.

I have the honor to be, &c.,

JOHN C. CALDWELL.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 44.—Translation]

To the honorable General Assembly:

In obedience to the dictates of my conscience and the duties of my civic dignity, I neither can nor ought longer to continue at the head of the public affairs of the country, and I come before your honorable body to present my irrevocable resignation of the charge of President of the Republic, with which I was honored on the 1st of March, 1879.

In my retirement to private life I shall wait the time marked by law to relieve me from my respéonsibility as ruler, without withdrawing as a simple citizen my adhesion to the authorities, nor my concourse to the maintenance of public order.

God guard your honorable body.

LORENZO LATORRE.
Montevideo, March 13, 1880.

Colonel Latorre to his fellow-citizens, and to all the inhabitants of the republic:

Resolved to separate myself from the government, to which end I have just sent my indeclinable resignation of the presidency of the republic to the honorable General Assembly, I owe to my fellow-citizens, and to the entire country, a manifestation of gratitude for the assistance with which it has honored me during the entire time that I have occupied the first magistracy of the state.

Duties of conscience and personal dignity impose upon me this firm resolution, withdrawing from the public stage my political personality, which, if it has weighed something in the balance of the stability, the advancement, and the well being of the country, has, at the same time, imposed upon me great sacrifices, to organize that which was disorganized, and to raise the spirits of a despairing country to the hope of its politico-social reconstruction.

Among the sacrifices, I have borne with tranquil mind the most difficult of all—that of defamation; for I have the conviction that public men owe to their country even the sacrifice of their own name; for above the ingratitude and passion of discontented spirits is the serene judgment of the calm reason of peoples, which does justice to him who possesses it, and the verdict of history, which judges, with severe impartiality men and events.

In my retirement to private life I carry my discouragement to the point of believing that our country is a country ungovernable. In this conviction, I have not the civic valor to face longer the rude mission which the vote of the national representatives imposed upon me.

But do not judge me ill: I neither desire, nor an able to be longer governor of my country, under any form, or under any pretext or consideration whatever, and for this reason, in taking the step which I have taken, I release myself completely from all compromise or political union with my friends.

I am going to be a simple citizen, with the fixed resolution to accept no charge or representation whatever, return to private life, where I shall discharge my duties as a citizen, supporting the authorities, and with the resolution to lend my concourse to the public order and stability of my country.

In abandoning public life, I sincerely hope that my fellow-citizens and all the inhabitants of the country will surround the magistrate who succeeds me with all their opinion and prestige; that my loyal companions in arms, who form the army of the republic, will continue faithful to the examples of morality, patriotism, and discipline which they have shown until the present, forming the prime support of the authorities and the public peace; that, in a word, Providence, protecting our beloved land, will inspire all its sons with one sole idea, one single sentiment—that of maintaining its honor and making its complete happiness.

LORENZO LATORRE.
Montevideo, March 13, 1880.

VenezuelaVenezuela

[656] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, December 23, 1879. (Received January 15.)

[657] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker.

Department of State, Washington, January 28, 1880.

[658] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, February 16, 1880. (Received March 9.)

[659] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, March 10, 1880. (Received March 27.)

[660] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, March 22, 1880. (Received April 10.)

[661] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, April 19, 1880. (Received May 6.)

[662] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, April 20, 1880. (Received May 6.)

[663] . Mr. Hay to Mr. Baker.

Department of State, Washington, July 13, 1880.

[664] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, August 10, 1880. (Received August 28.)

[665] . Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, September 2, 1880. (Received September 23.)

[666] . Mr Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States, Caracas, September 8, 1880. (Received September 26.)

[667] . Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker.

Department of State, Washington, October 15, 1880.

No. 656. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. No. 656.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, December 23, 1879. (Received January 15.) No. 186.]

Sir: Referring to the latter part of my dispatch No. 177, which I recommend you to carefully re-examine in this connection, I inclose herewith: 1st. A copy of a letter from Mr. John E. Wheelock.

2d. A printed letter of his to the Trinidad Chronicle, sent me as an inclosure of said letter.

* * * * * * *

Mr. Wheelock, in his printed letter, relates a certain alleged outrage on him of an aggravated character, by, as he puts it, a “civil officer of the Venezuelan Government.”

* * * * * * *

I bespeak your special and active attention to this case.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Annex 1 to dispatch No. 186.]

Mr. Wheelock to Mr. Baker.

Trinidad, December 4, 1879.

Sir: I have the honor to inclose you herewith my letter to the Trinidad Chronicle, containing a brief description of the infamous action of a civil officer of the Venezuelan Government, by which I was the sufferer. The proceedings as I have described them are strictly true in every particular, and in no way exaggerated.

I claim $50,000 as a small compensation for what I have been compelled to endure, and I most earnestly and respectfully request your assistance in enforcing this claim against the Venezuelan Government.

I am now on my way to New York, and my address will be at 66 Willow street, Brooklyn, N. Y.

I have, &c.,

JOHN E. WHEELOCK.

[Annex 2 to No, 186.]

Bolívar, Venezuela, November 13, 1879.

[From the Trinidad Chronicle, apparently of November 15, 1879.]

To the Editor of the Trinidad Chronicle:

Sir: You may have heard ere this of the violent outrage perpetrated upon an American by a civil officer in the service of the Venezuelan Government, and located in the mining district of Nueva Providencia. But as the facts of the case have been greatly misrepresented by those who are now greatly interested in hushing up the matter, I thought a curtailed description of this unprecedented and almost tragical occurrence, from the victim himself, might not prove uninteresting to your readers.

What is known as the Caratal mining district, which is the scene of the event which I wish to describe, is located about 200 miles southeast of this town of Bolivar. In the month of June last I visited these mines, as I had frequently done before, and remained there until the 13th of September. On that day I was ready and expected to start for this town en route for New York.

On Saturday morning early, being the 13th of September, 1879, I was arrested on complaint of an Italian (who has since been discovered to be a fugitive from justice from Demerara) of having robbed him of $1,200. The civil officer who made the arrest is known here as a “commissary,” and his duties combine somewhat, I believe, those of a sheriff and justice of the peace. The arrest took place in the little mining town of Chilé, about one mile from the quarters of the Italian, with whom and at whose invitation I had been stopping some time previous to the arrest. This Italian was temporarily in charge of a mill and mine called Eureka, and at his urgent invitation I had been stopping with him as his guest at Eureka. The mill and mine were not being worked.

After the arrest at Chilé, my arms were tied tight behind me, and with an escort of three or four péons as guard, I was sent back to Eureka, the Italian and the commissary following a short distance behind. The commissary, by the way, is a full-blooded negro, and an ex-revolutionary general. On the way my arms were tied so tight that they became painful. I repeatedly requested the guard to slacken the cords, but without avail, until one of them asked me what I would give him to loosen them; I told him $5. He slackened them up a little and I gave him the $5. A short time after this he dropped a little way behind, and another of the guard came up and drew the cords tighter than ever. A few moments after a third one came up to me and asked what I would give to have them loosened again. I thought this was getting rather monotonous, and as we were then not far from our destination I concluded to “grin an’ bear it.”

Arrived at Eureka, I was taken into the room where the safe was; the commissary then procured an interpreter, as he only speaks Spanish, with which language I am not very familiar. He then asked me if I had slept on the previous night in the room adjoining the one in which the safe was? I replied in the affirmative. After several more questions (through the interpreter always) he told me that I was accused of robbing the safe on the previous night, and demanded to know where the money was. He had previously searched my trunk and everything I had. Of course, as I knew nothing about any robbery I could not tell him. He then had some conversation with the Italian, who speaks Spanish very fluently, at the conclusion of which the latter got up and left the room. This civil officer of the government then ordered my arms to be re-tied tight behind me; then I was raised up, and by the cord which tied my arms I was suspended from a peg in the wall, my feet being some distance off the floor. The pain was excruciating. I was continually told that if I would say where the money was, I would be set free as I knew nothing about it, I could not tell. It is impossible for me to say how long they kept me suspended in this manner, as every moment seemed an age to me; but they lowered me and raised me many times. They then changed the manner of torture; stretched a rope across the room with a peculiar slip-noose or lasso in the center; raised my body up and thrust me through this slip-noose until it passed around me a little below the breast, then the rope was hauled tight, and I was left suspended in this manner. The agony was awful; I could only draw less than a half a breath; I could not speak, but every two or three minutes two of the péons would rush forward and raise me up, thus relieving the pressure and enabling me to speak. Then the civil officer would, always say to me: “Tell where the money is and we will let you go perfectly free and unmolested.” After repeating this many times, and I always being compelled to give the same answer, that, as I did not know I could not tell, this negro officer gave some rapid orders to his men, accompanied by fierce oaths.

I was then taken down and, with my arms still tied in a very painful manner behind me, I was led out into the forest about a half mile from any house, all under the direction of this same officer, who allowed no one to accompany us but the péons and the interpreter, that there might be no witnesses.

On reaching a suitable spot in the woods, a rope were stretched across between two small trees, and in the middle of this rope were arranged two small peculiar slipnooses, and in these were placed my bare ankles; the rope was then pulled taut, raising me up until my head was off the ground!

I had thought previously to this that they had nearly exhausted even Spanish ingenuity in inflicting physical torture, but all I had passed through was as nothing compared to what I was now compelled to endure. Suspended with my head down, the rope cutting deep into the flesh of each ankle, my arms tied so tight behind me that they were swollen and purple, I was kept in that position suffering from an awful thirst until my brain spun round and insensibility was coming to my relief.

I was then lowered down for a few moments until I recovered somewhat, when the same questions and answers passed between us and the whole operation was gone through again. This was repeated many times, varied by such changes as only people with the same blood as the old Spanish inquisitors could devise, such as jerking the rope continually while it was buried in the flesh of my ankles, and I was suspended head downward, striking me with the backs of their swords, &c.

But I have no disposition to dwell longer upon the awful agony I suffered or the excrutiating torture that was inflicted upon me by this officer of the Venezuelan Government; suffice it to say that all the human frame could endure was imposed upon me on that awful day.

If any suitable instrument had been accessible or opportunity had offered, I would certainly have taken my own life, as I believed that they would, after finding my inability to give them any information, take my life, as the surest means of preventing any action on the part of the United States, and I thought I would rather die before any more torture than have to die immediately afterward; and the péons standing by while I was suspended by my ankles and guessing what was passing in my mind, would extend their swords toward me with the question: “No quiere matarse?” (“Don’t you want to kill yourself?”) and then would draw back their swords, laughing all the while as though it was rare amusement. But I need have had no fear that they would wish to get rid of me to prevent any action on the part of the United States Government, for their opinion of the United States is about the same as ours of Lapland or of Patagonia.

The characteristics of the lower grade of officials are total ignorance and inhuman: brutality. They present a great contrast to some of the personages occupying the higher offices of the government, who are men of intelligence, education, and progressive ideas. The President of this very state, for instance, is a man of as much refinement as you will meet among the cultured classes of any country, and he appears to have the best good of his country at heart, but he needs must find it a very difficult matter to bring the masses up to appreciate his own elevated ideas and progressive sentiments.

It was late in the afternoon before this civil officer of the Venezuelan Government and his péons had satisfied their curiosity as to how much torture a North American could stand and still live; but when they thought they had reached the limit their operations upon me ceased, and I was conducted to the nearest jail and kept there a few days until the judge of the district gave the case a full investigation, when I was discharged with a full assurance from the judge that there was nothing whatever against me, not even a suspicion. Though the prosecuting witness repeatedly perjured himself, this was so clearly shown that I could not be even held for trial.

I should have mentioned that while I was being led away to jail the Italian followed me a short distance and offered for $600 to clear me right then and there! I had very foolishly, a few days before, while at this place, allowed him to see that I had several hundred dollars in my possession, and from this carelessness arose all my troubles, as I will explain. This Italian, as stated above, is known to be a fugitive from justice in Demerara; he was about to be discharged for misconduct from the employment of the mining company at Eureka; he was all prepared to leave the country, but he was heavily in debt, and as he supposed he could not leave the country with the money lie had received as salary from the mining company, he concluded (or at least this is almost the universal opinion) that he would spread the report that he was robbed, and as he knew I had some money with me he thought I would pay handsomely to keep out of jail, and so he would kill two birds with one stone. He failed in extorting $600 from me, but the mining company shortly afterward removed him from Eureka and he fled at once from the mines, taking, as it is generally supposed, all his money with him, for very few people believe that there was any robbery at all, but simply a well contrived though dastardly attempt to blackmail and to avoid the payment of his just debts.

After my speedy and honorable discharge, and as soon as I was able to travel, I came to this town to lay my case before the American consul, Mr. John Dalton, who forwarded a statement to Washington and made a demand upon this government for satisfactory damages as compensation for the horrible outrage.

I claim $50,000 as compensation, and I certainly would not undergo the same ordeal again for twice that amount paid in advance.

JOHN E. WHEELOCK.

United States Consulate,
Ciudad Bolivar, November 13, 1879.

The foregoing statement has been sworn to in my presence by the above-signed John E. Wheelock, which I attest.

[seal of the consulate.]

JOHN DALTON,
United States Consul.

No. 657. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker. No. 657.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker.

Department of State,
Washington, January 28, 1880. No. 62.]

Sir: I have received and given careful attention to your dispatch No. 186, of the 23d ultimo, in relation to the outrage alleged to have been perpetrated upon Mr. John E. Wheelock, an American citizen, by a civil officer of Venezuela, in the mining region near El Callao.

The Department is also in possession of other communications on the same subject from Mr. Wheelock himself, who is now residing at No. 66 Willow street, Brooklyn, N. Y., from his counsel, Mr. S. B. Elkins, of New York City, and from Consul Dalton, who writes fully on the subject from Ciudad Bolivar, under date of November 2, 1879, dispatch No. 32.

* * * * * * *

It appears, from Mr. Dalton’s correspondence, that the action of the authorities of the State of Guayana was commendably prompt. The outrage on Mr. Wheelock was perpetrated on the 13th of September last, and as early as the 26th of the same month the prefect of Roscio issued a stringent circular in reference to the numerous cruelties taking place in the mining district. Mr. Dalton having brought the case of Mr. Wheelock energetically to the notice of the president of the State of Guayana on the 30th of October, President Dalla Costa replied on the same day that he had ordered an immediate investigation, and the punishment of any parties found guilty. A few days later, on the 3d of November, the president of Guayana, under his own signature, and with the counter-signature of the subsecretary of Gobierno, issued an order denouncing the crime and its authors, and commanding due process and punishment. A translation of President Dalla Costa’s order is herewith transmitted for your information, and is presumably the paper referred to by the Venezuelan consul at Trinidad, Señor Obregon, in the letter you attach to your dispatch. Had no action been taken by the authorities of Guayana, the ease would be one requiring immediate presentation through your legation to the Government of Venezuela, in the unofficial form warranted by your relations thereto. As, however, a very praiseworthy zeal seems to have been exhibited by the authorities of the State where the outrage occurred, it will be sufficient for you to seek an unofficial interview with the Venezuelan foreign secretary, and to set forth to him the urgent necessity, in the interest of humanity, of the good fame of his country, and of friendly relations with other countries, that no step be left untried to effect the speedy and condign punishment of the authors of an atrocity at which humanity shudders. You may also give Señor Viso to understand that it is expected that Venezuela will spontaneously tender to Mr. Wheelock a more adequate and fully substantial reparation for the tortures he has received at the hands of the Venezuelan officers than the mere punishment of the criminals can afford, and not have this case to swell the list of unredressed grievances which must sooner or later be brought to a settlement.

Should the minister desire it you may read this instruction to him, and furnish him with a copy also should he express a wish to possess it.

The claim preferred by Mr. Wheelock is for the sum of $50,000. Should it be necessary, in due time, to make formal demand for reparation, this government will consider what indemnity it would think proper. But it is hoped that the sense of justice and equity of the Venezuelan Government will guide it to an immediate and unconstrained disposition of this question.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

No. 658. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. No. 658.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, February 16, 1880. (Received March 9.) No. 205.]

Sir: Referring to my Nos. 203 and 204, I inclose herewith— 1st. A copy of a decree of General Guzman Blanco, as the same appears in the Gaceta Oficial of the 11th instant, together with a translation thereof.

2d. A copy of another decree of General Guzman Blanco, as the same appears in the Gaceta Oficial of the 11th instant, together with a translation thereof.

By the first of these decrees he purports to suppress the port of Ciudad Bolivar, to substitute that of Guzman Blanco or Barcelona; to announce what has the verbal appearance of an actual blockade of the mouths of the Orinoco 5 to indicate fifteen days’ notice after publication of the decree in the Gaceta Oficial for vessels proceeding from the Antilles, thirty days for those proceeding from the United States, and forty-five days for those proceeding from Europe, &c. By the second he purports to provide for a marine station and tribunal at Carúpano.

I recommend that these decrees be examined in full. They imply that the insurrection at Ciudad Bolivar is regarded as of moment by this government. I find them in the press, and send them to you. Affecting though they do on their face the commerce of all nations whose vessels trade to Ciudad Bolivar, I have received from the minister of exterior relations no communication on the subject, verbal or other.

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure 1 in No. 205—Translation.]

Guzman Blanco, Illustrious American, Pacificator, Regenerator, and Provisional President of the Republic.

In view of the disturbances which have taken place in the State of Guayana, in consequence of the rising and criminal offense committed in Ciudad Bolivar on the 29th of last month, and in use of the authority which article 3 of the legislative decree of the 17th of May, 1873, concedes to me, I decree: Article 1. The custom-house established at the port of Ciudad Bolivar is suppressed, ceasing forthwith the commerce which is carried on by the Orinoco, of importation and exportation with foreign ports, and that of cabotaje, or coasting trade.

Art. 2 The importations and exportations of the commerce of Ciudad Bolivar will be carried on by the port of Guzman Blanco; and whilst the road leading from Barcelona to Soledad on the Orinoco is being expedited, the port of Carúpano is qualified, without restriction, to serve the same ends.

Art. 3. Every vessel bound to the ports of the Orinoco will be detained by the vessels of the government which are detailed for cruising service on the mouths of said river, and conducted to the nearest port open to commerce, in order that its cargo may be proceeded against conformably to paragraph 2, article 75, law xvi of the code of finance, and other laws which regulate commerce proceeding from abroad, and the coasting trade.

Art. 4. The foregoing article will take effect fifteen days after the publication of this decree in the Gaceta Oficial of this city, for vessels proceeding from the Antilles; thirty days after for those which proceed from the United States of North America; and forty-five days for those proceeding from Europe.

Art. 5. After the expiration of these periods, which are conceded in favor of importers, said vessels will be considered as contraband, and as such will be pursued and captured, and immediately conducted to the nearest qualified port, in order that they may be there judged according to the fiscal laws in force.

Art. 6. National or foreign vessels which are found armed on the Orinoco, or its neighborhood, by the insurgents, will be considered as pirates, and as such will be pursued and seized, to place them at the disposal of the marine station, established by decree of this date, in the port of Carúpano, in the State of Cumaná.

Art. 7. The minister of finance is charged with the execution of this decree, and with communicating it to the consuls of the republic abroad, and to the other authorities whom it concerns.

Given, signed with my hand in the federal palace of the capital at Caracas, the 10th of February, 1880.

Sealed with the great national seal and countersigned by the minister of finance.

GUZMAN BLANCO.

Countersigned:
The Minister of state in the department of finance,
J. P. ROJAS PAUL.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 205.—Translation.]

Guzman Blanco, President of the Republic.

In use of the powers which the last Congress of plenipotentiaries has conferred upon me, I decree: Article 1. On account of the insurrection which has occurred in the plaza of Ciudad Bolivar, which was the seat of the marine station of Guayana, one is established at the port of Carúpano, in the State of Cunianá.

Art. 2. To this station and its marine tribunal belong all the waters and coasts from the Orinoco to Cabo Codera, over which that of Guayana exercised jurisdiction, including the waters and coasts of Nueva Esparta.

Art. 3. The marine tribunal to which the anterior article refers will be organized conformably to the laws in force on the subject.

Art. 4. The ministry of war and marine is charged with the execution of this decree, and with communicating it to whom it concerns.

Given, signed with my hand, countersigned by the minister of war and marine, in the federal palace of the capital at Caracas, the 10th of February, 1880. Year 16 of the law and 21 of the federation.
GUZMAN BLANCO.

Countersigned:
The minister of war and marine,
JULIO F. SARRIA.

No. 659. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. No. 659.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, March 10, 1880. (Received March 27.) No. 209.]

Sir: Referring to my Nos. 203, 204, 205, and 206, which give some idea of the late insurrectionary or revolutionary outbreak at Ciudad Bolivar, and extension of open disaffection in the reported form of guerrilla bodies to some other States, I have now to add, in continuation of the subject, that according to all accounts the outbreak at Ciudad Bolivar has been suppressed by a counter-movement which originated in the State of Guayana; that all or nearly all the guerrilla bodies in other parts of the country have been dispersed that hundreds of political prisoners are lodged in jails and “bóvedas”; and that peace prevails for the present.

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

No. 660. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. No. 660.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, March 22, 1880. (Received April 10.) No. 210.]

Sir: According to the Opinion Nacional, the Congress for 1880 commenced assembling on 20th ultimo, and obtained a quorum on the 6th instant.

I inclose herewith a copy of the message of General Guzman Blanco, as Provisional President, to this Congress, as the same appears in Gaceta Oficial of the 8th instant, together with a translation thereof. * * *

As tending to affect foreign commerce with this country, I draw your special attention to that part of the message which contingently recommends the closure of the ports of Maracaibo, Coro, and Ciudad Bolivar; substituting for the first two the port of Puerto Cabello, and for the last the port of Carúpano—or, the establishment of differential duties, as stated in the message. The closure of the port of Ciudad Bolivar, with substitution of Carúpano, would virtually be, as I apprehend it, the closure of the Orinoco against foreign trade, which would certainly be a strange recompense for the patriotism with which the same message credits the State of Guayana.

* * * * * * *

I have to add that according to the Opinion Nacional of the 13th instant, the houses of Congress on that day scrutinized the elections for President of the republic, with the announcement of the result that the twenty States of the union had voted for General Guzman Blanco 5 and that, according to the same paper of the 17th instant, General Guzman Blanco on that day qualified as President.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure in No. 210.—Translation from “Gaceta Oficial” of March 8, 1880.]

Message of General Guzman Blanco, Illustrious American, Pacificator, Regenerator, and Provisional President of the United States of Venezuela, &c., &c., &c., to the Constitutional Congress of 1880.

Citizen Senators, Citizen Deputies: Your installation in Congress is a cause for national rejoicing, upon which I felicitate you and felicitate myself.

You come to seal that which the States of the union, represented in the Congress of plenipotentiaries, left established as the base of the Venezuelan federation. A great task, but one to which your patriotism and loyalty will correspond; yielding a fundamental compact which guarantees liberty and secures order, both producing the stability of the republic.

The Congress of plenipotentiaries of the States decided and fixed the two capital points which interpenetrate the constitutional reform. With full powers it has established the reduction of the present 20 States to the 7 great States of the future, and the formation of an absolutely impersonal executive power, with a federative council composed of two deputies for each one of the representations of the popular majorities, and one senator for each one of the seven autonomies, this body having the power to designate every two years who of its number may have to exercise the Presidency of the union, subject to the deliberative vote of the council in all that may not be purely administrative.

According to the compact of the Congress of the plenipotentiaries, the seven great States will be composed of groupings of the former twenty, except Guayana and Zulia, which will preserve their present status. The sections which enter into the formation of each great State must retain their proper interior autonomy, and elect their governors and the members for the legislature of the great State; and in its turn, each district of those which form the section will elect its prefect or civil chief, and its municipality. Thus the federative principle, combined with the popular vote, will extend to the municipality, which is base and point of departure in political organization according to the federal doctrine.

The States being organized in the course of the present year, in the next the first constitutional elections will take place in each locality, together with the national elections which the Chambers of 188I have to decree, conformably to the new compact; so that in 1882 the Congress may elect the federal council, representative of the popular majorities and of the autonomy of the States—a council which will then designate who of its number may have to exercise the functions of President.

On the 12th of May last year I charged myself with the provisional Presidency, conformably to the election of the congress of plenipotentiaries; I convoked the people to elections, and proceeded to reorganize the public administration, after which I absented myself from the country, using the permission which I solicited and which was accorded to me, in order to conduct abroad negotiations of transcendent interest for the future of the republic, of which the minister of state will give you an account, and, above all, in order not to influence directly or indirectly the elections which took place from August to October last.

On my return I found the republic in the best conditions of stability, so that the recent disturbance hardly lasted fifteen days, although it had commenced by a garrison mutiny in a distant part of the republic; although the government had just retired all the army, and reduced the permanent force of the whole union to only 2,100 men. The news of the occurrence at Ciudad Bolivar had hardly become known when all the population of the east, of their own will, repaired to the great town to ask arms of the authorities; and when the national delegate arrived with arms and supplies at Barcelona, he only had to organize the bodies, arm them, and put them on the road.

A strong squadron was got ready for sea in ten days, and proceeded to the Orinoco; but patriotism and public opinion in the State of Guayana are such that I have had to countermand the orders to both the army and the squadron, because the State has sufficed in itself, has armed 2,000 men in number, equipped a squadron, and by the river and by land fallen on the rebels and made them prisoners. Order and law have been re-established since the 18th ultimo in Guayana.

The scandalous occurrence at Ciudad Bolivar produced four guerrilla bodies in the State of Bolivar, as many others in Guzman Blanco, and two in Carabobo. In thirty-six hours the government had 3,000 volunteers in the State of Bolivar pursuing the disturbers, and 3,500 in the State of Guzman Blanco, and about 1,000 in Carabobo, notwithstanding that the insensate gang was there insignificant in the extreme.

From Curacao there came some of these disreputable men, who, instead of being in their homes enjoying the peace, the liberty, and the progress of their country, prefer to live in expectancy of any kind of agitation; and as they have not up to the present time approached any point of the coast, it is now probable that they may have to return for asylum to the same or to some other West Indian island.

Also from Trinidad went out another group of ringleaders, principal factors of the movement at Ciudad Bolivar, who had to return as fugitives, covered with ridicule and shame; for notwithstanding their precipitation, and the possession of a steamer, they found the Orinoco intercepted by the loyal and patriotic Guayanians.

As you see, our civil war once more owes its origin to the insidious asylums which, with satanic impassibility, the inhabitants of the islands of Curacao and Trinidad accord to the enemies of the peace of Venezuela; and it is my duty, my imperative duty, to advise the Congress of the republic of such persevering and systematic hostility on the part of both neighboring Antilles, and to ask one of two measures as a remedy: to close the ports of Maracaibo, Coro, and Ciudad Bolivar, merging the two first in that of Puerto Cabello, and the second in that of Carupano, or to establish differential duties, which may burden the importation of the Antilles and protect the direct commerce of Europe and the United States.

Thus may be met the contingency of the claims which the government substantiates, in order to bring them to the consideration of the government of both these islands, not being heeded, as they should be for the efficacious guarantee of our permanent tranquility.

This melancholy revolutionary craze, although lamentable on other accounts, will result very favorably for the solid stability of the future. In the general and sudden uprising of the national will—the people revindicating their sovereignty—the interests of the clubs and leaders of the two years’ government were swept away; and as events have run their course in a manner entirely national, these persons and these clubs appealed to arms, believing that they could impose themselves on the republic by violence; but being so few, and being so discredited, they have succumbed wherever they have appeared before the patriotic and energetic resolution and unanimity of the people.

In this process of purification of the popular cause, the few bad designs which menaced it have been eliminated; and it finds itself, after all, much grander, stronger, and more secure of the future of the country for which it can now answer.

Very painful have been these events, more than all for the reason that two millions of bolivars, which had already accumulated for roads, schools, and immigration, I have seen myself obliged to employ on soldiers for the defense of that peace which is the starting-point of all progress and of all possible development, all of which at the same time serves to show that we shall lose a half year more before we can again be in a condition to devote the energies of the administration with sufficient revenue to the progress of the republic.

On the other hand, I foresee spacious horizons of peace, of liberty, of order, and progress; for, these pernicious elements being now annihilated, the republic must remain so perfectly consolidated that the new constitution will go into effect without a single obstacle, and the future will be perfectly stable, the logical effect of the conciliation of liberty and order, sustained by the patriotism of all Venezuelans.

Caracas, March 7, 1880.
GUZMAN BLANCO.

No. 661. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. No. 661.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, April 19, 1880. (Received May 6.) No. 219.]

Sir: I think it proper to communicate to you, as matter of information, that Mr. C. J. Bandman (of New York, I think) has contracted with this government for the construction and operation of two prospective railways: one from La Guayra to Caracas, and the other from Puerto Cabello to Valencia.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

No. 662. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. No. 662.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, April 20, 1880. (Received May 6.) No. 220.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 164, of date September 28, 1879, and to my No. 167, of date October 28, 1879, and its inclosure of copy and translation of the preliminary contract, referred to in my No. 164, between Mr. J. M. de Rojas, minister plenipotentiary of Venezuela at Paris, and Mr. Eug. Pereire; and, quoting the statement in my said No. 167, that “My present impression is that the contract will not be effectuated,” &c., I have now to add in relation to the same matter that I have completely reliable intelligence to the effect that a rupture has taken place between General Guzman Blanco and Mr. Delort, chief, as I understand, of the Erench commission which has been here in the premises, and that Mr. Delort and the other members of the commission—five in all, I am told—left here on the 7th instant for France.

It would appear that part at least of the cause of the rupture turned, on Mr. C. J. Bandman having got a contract for a railway between Puerto Cabello and Valencia, this being one of the two contracts referred to in my No. 219.

I find in the Opinion Nacional of the 9th instant a communication of date 6th instant, from General Guzman Blanco to Eugene Pereire, concerning the matter, in which the blame of the miscarriage is put upon Delort. In this communication General Guzman speaks of Delort as a man “who may be a very good mariner and a very good engineer, but a fatal negotiator,” and in the conclusion of the communication he says: I shall much regret that you should not improve the occasion—having on such good footing the progressing negotiation—to send a competent man who may finish planning an affair which will give you money, hut which will accelerate the progress of Venezuela in a manner as surprising as satisfactory.

So the affair in question appears to be broken off or suspended, for the present at least.

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

No. 663. Mr. Hay to Mr. Baker. No. 663.
Mr. Hay to Mr. Baker.

Department of State,
Washington, July 13, 1880. No. 77.]

Sir: Referring to the previous instructions of this Department in relation to the outrage committed in September, 1879, upon Mr. John H. Wheelock by a civil officer of Venezuela, I have now to inclose for your information a copy of a letter recently received from Mr. Wheelock, communicating the report which reaches him through an apparently trustworthy channel that the so-called “General” Sotillo, the author of the outrage, has not been punished in any way.

In addition to the Department’s last instruction on the subject, No. 74, of June 10, 1880, I have now to direct you not to lose sight of this aggravated case, but to press the claim in such manner as to leave no room for doubt that this government awaits with keen interest the speedy intelligence of the due and exemplary punishment of the delinquent officer at whose hands Mr. Wheelock suffered the indignities and cruelties complained of, as well as the tender of a fitting reparation to the sufferer.

I am, &c.,

JOHN HAY,
Acting Secretary.

[Inclosure in No. 77.]

Mr. Wheelock to Mr. Hay.

66 Willow Street,
Brooklyn, N. Y., July 10, 1880.

Sir: I have just received word from Bolivar, Venezuela, that Sotillo, the civil officer who committed the outrage upon me in September last, has not been punished in any way, notwithstanding the assurances of the President of the State before I left there that he should be punished.

Will you be kind enough to inform me whether the Venezuelan Government makes any denial or justification of the outrage, as I have before reported to your Department?

* * * * * * *

Very, &c.,

JOHN E. WHEELOCK.

No. 664. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. No. 664.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, August 10, 1880. (Received August 28.) No. 258.]

Sir: Referring to my No. 219, of the 19th of last April, respecting two prospective railways in this country—one from La Guayra to Caracas, and the other from Puerto Cabello to Valencia—I have now to add, for your further information in the same premises, that I find in the Opinion Nacional, of the 7th instant, a letter, of date New York, July 23, 1880, from Mr. Charles J. Bandman to General Guzman Blanco,. President of the United States of Venezuela, in which Mr. Bandman says: I have the honor to communicate to your excellency that the engineers and part of the materials for the construction of the railway from La Guayra to Caracas will leave on the 16th of the ensuing month for Venezuela.

And, in the same letter, Mr. Bandman further says: The same constructing company of the La Guayra-Caracas road will take in charge that of Puerto Cabello-Valencia; and if Providence lengthens my life, I win see within two years both roads completed and in public traffic.

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

No. 665. Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts. No. 665.
Mr. Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, September 2, 1880. (Received September 23.) No. 270.]

Sir: It is worthy of notice that a political idea, contemplating alliance or confederation with other American governments, has place in the constitution of Venezuela. Article 119 of the constitution reads, as I translate, “The national executive will treat with the governments of America on compacts of alliance or of confederation.”

In reference to this article of the constitution, the executive has recently put forth a decree appointing a commission in order to study the matter, with direction that “the commission will occupy itself preferably in elaborating a report towards confederation between the sections which constituted the old Colombia”; and that “the commission will equally present a report towards the confederation or towards the alliance of all the nations of South America.”

The so-called old Colombia was composed of the present states of Colombia, Ecuador, and Venezuela. It was short-lived. The union was formed in 1819; Venezuela seceded in 1829, and Ecuador in 1830. The sum of the stated areas of these three countries is 1, 155,352 square miles, which is a tolerable approach to one-third of the total territorial area of the United States, and their present joint population may be about 6,000,000.

In view of existing physical, moral, and political conditions, I should judge that the reuniting of these three States—especially in tolerable order, harmony, and observance of central laws—is a considerable way off. The idea, however, appears to be a good and commendable one, as looking towards social development and the practice of larger political conceptions.

I inclose herewith a copy of the decree referred to, as it appears in the Gaceta Oficial of the 26th ultimo, together with a translation thereof.

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure in No. 270.—Translation.]

Guzman Blanco, illustrious American, pacifactor, regenerator, and President of the United States of Venezuela, &c., &c., &c.

I decree: Article 1. The one hundred and nineteenth article of the Federal constitution in force providing that the national executive will treat with the governments of America on compacts of alliance or confederation, I appoint, in order to study the matter, a commission composed of the citizens, the illustrious Procér Antonio Leocadio Guzman and Doctors Aníbal Dominici, Necanor Bórges, and Pedro Monsalve.

Art. 2. The commission will occupy itself preferably in elaborating a report towards confederation between the sections which constituted the old Colombia.

Art. 3. The commission will equally present a report towards the confederation, or towards the alliance of all the nations of South America.

Art. 4. The minister of the exterior relations is charged with the execution of this decree.

Given, signed with my hand and countersigned by the proper minister at the federal palace of Caracas on the 26th of August, 1880. Year 17th of the law and 22d of the Federation.
GUZMAN BLANCO.

Countersigned:
PEDRO J. SAAVEDRA.

No. 666. Mr Baker to Mr. Evarts. No. 666.
Mr Baker to Mr. Evarts.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, September 8, 1880. (Received September 26.) No. 271.]

Sir: Referring to past correspondence relative to the case of Mr. John E. Wheelock, I herewith inclose, first, a copy of my note on the subject to Mr. Saavedra, of date July 31, last passed; second, a copy and translation of Mr. Saavedra’s answer, of date 24th ultimo, and received 26th ultimo; third, a copy of my note to Mr. Saavedra, of date 7th instant, acknowledging the receipt of his note, and indicating that it would be brought by the earliest opportunity to the attention and consideration of my government.

Mr. Saavedra’s note is to the purport, first, that proper procedure has been taken to bring the alleged offender to justice, with the result that no cause was found for continuing the proceeding or for ordering his arrest; second, that in case of actual crime the government thinks the obligation of the republic is satisfied by the judgment and punishment of the offender, and that it would not owe pecuniary indemnification to the offended.

* * * * * * *

I am, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure 1 in No 274.]

Mr. Baker to Mr. Saavedra.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, July 31, 1880.

Sir: Having received a further dispatch from my government respecting the case of Mr. John E. Wheelock, concerning which I left with his excellency Mr. J. Viso, on the 12th of May last, a copy of a former dispatch from my government, since when I have not had the honor of receiving any communication from the ministry of exterior relations respecting the matter, I have now to respectfully request your excellency to he so obliging as to indicate to me, in such detail as may be practicable, what proceedings have been had in the case and what are the views of the Government of Venezuela in relation thereto.

I renew, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

[Inclosure 2 in No. 274.—Translation.]

Mr. Saavedra to Mr. Baker.

Caracas, August 24, 1880.

I have had the honor of receiving the communication of your excellency, of date 31st of July, in which, on account of your having received a new instruction from your government relative to the matter of Mr. John E. Wheelock, you ask what proceedings have been had therein, and what are the views of this government in the premises.

From the time that this department had £he first notice of the event, on the 20th of January last, it addressed itself to the President of the State of Guayana, in order to express to him the satisfaction with which it had read the measures dictated without delay to the end of investigating the facts; and the confidence that the tribunals would proceed actively and efficaciously, administering full justice, to the extent of imposing on the delinquents, if such there were, and without consideration of any sort, the punishment which the law points out. Besides, a copy of the proceedings which might be taken before the authorities of the State was requested, as also other information conducive to the object of the government.

The copy having arrived, it appeared from it that the complainant had exaggerated the facts, and that two magistrates, the departmental judge of Roscio, and that of the first instance of the State, had decided in accord and successively that there did not exist grounds for continuing the process, nor for ordering the arrest of Señor Sotillo. Thereupon the ministry, desirous not to leave anything undone, wrote to the President of Guayana that the government had considerable interest in knowing if anything further required to be done there, besides prosecuting the investigation to verify the truth, and proceeding against the parties; or else putting far from all doubt the exaggeration of the complainant. And Doctor Parejo, actual President of that State, notwithstanding the investigation had terminated, moved the tribunal, with lively earnestness, to open it de novo. Such is the state of the matter.

It is seen, then, that not only the authorities of Guayana as recognized by his excellency Mr. Evarts in his instruction to your excellency of the 22d of January last, of which, after having read it to my predecessor, you delivered him a copy towards the end of May, but also the supreme federal government, have done, and do, as much as is in their power to accomplish the bringing of the truth to light, and the punishment of the offense which might be shown to have been committed.

The government thinks that if there has actually been a crime, the obligation of the republic is satisfied by the judgment and punishment of its author, and that it would not owe pecuniary indemnification to the offended.

I renew, &c.,

PEDRO I. SAAVEDRA.

[Inclosure 3 in No. 274.]

Mr. Baker to Mr. Saavedra.

Legation of the United States,
Caracas, September 7, 1880.

Mr. Minister: I have the honor to acknowledge that your excellency’s note of the 24th ultimo, in relation to the case of Mr. John E. Wheelock, was received by me on the 26th ultimo. I will only add at present that the note in question will be brought by the earliest opportunity to the attention and consideration of my government.

I avail myself, &c.,

JEHU BAKER.

No. 667. Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker. No. 667.
Mr. Evarts to Mr. Baker.

Department of State,
Washington, October 15, 1880. No. 91.]

Sir: Your dispatch of the 8th ultimo, No. 274, in relation to the claim of Mr. John E. Wheelock, and inclosing copy of the correspondence between yourself and Mr. Saavedra, the minister of exterior relations for Venezuela, on that subject, has been received.

Your course in presenting the subject to the Venezuelan government, in pursuance of my instruction of the 28th of January last, No. 62, is approved. When that instruction was dictated the facts in relation to the barbarous outrage perpetrated upon a citizen of the United States by a public officer of the Venezuelan government, acting under color of law, were all before the Department. There appeared no ground for question as to the truth of the statements. They were substantially the same as received from Mr. Wheelock, the victim of the outrage, from Mr. Dalton, the consul at Ciudad Bolivar, and from your legation. Nor do I now find the facts directly controverted by the Venezuelan minister of exterior relations in his note to you of the 24th of August last, a copy and translation of which you inclose in your No. 274.

To characterize this cruel and unusual proceeding in its true light it is only necessary to give a brief recital of the occurrences attending it.

Mr. John E. Wheelock, an American citizen, in the legitimate pursuit of his regular business, visited, in June, 1879, the mines of the Carstal district, situate about 200 miles southeast of Ciudad Bolivar. He remained there until the 13th of September following. On the morning of that day he was arrested, at the instance of an Italian, who alleged that he had had $1,200 stolen from his safe, and accused Mr. Wheelock of the theft. The arrest was made by an officer having the official title of “commissary,” combining, as it appears in one person the dual functions of a magistrate and police constable. This functionary, as it further appears, acting at once as judge and executioner, directed his subordinates to pinion Wheelock’s arms behind his back, and compelled him to march a mile from the place of arrest—Chilé—back to the mining camp. The cords with which his arms were bound cutting into his flesh, Wheelock paid, to one of the armed guards who were driving him, $5 to have the cords loosened a little. This guard then stepping back a short distance, a second one stepped up and again tightened them, when a third offered to slacken the cords for another $5, which offer was, however, declined by the unfortunate prisoner.

Arriving at the scene of the supposed larceny, Mr. Wheelock was requested by the commissary to confess what he had done with the Italian’s money. Upon replying that he knew nothing of it, his arms were again tightly pinioned behind him by the orders of this same officer, and he was suspended, by the cord with which his arms were bound, from a peg in the wall at a height which took his feet some distance from the ground. Again asked to confess, he protested his innocence. The mode of torture was then changed, a slipnoose was made, the rope was put tightly around his body, and he was suspended in mid air, with the fore part of his body bearing towards the ground. Still refusing the invitations to confess, he was, when nearly dead, taken down. He was then taken to the woods, half a mile distant, and from a strong rope stretched between two trees he was suspended by cords tightly tied around his ankles, with his head down but not so as to reach the ground. Again urged to confess, Mr. Wheelock indignantly denied his guilt. Failing through all these barbarous methods to wring a confession from Mr. Wheelock, this inhuman official committed him to jail, when, after remaining there a few days, his case came in order before the district court, and, after a full and searching investigation before that tribunal, Mr. Wheelock was honorably acquitted and discharged, with the personal assurance from the district judge that “there was nothing whatever found against him, not even grounds for a suspicion of the offense with which he had been charged.”

It is unnecessary to comment on proceedings of the character of these by an officer of a civilized government, perpetrated under the guise of official authority. Such atrocities as resorting to “the torture” to extract a confession of guilt from persons accused of crime, are now, happily, considered by all civilized governments and peoples as belonging to an age long past, and it might well have been hoped that such inhuman cruelties would never have found an opportunity for revival in any of the constitutional governments established on this continent.

Believing, as I did, when the transaction was first brought to the attention of this government, and as I do not now allow myself to doubt, that the Government of Venezuela shared in this common sentiment of abhorrence of such practices, and conceiving that the enlightened sense of justice of that government, strengthened by the recollection of the long and unbroken friendship which has heretofore subsisted, and still subsists, between the people and Governments of the United States and Venezuela, would at once prompt it to disavow the conduct of this unworthy official, by degrading him from his office and handing him over to the proper tribunals for trial and merited punishment, and, at the same time, spontaneously making to the victim of his cruelties the only remaining reparation it could for his wrongs by a reasonable pecuniary indemnity, the instruction which I forwarded in January last was conceived in the most friendly spirit toward the Venezuelan Government, as it was dictated in the most moderate tone. It is, therefore, with the greatest regret and surprise that this government receives the information conveyed to you in the note of Mr. Saavedra of the 24th of August, giving the result of the promised investigation into the conduct of Señor Sotillo, the author of the illegal and cruel acts from which Mr. Wheelock suffered. The minister of exterior relations states in that communication that “Two judges the departmental of Roscio and that of the first instance of the State, had decided in accord and successively that there did not exist merit for continuing the proceeding (sumario), nor for ordering the arrest of Señor Sotillo.” Upon what character of evidence this conclusion was reached does not appear from the minister’s note. It is sufficiently evident that neither the testimony nor deposition of Mr. Wheelock formed any part of it; nor is there any intimation that the facts as first stated by Mr. Wheelock were refuted or even directly controverted, beyond the suggestion that he had exaggerated them. That the successive decisions of the two judges were submitted to the executive authorities of Venezuela, is evident from the further statement of Mr. Saavedra that “Doctor Parejo, actual President of that state, notwithstanding the investigation had terminated, moved (excito) the tribunal, with vivid earnestness, to open it de novo.” “Such,” says Mr. Saavedra, “is the state of the matter,” and he concludes by informing you that the supreme federal government having done as much as has been in its power to bring “the truth to light” and secure “the punishment of the offense which might turn out to be committed,” the minister adds that his government “thinks that if there has actually been a crime, the obligation of the republic is satisfied by the judgment and punishment of its author, and that it would not owe pecuniary indemnification to the offended.”

The general principle here invoked by Mr. Saavedra, that if a crime is committed against the person, property, or character of an alien resident of the country by a citizen of the country in which such alien may be resident, and the government of such country secures the judgment and punishment of its author, its obligations to the government of the party wronged are satisfied, and that it would not in such case owe pecuniary indemnity to the offended, may very well be admitted; but to claim this for the proceedings had before the Venezuelan judges in the case of Commissary Sotillo would seem little less than a mockery of justice.

To the worst features of the outrage perpetrated on Mr. Wheelock (the occurrence in the woods) there were no witnesses but the perpetrators and the victim. Mr. Wheelock’s evidence was not before the judges, and there is, therefore, every reason to believe that Sotillo’s alleged vindication rested solely on his own testimony and that of his subordinate instruments.

To denominate the proceedings against the officer Sotillo as a miscarriage of justice, is the mildest form of denunciation that can be applied. The sanction of the executive government of Venezuela imparts to them the character of an absolute denial of justice. Were such an outrage as that perpetrated by Sotillo on Mr. Wheelock possible—as fortunately it is not—in the United States, and Venezuelan citizens were the subject of it, the offending officer would be instantly dismissed from the public service and handed over to the proper tribunals for trial, and, if found guilty, subjected to the severest punishment denounced by the laws of the country against an offense at once so abnormal and inhuman. It is unnecessary to invoke the principles of the treaty of amity and friendship (1860) existing between the United States and Venezuela, of the 3d article of which these acts are in clear contravention. It is no less an offense against the principles of public law and the civilization of the age. This government would be wanting in that duty which it owes to its citizens, and regardless of its own dignity, were it lightly to pass over so flagrant an outrage.

You will lose no time in bringing these views to the attention of Mr. Saavedra, expressing at the same time the earnest wish entertained by the President that the subject may receive the early and earnest tttmsid-eration of the Venezuelan Government, and result in a speedy adjustment of Mr. Wheelock’s claim for pecuniary indemnity. When the Government of Venezuela shall signify its willingness to make such reparation the amount of that indemnity may properly become a matter for further consideration by this Department.

I am, &c.,

WM. M. EVARTS.

Alphabetical Index Alphabetical Index

A.

Acapulco: arrest, trial, and acquittal of Captain Jacobson, of American schooner Dreadnaught, for alleged violation of Mexican contraband law; letter by United States Consul Sutter 732–734 [Pgs. 732–734 include portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463] contract for construction of railroad and telegraph line between city of Mexico and, approved by the President; terms of the contract 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 483 and Doc. 484]

Adams, Moses: schooner; claim against Great Britain 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Adams: United States ship; entry of a closed port of Colombia by 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 327 [Pg. 327 is part of Doc. 208], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 214], 339 [Pg. 339 includes portions of Doc. 215, Doc. 216, and Doc. 217], 340 [Pg. 340 is part of Doc. 217], 341 [Pg. 341 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 218], 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219] (See Coaling Stations.)

Address: of the governor of Buenos Ayres to the people of the province 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 24] of the President of Mexico to Congress; foreign relations; commerce; public debt; railroads; military training; Indians 768–774 [Pgs. 768–774 include portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487]

Agriculture: Belgium: damage to crops from heavy rains and inundations 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Brazil: the minister of agriculture recommends the government to grant subsidy of $50,000 per annum to line of steamers between the United States, Canada, and Brazilian ports 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Hungary: results of the harvest in 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Morocco: hopeful prospects for harvest; misery and desolation from famine in southern provinces 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505] tithes demanded of all persons engaged in agricultural pursuits 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]

Netherlands 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

Albania: repudiation of the government of the Porte; rejection of the anti-Albanian decrees of the Powers; a syndicate of bankers offer large contributions for the maintenance of the forces under arms; Ottoman employés expelled from the public bureaus; Turkish troops in citadel at Scutari 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Albania and Montenegro: affairs causing anxiety; proclamation concerning extension of Austria’s power 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Alcock, Sir Rutherford: convention with Chinese Government in 1869; 50 per cent. additional import duty; regulations agreed to by, to be put in force; proposal that this convention, concluded but not ratified, be adopted by all the powers 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 134], 184 [Pg. 184 is part of Doc. 134], 218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 149], 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 163]

Allegiance: naturalization; cases of citizens of the United States in Germany 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286] (See Naturalization.)

Alliance: rumors regarding, between Austria-Hungary and Germany 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

Alsace-Lorraine: treaty with Germany of 1868 does not extend to; cases of John Schehr, Michal Pacquet, the brothers Franz, Theobald Hess, and Joseph Lauber; cases of Lester, Fischer, and Schaug; new decision of the questions involved 441–443 [Pgs. 441–443 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282]

Amar, Isaac: a Jew persecuted in Morocco; his illegal imprisonment and subsequent release 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506]

American doctrine as to what entitles a blockade to the recognition of neutrals 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 526] life insurance companies in France; letter of Mr. Merrill 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

oil company at Talara; destruction of their property; the Chilian navy warned by the government against repetitions of such acts 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 118]

property destroyed by Chilian fleet at Talara 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

students in straitened circumstances charged passport fees in Germany; necessity for passport; such persons deserving of aid; free passports; statistics 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 272], 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

American citizens: Henry Pinkos, a Jewish citizen of the United States, ordered to leave St. Petersburg 873–882 [Pgs. 873–882 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, and Doc. 569] impressment for service in Mexican army (see Army) 776–780 [Pgs. 776–780 include portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

loans forced upon, in Chihuahua 722–724 [Pgs. 722–724 include portions of Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456]

murder of three, in Mexico, State of Michoacan. 739–744 [Pgs. 739–744 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 745–752 [Pgs. 745–752 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

naturalized German, fined or prosecuted for non-performance of military duty on return to Germany; settlement in cases of 441–461 [Pgs. 441–461 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

outrage upon Mr. John E. Wheelock, by an official of the Venezuelan Government 1028–1032 [Pgs. 1028–1032 include portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, and Doc. 658], 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 1040–1044 [Pgs. 1040–1044 include portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667]

right of consul-general to administer upon effects of, denied; case of Mr. Gentil 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 232], 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 235]

sale or lease of land to, in Fukien (see Fukien) 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 181], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 181]

transfer of foreign-built vessels to, not to be considered as an evidence of bad faith; the presumption rather the other way 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 523]

under the control of the consular courts; their rights as to person and property under sole jurisdiction of the United States authorities 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 133], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 133]

American flag: right of foreign-built ships, alleged to have been purchased by American citizens, to sail under 824–826 [Pgs. 824–826 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523]

American independence: commemorated at Tunis by display of flags at all the consulates; the Bey sends assurances of his friendship 1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654]

“American University at Philadelphia”: sale of diplomas by 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265] (See Diplomas.)

American vessels: boarded and searched by Spanish naval officers; Spanish Government orders an immediate investigation 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 583 and Doc. 584], 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585] question of granting clearances to, in Peru, during the war between that country and Chili 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 527]

Amoy: war power of; report of Consul Goldsborough (see Education) 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 171], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 172]

Anderson, John: case of, at Calcutta; Earl Granville admits lack of jurisdiction of the Calcutta court 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 308] tried for murder at Calcutta; in custody of local police; jurisdictional rights of the United States in case of; question of jurisdiction not raised at trial; extradition applied for 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 308], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 308], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Anganqueo, State of Michoacan, Mexico; murder of three American citizens in 739–744 [Pgs. 739–744 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 745–752 [Pgs. 745–752 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

Arctic Expedition: stores for British, placed at disposal of, from the United States 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 309], 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 309]

Arendt: memorandum of rules regulating official intercourse in China 186–188 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 135]

Argentine Republic: actual war begun on the 17th of June; engagement between the provincial troops of Buenos Ayres and the national troops near Merlar, twenty miles from the city 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19] anarchy and revolution in almost all the provinces; as yet, no fighting 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

Buenos Ayres declared the permanent capital; election of deputies to Congress held on Sunday, resulted in the election of distinguished and prominent men; return of Congress from Belgrano to Buenos Ayres 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

chamber of national deputies at deadlock, and unable to organize 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

civil war temporarily averted; continued peace conditional upon resignation of General Roca 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12]

concentration of forces in Buenos Ayres 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

conference between the President and Ex-President Sarmiento; commission appointed to confer with General Roca; conference at Rosario with Roca results unsatisfactorily 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

critical political situation; concentration of troops at Buenos Ayres; apprehension of civil war 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11]

discussion of the question of mediation in the difficuties between Chili and Peru, by this government 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

division of the chamber of deputies, the majority act with the rebels; the minority acting with the national government, declare the seats of the rebellious majority vacant, and order new elections 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

General Roca reported elected president: Madero vice-president 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

gold fallen in the market; Argentine stocks advanced; confidence of business men in the coming administration of General Roca 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 24]

hostility in, to Chili 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

interview between Roca and Tejedor, opposing presidential candidates; probability that a solution of the difficulties will be arrived at without reference to the candidature of either 21 [Pg. 21 includes portions of Doc. 15 and Doc. 16]

intimidation at the polls 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

peace established 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

political situation unchanged; the city of Buenos Ayres in possession of the municipal troops 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

preparations to oppose Chili, should the case require it 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

proclamation of the President 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 11]

prospects of revolution upon the coming presidential election 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

prospects of war with Chili; reconciling conflicting political elements 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

questions by national senate, sent to the President; answers of the President 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 23]

quiet election of members of Congress 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

refusal of Roca party to vote 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

resignation of Gonzales, minister of foreign affairs 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

South American continental exhibition 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9] (See Exhibitions.)

steady progress towards establishment of better feeling; Buenos Ayres under martial law until 30th of October, after inauguration of the President elect; no conditions offered the revolutionists; the names of all officers concerned in the revolution dropped from the lists by President’s decree 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

want of harmony between governor of Buenos Ayres province and legislature 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Arias, Commander of provincial forces of Buenos Ayres: engagement with national troops under General Racedo; communication with the city opened 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Armenians: their character as a people; their position under Turkish rule 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610]

Army: additions to German; infantry; field artillery; light artillery; pioneers; statistics 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260] bill for the extension of military enrollment in Sweden and Norway defeated; consequent resignation of the ministry and organization of new ministry 935 [Pg. 935 is part of Doc. 591]

impressment of American citizens for service in that of Mexico; report of Consul Schuchardt thereupon; the United States minister instructed to demand their instant release and indemnity 776–780 [Pgs. 776–780 include portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

increase, consolidation, and discipline of Haytien troops 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

manœuvers of the French, witnessed by officers of the United States 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241]

of Germany: military and naval expenditures; comparison between such expenditures in France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, Russia, and Austria-Hungary 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 266]

of Japan 669–676 [Pgs. 669–676 include portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425] (See Conscription law.)

parade of troops at Berlin; unequalled training of German soldiers 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

vain efforts of the United States minister to obtain permission of the President of Mexico for the entry upon her soil of United States troops in pursuit of hostile Indians and other marauders escaping across the borders 774–776 [Pgs. 774–776 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

and navy, Netherlands 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

Arnold, George: an American citizen, murdered in Michoacan, Mexico. 739–744 [Pgs. 739–744 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 745–752 [Pgs. 745–752 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

Arosemena, Dr.: his special mission offering mediation for the settlement of the war between Chili and Peru and Bolivia; his hope for intervention on the part of the United States 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107], 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109] (See Colombia.)

Arreola: leader of a band of cattle thieves in Mexico, consigned with part of his band to district judge of Coahuila for trial 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Assioût: Slave trade at; description of the place and of the vicinal facilities for carrying on trade in slaves; arrest of slave traders; commotion among interested Europeans on question of slave-trade in Egypt; ideas of the dominant native classes 1008–1012 [Pgs. 1008–1012 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé (see Railroads, Mexico) 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 454]

Atwater, Dorence, United Slates consul: French protectorate flag at Tahiti 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

Austria-Hungary: Civil Engineer Fads’ desire for information touching river improvements in the empire; memorandum transmitted by Minister Kasson 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29] effect of the English election; apprehensions concerning the observance of certain articles of the treaty of Berlin; change in the heads of many governments; the feeling against Mr. Gladstone 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

emigration from Upper Hungary to the United States, the Government of Hungary recommended to take steps to prevent it 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

growing cloud of war east of the Adriatic; repudiation of the Government of the Porte by Albania; the anti-Albanian decrees of the powers rejected 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

liquidation of Egyptian debt 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351] (See Egypt.)

river improvements; results attained; statistics 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 32]

Roumanian recognition; interest of the United States Government in the Hebrew race in foreign countries; desire to secure terms favorable to them in Roumania 35 [Pg. 35 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

rumors regarding alliance between, and German Empire 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 257]

State railways 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 270] (See Railroads.)

statistics of the population of “the new annexed provinces” 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Avellaneda, President of the Argentine Republic: demands for his resignation; proclamation and decree ordering disarmament of troops 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11], 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 11], 15 [Pg. 15 is part of Doc. 11] he asks permission of Congress to place the province of Buenos Ayres under martial law; permission refused; he leaves the city 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

he declares Tejedor a rebel, and refuses to return to the city until the insurrection is suppressed 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Avalos, Zeferino: convicted and executed for the murder of a fellow-citizen in Texas; record of his trial and conviction; application for pardon refused; review of the case; the sentence; article 186 of the Mexican penal code; value of precedent established by the case 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 713–719 [Pgs. 713–719 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

B.

Babson, F. J.: (see Fortune Bay outrage.) 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 361]

Bailey, David H., United States consul-general at Shanghai: transmits letter to Mr. Seward 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 137]

Baird: (see Fishery Exhibition, &c.) 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258] letters with reference to international exchange of works of science and art 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 570], 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571]

Balt, Mark: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 375]

Bancroft: late minister to Germany from the United States; his interpretation of treaty of 1868 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282] (See Treaty.)

Bandinel, J. J. F., United States consul (see war power of China) 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 171]

Bandman, C. J., of New York: contract with Venezuelan Government for construction of railways 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662]

Bank, National: establishment of in Hayti 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 397], 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400] report of the Imperial Ottoman 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609]

Barcelona, Venezuela: decree substituting port of, for that of Ciudad Bolivar 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658]

Bavaria: opposition to imperial control of railroads 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 270] (See Railroads.)

Bayley, S. P., United States consul at Palermo: report on Mormon emigration from Italy 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]

Becker, Benjamin: naturalization case of, at Berlin 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282]

Belgium: accessions from, to Mormon colony in Utah 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54] (See Mormon.)

heavy rainfalls and inundation; great danger to the crops 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

proposition to suppress the word “alone” in Article XII of the Consular Convention with the United States 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59]

resumption of diplomatic relations with Mexico 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467]

return of the Belgian ambassador to Rome; passage of the school bill; manifesto of the priesthood; attempts against the life of the King 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 49]

the opening and management of a permanent exhibition of arts, science, commerce, and industry in Brussels; the establishment of sample-rooms for American products 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Belgrano: government removed to; reply to United States minister’s offers of mediation, by national government 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Berlin: International Fishery Exhibition 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 259] (See Fishery.)

parade of troops; efficiency of the German Army 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

Berlin treaty: Austria’s benefits from, causing a change in the apparent relations between Russia and Germany; Germany and Austria form an alliance for the execution of; England’s interest in the alliance; apprehensions of war 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 257], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 257] conference of the powers at Berlin; countries represented; names of the representatives; direction and position of boundary; Austria’s tendency to hold back; decision of the conference not acceptable to the Porte; to what power can the succession at Constantinople be given 439–441 [Pgs. 439–441 include portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Bismarck: arguments on the railroad bill, 1876 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 270] (See Railroads; history of, in Prussia.)

tenders his resignation to the Emperor; cause of this action; disproportionate representation in the Federal Council; the Emperor declines to accept his resignation; reform needed in representation 405–407 [Pgs. 405–407 include portions of Doc. 267, Doc. 268, and Doc. 269]

visit of, to Vienna and enthusiastic reception of, by the people; he signs the alliance between Germany and Austria 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 257] (See Berlin treaty.)

Blair: transfer of, charter (see Mexico) 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 454]

Blanco, Guzman, provisional president of Venezuela: decrees closing port of Ciudad Bolivar, virtually blockading the Orinoco and providing for marine station and tribunal at Carúpano 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658] his message to Congress 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 660], 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662]

Block, Elie: naturalization case of, at Berlin 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282]

Blockade: Arica and Mollendo blockaded by Chili; American doctrine as to what entitles a blockade to the recognition of neutrals; to be binding, must be effectual 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 526]

Blyden, Dr. E. W.: confirmed as secretary of the interior in Liberia; elected president of Liberia College 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Boisselier, Richard W. and Casper D.: naturalization cases of, at Berlin, favorably settled 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 286]

Bolivia: armistice favorably considered by prominent cabinet officers apprehensions that La Paz will be moved upon by Chilian forces 81 [Pg. 81 includes portions of Doc. 68 and Doc. 69] death of the minister of foreign relations; the United States minister informed officially; his reply 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, and Doc. 62], 76 [Pg. 76 includes portions of Doc. 62 and Doc. 63], 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

decree authorizing privateers 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64] (See Treaty.)

election of General Campero as president; indications of a strong government; prosecution of the war with Chili; new levies of men; the revenues of the republic pledged for war; proposed unification of Peru and Bolivia 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

exchange of prisoners of war with Chili 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

in the war with Chili and Peru, Columbia offers mediation; interest of the United States therein 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, and Doc. 62], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

protocol of preliminary bases of Federal Union of Peru and 848–851 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 537] (See Union.)

resignation of the provisional president and general in command of the allied forces; failure of Congress to elect a president 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 66 and Doc. 67]

Bonanza, schooner: claim against Great Britain 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Bonded warehouses: in China 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Bosnia-Herzegovina: revision of the enumeration of the census; statistics of towns and population 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Boundaries: undefined, of Brazil; mission concerning, to Venezuela; dispute concerning, between Colombia and Costa Rica 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207], 326 [Pg. 326 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Bove, Stephen: claimant of an estate in Holland, alleged to have been bequeathed to him; origin and purpose of rumors of such legacies 813–816 [Pgs. 813–816 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]

Boxer, British man-of-war: sheltering Haytien revolutionists 617 [Pg. 617 includes portions of Doc. 391 and Doc. 392]

Brandt, William: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 286]

Brandt von, Mr.: German minister at Peking; his views with reference to the official intercourse question; free access to provincial authorities 463 [Pg. 463 includes portions of Doc. 294, Doc. 295, and Doc. 296], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Bray, John W., schooner: claim against Great Britain 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Brazil: application of M. de Lesseps to the Emperor for laborers to accomplish his interoceanic canal scheme 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72] (See Canal.)

closing of the second session of the legislature by the Emperor; the electoral reform bill left over; the speech from the throne; the extraordinary session called to consider the electoral reform bill 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

contemplated withdrawal of line of steamships between, and New York; trade of much value 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

counterfeiting paper currency of, in the United States; punishment of the crime 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

death of two eminent statesmen; their work and characters 87 [Pg. 87 includes portions of Doc. 72 and Doc. 73]

decision of the United States Supreme Court concerning trade marks; effects in Brazil 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30], 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76] (See trade marks.)

discussion of an electoral reform bill; improbability of its passage; eligibility of non-Catholics and naturalized Brazilians to office; emancipation of slaves 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

increase of taxation 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77] (See Treasury.)

intended appointment of a minister to China; United States offers friendly welcome and moral support on part of United States minister there 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92]

issue of paper currency and government bonds; a loan authorized to consolidate the floating debt and to liquidate the budget of 1878–79; success of the loan, &c. (See Treasury) 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]

rejection of the electoral reform bill; the legislature adjourned; tenure and characters of senators and deputies; unsettled condition of affairs 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

resignation of the ministry; another chosen by Mr. Saraiva; liberal policy and views of the new ministry 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 77 and Doc. 78]

the Emperor asked to name a third commissioner under the French-American convention of January 15, 1880; Mr. Outrey’s communications 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83] (See Commission.)

the labor question; scarcity of labor; probability that the government will take steps to induce Chinese immigration; de Lesseps will draw no laborers from Brazil 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 71] (See Labor.)

the vessel, Foster, overcharged per ton by custom-house authorities in New York; Brazilian vessels entitled to exemption therefrom; proclamation of President Polk on this question, &c. (See Shipping) 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 88 and Doc. 89], 103 [Pg. 103 includes portions of Doc. 90, Doc. 91, and Doc. 92], 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]

British Columbia: alleged trespass on fishery grounds of 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 330] (See Fisheries.)

British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society: letter of the secretary to the London Times on slave traffic in Egypt 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 653], 1025 [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 653]

British subjects: destruction of the property of, by Chilian feet; Lord Salisbury’s remonstrance 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 118]

Brussels: festivities in the city; opening of the national exhibition; review of the troops; unveiling of the statue of Leopold I 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54] international congress of commerce and industry 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57] (See Congress.)

Bryson, Admiral: his arrival at Buenos Ayres 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

Bucaramanga: cause and account of riot in 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 199], 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200]

Buchanan, John, M. D.: (see Diplomas) 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

Buenos Ayres: address of the governor to the people, reviewing the course of events 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 24] Admiral Bryson’s arrival at the port; his arrangements for salutes 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

apprehensions of invasion; General Roca’s troops in adjoining province 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 15]

bloody battle near the city on the 21st inst.; the national forces victorious; attack upon the city; repulse of Arias; the city Surrounded; peace expected soon 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

declared a free port to all articles necessary for consumption; post-office closed; no mail service 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

declared permanent capital of the republic; return of Congress from Belgrano 34 [Pg. 34 includes portions of Doc. 25 and Doc. 26]

great confusion of affairs; the President and a part of his cabinet at Belgrano; the port closed; the city declared in a state of siege; destruction of railroad tracks and telegraph lines running from the city 24 [Pg. 24 includes portions of Doc. 17 and Doc. 18]

intense political excitement; passage of a bill by chamber of deputies, appropriating $5,000,000 to arm the province; its probable passage by the senate 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 15]

intention of the authorities to inclose and reduce the city, not to bombard it 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

landing of guns and rifles to arm the province 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

political situation in; congressional election in; in possession of troops 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11]

proposition to remove seat of government from, or to federalize the city; much public feeling excited thereby 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

report by Colonel Tisdel upon the feasibility of extending a line of American steamers from New York to Rio, as far as Buenos Ayres; encouraged by the President; a market for American products, but no steamships to bring them; subsidy assured by the government 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

resignation of Tejedor as governor; the lieutenant-governor acting; terms of the surrender of Tejedor 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

the commercial community call upon the United States minister, asking his mediation between the contending parties; his reply, acceding to the request 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21], 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 21]

the legislature disbanded by the President; a new one ordered elected; probability that it will be in harmony with the national government 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 24]

Bülow, von, minister of state and secretary of state for foreign affairs, Germany: his death 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

Bunker Hill, schooner: claim against Great Britain 552 [Pg. 552 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Burnato, Felipe: impressment for service in Mexican army; report of his case by United States Consul Schuchardt 776–780 [Pgs. 776–780 include portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

C.

Calcutta: trial at, of John Anderson 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308] (See Anderson.)

Callao: its projected blockade and bombardment by Chilian fleet; time allowed non-belligerents, neutrals, and neutral vessels to leave; flight of inhabitants to Lima 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533], 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]

Campero: elected president of Bolivia; after his repulse at Tacua 80 [Pg. 80 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68] (See Bolivia.)

Canada: citizens of, desire to visit Kentucky to purchase short-horned cattle 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342] (See Cattle.)

fishermen fishing on the United States side of Lake Ontario 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314] (See Fisheries.)

incursions of Indians from, to the United States 497 [Pg. 497 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324] (See Indians.)

privilege of transit of American cattle through 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339] (See Cattle.)

unlading of foreign vessels in ports of; transportation of merchandise to, from, and through 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360] (See Commerce.)

Canal: application of M. de Lesseps to the Emperor of Brazil for laborers to work upon the interoceanic; interest awakened therein in Brazil 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72] (See Brazil.)

de Lesseps’ Panama enterprise; the French Government not concerned in it 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

Canton: necessity for appointment of all interpreter at Canton for United States consulate 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131] (See Compensation.)

war power of; report of vice-consul Cheshire in charge 274–276 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 171], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 172] (See Education.)

Cape Verde Islands: United States naval cemetery at Porto Grande, St. Vincent; transfer of the dead from the new to the old 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 539], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542]

Carúpano, Venezuela: decree providing for marine station and tribunal at 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658]

Cattle: desire of Canadian citizens to purchase short-horned Kentucky; importance of modifying regulations concerning their importation into Canada 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344] plague in China; quarantine in Japan against Chinese; instructions of the United States minister to Japan enforcing the quarantine 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 430]

privilege of transit through and rest in Canada, of American 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

report of committee of privy council of Canada on importation of, from the United States; law with reference to diseases of, treats the United States as one country 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 349 and Doc. 350]

theft of, by band under leadership of Robert Martin. (See Martin.) 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 503]

Cattle-thieves: release of sixteen, in Mexico and their return, at the government expense, to the scene of their former depredations. (See Arreola.) 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Center, Addison. (See Fortune Bay outrage.) 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 361]

Central America: abuse of the claim to American protection abroad; expatriation, how effected; the case of Maassen 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 98] (See Citizenship.)

recognition, of an appointee as United States consul contrary to the rules of the government 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96] (See Consuls.)

Charleston: loss of cotton-laden ships by fire 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

Charter: transfer of Blair, Mexico 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 454]

Cheshire, F. D. (See War power of China.) 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 171]

Cluett, John: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 375]

Chihuahua: incursions and depredations of Indians in, reported by the United States consul; consequent action of the Interior and War Departments of the United States Government; Government of Mexico requested to aid in ssuppression of Indians on the border; report of the general commanding the Department of the Missouri 708–711 [Pgs. 708–711 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451] letters from governor of, to Mexican department of foreign relations with reference to thefts of cattle, &c., by Robert Martin’s band 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 503], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504]

progress and results of revolution in; American interests affected; forced loan upon American citizens; rights and privileges of the United States consul and consulate 722–724 [Pgs. 722–724 include portions of Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456]

Chilé: arrest of Mr. John E. Wheelock, an American citizen, and his maltreatment at the hands of an officer of the Venezuelan Government 1029 [Pg. 1029 is part of Doc. 656]

Chili: confident of success in war with Peru; the principal cause of the war; capture of the Huascar; hostility of the Argentine Republic 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110] depredations of fleet of, at Lobos Islands and Eten 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532]

destruction by fleet of American property at Talara; to be brought to the attention of the government 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112]

efforts on the parts of France, Italy, and Great Britain in the interests of peace; recuperation of the army 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

her desire for conquest; the nitre and guano districts; military order 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114] (See Commerce.)

mediation of the United States, &c 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314] (See Mediation.)

message of the President to Congress; parts relating to commerce 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120] (See Commerce.)

necessity of vigorous measures by, against Peru; destruction of the property of foreigners; precedents for her course; military necessity of certain acts 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 125] (See Neutrals.)

offers of mediation on the part of Colombia; appointment of Arosemena as special envoy 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107] (See Colombia.)

order of the minister of war; bombardment and destruction of all Peruvian coast towns directed; meeting of the diplomatic corps: large proportion of foreigners in coast towns of Peru; note of the United States minister to the minister of war 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117]

proposed exchange of prisoners of war with Bolivia 78 [Pg. 78 includes portions of Doc. 64, Doc. 65, and Doc. 66]

proposed shipment of a torpedo-boat from Bristol, R. I., to be used against Chili in the war with Peru and Bolivia; alleged violation of neutrality laws 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

reply of the minister of foreign relations to the notes of the diplomatic corps concerning the recent order of the minister of war; character of the Chilian soldiery; apprehensions of armed intervention from Europe unfounded 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

status of foreign-built ships owned by Americans 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110] (See Shipping.)

the minister of foreign relations asks aid of the United States legation in the matter of exchange of prisoners with Bolivia 127 [Pg. 127 includes portions of Doc. 112 and Doc. 113], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 115, Doc. 116, and Doc. 117], 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123]

the war spirit in the ascendency; probable change of ministry; confusion of internal affairs; rumor of intervention on the part of the United States 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109]

vessels of, exempt from tonnage tax higher than 30 cents per ton 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126] (See Treasury.)

China: case of Chung How 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 155] (See Chung How.)

commercial grievances; the action of foreign representatives in conference at Peking, &c 223–225 [Pgs. 223–225 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, and Doc. 153] (See Commerce.)

commission to negotiate treaty, appointed by the President of the United States, 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

concession of new trading ports 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 134] (See Commerce.)

conference of foreign ministers in, to consider questions relating to taxation of foreign manufactures and foreign owned produce; official intercourse and judicial proceedings; extinction of the Foochow trade committee 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127]

currency in 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135], 263 [Pg. 263 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167] (See Currency.)

discussion by an assemblage of representatives of all the treaty powers in, of the lekin taxes, transit pass system, the judicial system and official intercourse 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

dispute with Japan 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139] (See Lew Chew Islands.)

education in 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 172] (See Education.)

embassy from Brazil to be sent to; United States minister instructed to extend welcome and moral support 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

emigration from, to the Sandwich Islands 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157] (See Emigration.)

emigration of natives from; penal code of, in reference to emigration 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 184] (See Emigration.)

imperial decree in the case of Chung How 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142] (See Chung How.)

issue and surrender of transit passes (outwards) 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 166] (See Commerce.)

judicial torture in; extracts from North China Herald, and Supreme Court and Consular Gazette 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 178]

lekin taxes only a temporary expedient 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 153] (See Lord.)

mixed cases, civil and criminal in, to be determined in court of defendant 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147]

no laws of copright in 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

opinion of Dr. Lord, United States consul at Ningpo 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153] (See Lord.)

penal code of; renunciation of allegiance 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 184]

proposed conference of foreign representatives with the Yamên concerning trade grievances; recapitulation of certain grievances 223–225 [Pgs. 223–225 include portions of Doc. 151, Doc. 152, and Doc. 153]

proposed rules for the issue of outward transit passes; the Yamên unprepared to discuss the question 201 [Pg. 201 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 140]

propositions upon rules of taxation submitted by the German minister 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 134]

protocol inviting attention of government of, to report of diplomatic committee at Peking, on official intercourse 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

readiness of the Yamên to consider representation put forward by diplomatic corps, &c. 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136] (See Tsung-li Yamên.)

recognition of Her Majesty’s supreme court for China and Japan 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 134]

reduction by Congress of the salaries of interpreters; necessity of adequate compensation in order to obtain competent interpreters 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131] (See Tientsin, Foo-chow, Canton.)

report of committee of foreign ministers at Peking upon extraterritorial system 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

report of the diplomatic committee on the administration of justice in, accepted; memoranda of the United States minister, the protocol and joint note in reference thereto 145–167 [Pgs. 145–167 include portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, Doc. 133, and Doc. 134]

rules for the issue of transit passes 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138], 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

suppression of the Taiping rebellion; the reconquest of Ili 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 142] (See Chung How.)

taxes upon native produce designed for shipment by foreigners; lekin 230 [Pg. 230 is part of Doc. 153] (See Lord.)

the collection of inland duties; on payment of transit dues, goods to be exempt from further inland charges; rendered a dead letter by a new tariff rule; single payment commutation for all inland dues 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 134]

the missionary question 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 153] (See Lord.)

the standard tael 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 164] (See Coin.)

tonnage dues, or registration fees, upon lighterage boats; the rule apparently unauthorized by the foreign office 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 158]

trade grievances,; rigid adherence to former position by foreign office; willingness to discuss measures for the removal of the grievances 216–218 [Pgs. 216–218 include portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 254 [Pg. 254 includes portions of Doc. 162 and Doc. 163]

transit trade outwards; restrictive measures altering treaty stipulations; objectionable rules and penalties; restrictions upon the transport of produce from the interior 259–261 [Pgs. 259–261 include portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

treaties allow foreigners to lease land; lekin and barrier dues; transit dues; levies exacted in violation of law; tax upon native productions; articles intended for personal use of foreigners exempt from duty; tonnage dues 218–220 [Pgs. 218–220 include portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150] (See Tonnage dues.)

unwillingness of, to make treaties 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 153] (See Lord.)

war power of 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171] (See Consuls.)

Chin Kiang: war power of; report of Consul Scruggs 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 171], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 171], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 172] (See Education.)

Chishem, P. B.: (See Forced Loan.) 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

Cholera in Japan 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

Chung How: Chinese minister to Russia: imperial decree in his case attracting much attention; his rank and character; his offense 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142] circumstances under which he was sent to St. Petersburg; negotiation of treaty with Russia; his confidence in the powers conferred upon him; charge of high treason preferred against him by Tso Chung Tang 208–210 [Pgs. 208–210 include portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

counsel of Prince Rung in case of, listened to; his death sentence temporarily remitted 286–288 [Pgs. 286–288 include portions of Doc. 172, Doc. 173, and Doc. 174]

did he exceed his instructions? probable rejection of the treaty made by him 210 [Pg. 210 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

efforts to avert his punishment commended 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

his fate still unknown; practical rejection, by the Chinese, of his treaty; said to have exceeded his instructions; consideration of punishment to be inflicted upon him; his removal from office, and punishnment, decreed 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 155], 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157]

in serious danger of capital punishment; action of the representatives of the United States, England, Germany, and France in the matter 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 151], 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 151]

sentenced to death; defended by Prince Kung and his associates; Imperial approval of the sentence 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157], 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 157]

suspension of his sentence appreciated at Washington 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

treaty negotiated by 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 168] (See Treaties.)

unconditionally set at liberty; gratification of the government at Washington thereat 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 176 and Doc. 177], 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Circulars: to consuls and diplomatic officers of the United States 1–8 [Pgs. 1–8 include portions of Doc. 1, Doc. 2, Doc. 3, Doc. 4, and Doc. 5]

Citizenship: expatriation, how effected; claim to protection abroad, &c.; the case of aliens 108 [Pg. 108 is part of Doc. 98] (See Central America.)

Guatemala; who are native citizens of; rights of natives; rights of foreigners 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 100], 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

City of Mexico: contract for railroad and telegraph from Acapulco to, approved by the President; terms of the contract 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 483 and Doc. 484]

Cuidad Bolivar: decree closing port of, and substituting that of Barcelona 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658] insurrection at; consequent closing of the port; suppression of the outbreak by a counter movement originating in the state of Guayana 1032–1034 [Pgs. 1032–1034 include portions of Doc. 657, Doc. 658, Doc. 659, and Doc. 660]

Civil matters: proceedings in China in, against foreigners 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 133] (See Memorandum.)

Claims: against the late Lew Chew Han must be presented to finance department of Japanese Government before May 30, 1880; proclamation; method of paying; method of collecting dues 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435], 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436] nationality of applicants in, arising out of Franco-German war, not recorded; presented through organized commissions, not through embassies; case of Miltz 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

resolution passed by Liberian legislature for settlement of the United States Government’s claim for ordnance 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

“Cleopatra’s Needle”: (See Obelisk.) 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630]

Coahuila: campaign against Indians in; escape of many Indians from reservations and their alleged refuge 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458] trial of cattle thieves by district judge of 763 [Pg. 763 includes portions of Doc. 479 and Doc. 480]

Coaling stations: establishment of, in Colombian Territory by United States; purchase of lands; object of the visits of the Adams and Kearsarge 335–343 [Pgs. 335–343 include portions of Doc. 212, Doc. 213, Doc. 214, Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219]

Code: “Napoleon,” proposed urgence of its adoption upon the Chinese 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 133] (See Mixed courts.)

penal, of China; its defects, &c 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 133] (See Mixed courts.)

Cohen, Levi A.: accredited agent to Morocco, of the board of delegates of Union of American Hebrew Congregations in New York; desire for the co-operation of United States Consul Matthews in looking after, the interest of Jews in Morocco 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513]

Coin: no gold or silver, issued by Chinese Government; bullion, chiefly silver, used as currency; the relative value of the standard tael to foreign coins not determined; the treasury tael recommended; reforms suggested 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 164], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 164] value of foreign, arbitrarily fixed in China 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 134] (See Statement of grievances.)

Coinage: statistics of, in Servia 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

Collisions at sea: prevention of 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300] (See Regulations for preventing collisions at sea.)

conflicts of jurisdiction in the decision of cases; necessity for adoption of international regulations 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589]

Colombia: anxiety on account of undefined boundaries of Brazil 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195] (See Boundaries.)

asking co-operation in the establishment of peace between Chili and Peru and Bolivia 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

custody of registers of United States vessels in ports of 312 [Pg. 312 is part of Doc. 197] (See Shipping.)

custody of ships’ registers; convention concerning custody of ships’ papers 488 [Pg. 488 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 489 [Pg. 489 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

excessive tariff of postal charges in, on correspondence for the United States 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

harmony established between Chili and; treaty executed referring disputed questions to arbitration by the President of the United States 331 [Pg. 331 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

increased postal facilities with 332 [Pg. 332 includes portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211] (See Postal Union.)

modification of transit protocol for Isthmus of Panama 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

offers of mediation by special mission of Arosemena to Chili and Peru and Bolivia 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, and Doc. 62], 309 [Pg. 309 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194] (See Mediation.)

operations of the United States vessels Adams and Kearsarge; order of President Cervera 323 [Pg. 323 includes portions of Doc. 204 and Doc. 205] (See Adams and Kearsarge.)

President of Venezuela purchasing arms in Europe with purpose of war with; secret treaty between Guzman Blanco and Ecuador 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

reported unfriendliness of Government of, towards the United States; interest of in fourth of July celebration; resolution by Senate of 324 [Pg. 324 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 325 [Pg. 325 includes portions of Doc. 206 and Doc. 207]

right of transport across the Isthmus of Panama claimed by the United States; transportation, on the Isthmus, of prisoners of the United States 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 320 [Pg. 320 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

riot at Bucaramanga 310 [Pg. 310 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195] (See Bucaramanga.)

rules for the deposit of ships’ papers 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198] (See Shipping.)

the United States appreciates the course of, in relation to Chili and Peru and Bolivia 318 [Pg. 318 includes portions of Doc. 199 and Doc. 200], 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Commerce: (See, also, Shipping, Steamship lines, Railroads, Taxation, Lekin, Tonnage dues, Emigration, and under names of countries.) Africa: proposed commercial treaty between Liberians and Mandingo negroes 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 439], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Argentine Republic: Buenos Ayres declared a free port for all necessary articles of consumption 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21] fall of gold in markets of 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 24]

report by Colonel Tisdel upon feasibility of establishing steamship lines between the United States and; market for American products 33 [Pg. 33 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

Austria-Hungary: river improvments in 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 32]

Belgium: international congress at Brussels 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57] (See Congress.)

Brazil: value of commerce with 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79] vessel Foster, overcharged by custom-house authorities in New York 102–105 [Pgs. 102–105 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]

British North American possessions: revision of regulations recommended 508–510 [Pgs. 508–510 include portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335]

Canada: transit through, of American cattle. (See Cattle) 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339] unlading of foreign vessels in ports of; regulation concerning; transportation of merchandise to, from, and through 529 [Pg. 529 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361]

Chili: message of the President to Congress; the ordinary consequences of the war but little felt; statistics of commerce and finance 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120] vessels of, exempt from tonnage tax of over 30 cents per ton 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126] (See Treasury.)

China: concession of four new trading ports, two on the great river, and two on the coast; desire of the Shanghai Chamber of Commerce that all ports in China be thrown open to commerce 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 134] export trade discussed by M. von Brandt, German minister to; transit passes; authorities at Canton instructed to issue them when required 29 [Pg. 29 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

grievances in commercial affairs; action of representatives of foreign powers in conference at Peking; intent of the treaties; proposals of the Chefoo convention; position of Chinese Government; lekin taxes; ownership of produce from foreign countries 167–170 [Pgs. 167–170 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134] (See Treaty.)

inland duties on opium 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

readiness of the Yamên to consider report on commercial questions by diplomatic committee at Peking. (See Official intercourse) 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

regulation governing exportation of goods bought or manufactured in port 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 166]

the Wo Chung 303–305 [Pgs. 303–305 include portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, and Doc. 190]

transit passes outwards; rules governing their issue and surrender; regulation governing coastwise shipment of native produce, duty free 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 166], 262 [Pg. 262 is part of Doc. 166]

transport of produce to ports in. (See China: transit trade outwards) 259 [Pg. 259 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

Cuba: question of commercial reforms in 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 574]

Germany: commercial interests of, in Samoa; defeat of the Samoan hill 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277] (See Bismarck.)

Great Britain: exclusion of United States vessels from the carrying of government stores 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

Hawaii: cotton clothing manufactured in the United States, of native material, to be free of duty 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 377] custom-house statistics; importation of machinery from Great Britain and the United States; value of dutiable goods imported from various countries; value of bonded goods and spirits; value of non-dutiable goods from the United States; resumé 602–604 [Pgs. 602–604 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385]

large importations of foreign rice; export of rice to the United States 606–614 [Pgs. 606–614 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391] (See Rice.)

register of American schooners under flag of 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

seizure and libel of bark Kalakaua: (See Kalakaua.) 592–595 [Pgs. 592–595 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, and Doc. 380]

Hayti: desire for foreign capital in 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 397] message of the President, to Congress; extension of commerce hoped for 641–644 [Pgs. 641–644 include portions of Doc. 409, Doc. 410, and Doc. 411]

Honduras: closing of ports of Utilla and Bonca; action of officials against American vessels 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 99] (See Tonnage dues.)

Japan: Chamber of Commerce recommends revision of treaty; statistics of customs dues 657–661 [Pgs. 657–661 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422] opening of new ports, consequent upon the demand for Japanese coal; ad valorem duties should be made specific; necessity of bonded warehouses; system of drawbacks 664–666 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 422]

quarantine against plague-infected cattle from China 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 430]

rules reforming appraisement and system of imposing duties on imports; limiting payment of customs duties to standard currency; table of taxes; table of exports; dutiable articles of export; gold and silver coin 666–668 [Pgs. 666–668 include portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Liberia: proposed treaty of commerce with Mandingoes; interest of the United States in extension of foreign commerce of 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 439], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

Matacong: seizure of, by the French, for purposes of revenue; threatened disaster to trade 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Mexico: customs regulations 495–497 [Pgs. 495–497 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324] effects of the Zona libre upon commercial interests of the United States 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 456]

Monrovia: diversion of Central African trade from Sierra Leone to 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 439], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Montenegro: products and commerce of; ports of 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Netherlands 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

Peru: exportation of nitre; military order regarding exportation of guano; determination of Chili to arrest the nitre and guano trade 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114], 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 118] right of foreign-built ships to sail under American flag 824–826 [Pgs. 824–826 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523]

right of United States consul at Iquique to grant clearances to vessels shipping nitrates, in question; right of foreign vessels; rights of United States vessels covered by treaty 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 527], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

Portugal: export duty on cork; import duty on coal, coke, cotton-seed oil, and coffee; additional tax on merchandise imported 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

Servia: rights of the Jews in commercial affairs 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Society Islands: trade with, under flag of the French protectorate 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

United States: differential duties upon indirect colonial importation of the Netherlands 806–809 [Pgs. 806–809 include portions of Doc. 513, Doc. 514, and Doc. 515] trading vessels interfered with by Spanish cruisers 922–927 [Pgs. 922–927 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582]

Venezuela: decrees of the provisional president seriously affecting commerce; suppression of the custom-house at Ciudad Bolivar and closing of the port; substitution of the port of Guzman Blanco or Barcelona; closing of commerce on the Orinoco 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658] the President’s message to Congress 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 660], 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662]

vessels bound to ports of the Orinoco to be detained by government vessels and cargoes to be proceeded against; this is to take effect for vessels from the Antilles fifteen days after publication of notice; thirty days for vessels from the United States, and forty-five days for vessels from Europe 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658]

Commission: French American claims; third commissioner to be named by the Emperor of Brazil; Baron de Arinos named 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81], 98 [Pg. 98 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 82 and Doc. 83] (See Brazil.)

Commission of liquidation in Egypt: “adhesion” of the United States asked, to its decisions; its work nearly completed; assent given by all the powers except the United States, Greece, and Russia; satisfactory conclusions arrived at by the commission 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646] appointment of 1015–1017 [Pgs. 1015–1017 include portions of Doc. 644, Doc. 645, and Doc. 646]

final views and action of the United States Government concerning 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652], 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 652 and Doc. 653] (See pages 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344] and 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351].)

necessity for; decree instituting; members appointed by the Khedive; declaration of governments concerned 1001–1007 [Pgs. 1001–1007 include portions of Doc. 636, Doc. 637, Doc. 638, Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and Doc. 641]

only five powers represented in; dissatisfaction of Russia; decisions of the courts at Alexandria with reference to questions which may be changed or settled by this commission 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642]

reserve of rights with relation to, by the United States 1017 [Pg. 1017 includes portions of Doc. 645 and Doc. 646]

the Government of the United States changes its recent decision and grants adhesion to the scheme; adjournment of the commission 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651]

Compensation: inadequate for interpreters at Tientsin, Foo-Chow, and Canton; salary of $2,500 recommended 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131] (See Interpreters.)

Conference at Madrid to discuss measures for the protection of Jews in Morocco: initiative taken by the Spanish Government; allegations of abuse of the privileges of protection, by foreign representatives 893–895 [Pgs. 893–895 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, and Doc. 577], 896 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 577]

Congress: international industrial; Mr. Noyes and Mr. Putnam appointed delegates to; the question of trade-marks not to be submitted to; commission appointed by; draft of treaty by the commission; patents; trade-marks; designs and models; commercial name; conference at Paris 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 382 [Pg. 382 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 246], 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 252], 388 [Pg. 388 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253] international, of commerce and industry at Brussels; the United States invited to appoint one or more delegates; Mr. Putnam and Mr. Wilson appointed 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57], 73 [Pg. 73 includes portions of Doc. 57, Doc. 58, and Doc. 59], 74 [Pg. 74 includes portions of Doc. 59 and Doc. 60]

Connolly, John: an American citizen murdered in Michoacan, Mexico 739–742 [Pgs. 739–742 include portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 745–755 [Pgs. 745–755 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

Conscription law in Japan: boundaries of conscription districts 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 424] conscription officers and their duties 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 424], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 424]

drawing by lot 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 424], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 424]

examination of conscripts 673 [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 424]

exclusion and exemption from service and postponement of conscription 671–673 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 424]

miscellaneous rules 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 424]

number of conscripts; quotas for the seven military departments; supplemental conscripts; standard height of different classes of soldiers 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 424], 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]

the enlisting of conscripts 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 424], 670 [Pg. 670 is part of Doc. 424]

Constellation: thanks of Great Britain to the United States for services and cargo of 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341] boarded by British customs officers on her arrival at Queenstown; Captain Potter’s protest; their removal asked; their departure and subsequent return; their final departure; their action strongly disapproved by British Government; Lord Tenterden’s expressions of regret; fifty-second section of regulations 476–479 [Pgs. 476–479 include portions of Doc. 305, Doc. 306, Doc. 307, and Doc. 308]

Constitution of the French Republic: assembly at first in favor of a monarchy; a republic proclaimed; Thiers driven from the presidency by “a vote of blame”; Marshal MacMahon elected and his powers prolonged; committee appointed to report upon constitutional laws 368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 241] legislative; the chamber of deputies; mode of election; quotas for the several arrondissements; functions of the deputies; term of service; quotas for dependencies 375–378 [Pgs. 375–378 include portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

the legislative power; how exercised; composition of the senate; quotas of members from the several departments and dependencies; mode of election; requirements for eligibility; term of service; powers of the senate 369–371 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 241]

the president; mode of his election; his functions and powers; his responsibility 371–373 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 241]

the republic established by vote of 425 to 254; piecemeal adoption of; no mention of the judiciary; not a symmetrical document 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 241]

Constitution: proposed amendments to that of Norway and Sweden 937–939 [Pgs. 937–939 include portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594] protocol of proposed, for Peru and Bolivia 848–851 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 537]

Consuls: circulars to, at seaports; legal status, &c., of foreign-built vessels purchased abroad and wholly owned by United States citizens; a case in point; tonnage dues; shipment and discharge of crew; treasury regulation in regard to this class of vessels; rulings and instructions of department 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 8 [Pg. 8 is part of Doc. 5] circular to, relating to the framing of rules for the working of the transit-pass system in China 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

circular to, requesting reports upon all subjects calculated to advance commercial and industrial interests of the United States; reports to be published frequently; duplicate copies of reports no longer required 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 4 [Pg. 4 is part of Doc. 3]

duties of, in transactions concerning the purchase and uses of foreign-built vessels by Americans (see Shipping) 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

fees allowed for examination of ships, &c., to prevent spread of contagious diseases (see Health) 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

in China, to withstand levy of tonnage dues or registration fee on lighters 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

merchants as; objection to them. (See Lord) 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 153]

rank in mixed court 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 162]

recognition of a United States consul contrary to rules of the government in Central America. (See Central America) 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 95 and Doc. 96]

reports of, on war power of China. (See War Power of China) 274–280 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 171]

Contraband law in Mexico: arrest of Messrs. Kemp and Jacobson for alleged violations of 730–734 [Pgs. 730–734 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463]

Convention: consular with Belgium. (See Belgium) 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 55, Doc. 56, and Doc. 57]

Copyright: no law of, in China 300 [Pg. 300 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Cotton: clothing made from, grown and manufactured in the United States to be duty free in Hawaii 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 377] ships laden with, lost by tire at Charleston and New Orleans; reward offered by government of Louisiana for apprehension of incendiaries 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338], 517 [Pg. 517 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

Courts, mixed, in China: (See Mixed Courts) 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 133] recognition of English supreme, for China and Japan 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 134]

Crest of the Wave, schooner: claim against Great Britain 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Criminal matters: proceedings in China in, against foreigners 146 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 133] (See Memorandum.)

Crops: damage to in Belgium by inundation and heavy rainfalls 66 [Pg. 66 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

Cuba: proposed law for emancipation of slaves in 891–893 [Pgs. 891–893 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

Currency: amount and nature of, in Hayti; no paper; foreign bullion; absence of banks; no gold or silver mines worked in Hayti; import and export of gold and silver; statistics; no standard coin for minting operations in Hayti 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 404] branch of imperial mint established at Tokio; regulations for receiving bullion for coinage alt the branch office; charges for premelting; charges for coinage 653–655 [Pgs. 653–655 include portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

Brazil: counterfeiting paper money of, in the United States 100 [Pg. 100 includes portions of Doc. 83, Doc. 84, and Doc. 85], 101 [Pg. 101 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

coinage of the Bavarian Government; desire for the remonetization of silver in Germany 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

fluctuation of, in Turkey; relative value of Ottoman moneys 969 [Pg. 969 is part of Doc. 608]

Peru: decree concerning its improvement; value of the paper note 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 525] depreciation of paper soles; consequent decree with purpose of regulating prices of the necessaries of life 845–847 [Pgs. 845–847 include portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537]

precious metals passed by weight in China; no mints in China; value of foreign coins not definitely fixed; the Kuping tæl; the Haikwan tæl; multiplication of standards 263–265 [Pgs. 263–265 include portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

receipts of gold and silver at imperial mint of Japan; coinage; bullion held at the mint 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430]

unsatisfactory state of, in China; desirability of a mint 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Customs: statistics of, at Hawaiian Islands. (See Hawaii). 602–604 [Pgs. 602–604 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385]

D.

Dabney, Samuel W., United States consul at Fayal: an account of his and his son’s gallant conduct in rescuing sailors wrecked off Fayal 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542], 858 [Pg. 858 includes portions of Doc. 542 and Doc. 543]

Dagle, Charles: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 361], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 375]

Debt: action brought in courts at Alexandria for ½ per cent. interest unpaid on debt of Egypt; courts deny jurisdiction 1007 [Pg. 1007 includes portions of Doc. 640 and Doc. 641], 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642] consolidation of the public, of Liberia 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 441]

of Egypt; its causes; the Suez Canal, &c. Extract from Egyptian Gazette 1020–1022 [Pgs. 1020–1022 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, and Doc. 652]

Portugal: addition of £4,000,000 to funded debt of 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

public, of Liberia; message of the President of the republic proposing its adjustment 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 441], 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

the floating, of Egypt, amounts to £12,500,000; items composing this debt 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 630]

Decisions: the unconstitutionality of the trade-mark laws, by the Supreme Court of the United States 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

De Lano, M. M., United States consul at Foochow: letter on tonnage dues on lighters; war power of China 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 158], 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 171]

De Lesseps: his interoceanic canal scheme. (See Canal) 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

Denmark: her reported transfer of St. Thomas to Great Britain denied 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221] immigration from, of Mormons into the United States; the governments of, not empowered to interfere 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 347 [Pg. 347 includes portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225]

military garrisons to be supported in her West Indies islands at expense of home government; Santa Cruz in a bad financial condition 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]

naturalization of foreigners in the United States. (See Naturalization) 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219]

reception on New Year’s day by the King and Queen, of the diplomatic corps and their families 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

Denny, O. N., United States consul-general at Shanghai: original text of treaty negotiated by Chung How forwarded to Washington by; report on war power of China 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 168], 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 171]

Dettmar, Jacob: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 286]

Devèria: memorandum of rules regulating official correspondence in China. 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 135]

Diaz, President of Mexico: good disposition of administration of, towards the United States 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 457]

Diplomas: sale of, to persons in Germany, by “the American University at Philadelphia;” “John Buchanan, M. D.” 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 398 [Pg. 398 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265] spurious medical, used by P. C. E. Volland 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Diplomatic officers: circular to, regarding international sanitary conference 5 [Pg. 5 is part of Doc. 4]

Dreadnaught, American schooner: (See Jacobson; Mexico; contraband law) 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462], 732–734 [Pgs. 732–734 include portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

Duff and David: case of, against the Swatow Opium Guild 192 [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 137], 193 [Pg. 193 includes portions of Doc. 137 and Doc. 138]

Duperval, General: (See Hayti) 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

E.

Eads, Civil Engineer: desires information touching river improvements in Austria-Hungary; memorandum for his information transmitted 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

Earthquake at Tokio, Japan: extract from Japan Daily Herald 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 432], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

Eastern question: mission of Mr. Goschen to Constantinople; the identical note to the Sultan; Germany’s invitation to England, France, Russia, Austria-Hungary, and Italy, to meet at Berlin for conference; article reserving mediatory rights 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 281]

Education: efforts made to educate Chinese in foreign branches; reports of consuls thereon 281–286 [Pgs. 281–286 include portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173] in Japan, regulations concerning; all affairs, connected with, under sole control of the minister of; division of schools; officers and their salaries; educational age of children from six to fourteen; children required to receive instruction” (art. 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]); subsidies to the schools; normal schools; inspection; reports to minister of education; corporal punishment prohibited; examinations; statistics 655–657 [Pgs. 655–657 include portions of Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422], 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

message of the President of Liberia, touching upon 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 441], 698 [Pg. 698 is part of Doc. 441]

work of the Mikado of Japan, in the promotion of 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

Egypt: commission of liquidation for regulation of finances of; declaration of the Russian Cabinet that it will not be bound by decisions of the commission which may affect the rights of the mixed courts 885–887 [Pgs. 885–887 include portions of Doc. 570, Doc. 571, Doc. 572, and Doc. 573] debt of; commission for its liquidation organized by Governments of Great Britain, Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, and Italy; interest of the United States in the commission’s work as bearing upon the mixed tribunals in 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 351]

mixed tribunals in, &c. (See Mixed Courts) 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

Egyptian Gazette: extract from, on the tribute 1021 [Pg. 1021 is part of Doc. 651], 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652]

Eick, Otto: naturalization case of, favorably settled at Berlin 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287]

Election: of president and congressmen in Argentine Republic; revolutionary results anticipated 10–16 [Pgs. 10–16 include portions of Doc. 7, Doc. 8, Doc. 9, Doc. 10, Doc. 11, and Doc. 12]

Ely, R. T.: paper on railroads in Germany. (See Germany: Railroads) 408–422 [Pgs. 408–422 include portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Emigration: converts to Mormonism, leaving Switzerland for the United States 951 [Pg. 951 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 600] from China to the Sandwich Islands; to Cuba; encouraged by Chinese Steam Navigation Company 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157]

from upper Hungary to the United States; the Government of Hungary recommended to take preventive measures 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39]

natives of China not permitted to renounce country and allegiance; penal code provides punishment; difference under the Burlingame treaty 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 184], 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

of Mormons from Italy to the United States; report of United States consul at Palermo 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

of Mormons to the United States from England; money sent from Utah to defray expenses of 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 466 [Pg. 466 is part of Doc. 299] (See Mormons.)

of persons from Sweden and Norway to the Mormon community in Utah, 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, and Doc. 591], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594]

statistics of Hungarian; restrictions recommended 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

the Swiss government abstains from participation in schemes for emigration or colonization; declaration of the Grütliverein on the subject; statistics 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603]

England: change of ministry; consequences of change, &c 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 281]

Estates: in Holland alleged to be awaiting heirs; the origin and purpose of such rumors; their absurdity; case of Bove, a recent claimant; case of the Kern heirs 813–816 [Pgs. 813–816 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517] in Switzerland: claimed by natives of that country naturalized in the United States 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600]

unclaimed: (See Germany.) 403 [Pg. 403 includes portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267]

Exhibition: at Brussels: free entry of samples secured from the government 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 54] (See Belgium.)

continental, of South America; its purposes and terms to exhibitors; its facilities; time for receiving articles for this exhibition extended to July 31, 1880 11 [Pg. 11 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

proposition for suitable building outside of exhibition grounds in which to exhibit American products now on exhibition at Rio 18 [Pg. 18 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

international fishery, at Berlin 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 259], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

Expatriation: views of the United States Government concerning; case of Carl Rau 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606]

Export: (See Commerce) 128 [Pg. 128 includes portions of Doc. 113 and Doc. 114]

Extradition: negotiations for treaty of, between the United States and the Netherlands 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 513] proposition of the Marquis of Salisbury for settlement of expenses on account of, between Great Britain and the United States; settlement under treaty to be made by party receiving fugitive, immediately 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297], 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

request for, of eight suspicious individuals arrested on Mexican frontier by United States forces, 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502]

settlement of expenses on account of, between Great Britain and the United States; provision of the treaty of 1842; nature of expenses; claims to be preferred separately 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 301], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Spain: transit of criminals through; conventions with various countries regarding this question 920–922 [Pgs. 920–922 include portions of Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582]

Extraterritoriality: opinion of Dr. Lord 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 153] (See Lord.)

Extraterritorial system: conditional readiness of the United States Government to abolish it in China and Japan 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 133] spontaneous acceptance of, among Asiatic peoples 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 133]

F.

Fairchild: United States minister at Madrid appointed to represent the United States in discussion of protection of Moorish subjects 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335]

Federal council: new rules for representation of the German States in 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278]

Feudal system: abolition of, by the Mikado of Japan 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

Fez, Morocco: burning of a Jew by a mob of the populace; the prime minister’s statement of the affair; statement of Mr. Cobb, from relation of an eye-witness 801–803 [Pgs. 801–803 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510]

Fillmore, Millard: proclamation relative to discriminating tonnage dues 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Finance: Chili: statistics in message of the President to Congress 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Egypt: commission for regulation of financial affairs; the Russian cabinet reserves the privilege of forming an independent opinion as to those decisions of the commission which may affect the rights of mixed courts 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571], 887 [Pg. 887 includes portions of Doc. 572 and Doc. 573]

draft of a decree by Khedive’s government, with reference to the domanial loan of the Rothschilds; views of the Government of the United States desired 992–994 [Pgs. 992–994 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631]

floating debt 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 630], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 637]

imperative necessity for the appointment of a commission of liquidation; its probable work; distribution of indebtedness; decree of the Khedive instituting the commission 1001–1003 [Pgs. 1001–1003 include portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639], 1005 [Pg. 1005 includes portions of Doc. 639 and Doc. 640]

Peru: crippled condition of her finances through Chili’s course in the matter of the export of nitre and guano 131 [Pg. 131 is part of Doc. 118]

Portugal: estimate of receipts and expenditures; deficit taxation; opposition of commercial classes 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545]

Switzerland 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 604], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605]

Turkish Empire: financial condition 968–971 [Pgs. 968–971 include portions of Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609]

Fisheries: alleged trespass of United States fishermen in province of British Columbia 503–505 [Pgs. 503–505 include portions of Doc. 328, Doc. 329, Doc. 330, and Doc. 331] (See Stephenson.)

Canadian fishermen crossing to United States side of Lake Ontario to set their nets; cases of this offense isolated; seizure of nets by American customs officers 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 494 [Pg. 494 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

claims against Great Britain 530–590 [Pgs. 530–590 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

official statement of Newfoundland herring; United States vessels employed 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 361], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

order of the Queen’s council suspending operation of article 10 of regulations for prevention of collisions at sea; open fishing-boats not required to carry side-lights 512–514 [Pgs. 512–514 include portions of Doc. 338, Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

outrage upon American fishermen at Fortune Bay, Newfoundland. 530–590 [Pgs. 530–590 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

statutes of Newfoundland applicable to; herring not to be taken in seines; proviso as to use of nets; herring not to be taken at certain points and at certain dates; penalties for violation of statutes; law not to interfere with rights under treaty; statutes concerning the coast. 585–588 [Pgs. 585–588 include portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Fishery Exhibition at Berlin: America to participate, and space assigned; letter to Professor Baird relating to fluid for preserving specimens of fish: proposed plan of the exhibition, &c. 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 263], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 263, Doc. 264, and Doc. 265] appointment by the United States of Messrs. G. B. Goode, and Frederick Mather, to serve on the international jury 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

award of the jurors; address of thanks and medal to each government participating; first prize of honor to Mr. Baird, official representative of the United States; great success of 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 280]

desire that the United States participate therein; effort to induce Congress to send Professor Baird 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 395 [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 259], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

list of prizes and honorable mention 436 [Pg. 436 is part of Doc. 280], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 280]

opened formally by the Crown Prince of Germany; addresses of the ministers; report of speech of Mr. White 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 273], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 273]

speech of Mr. White approved 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277]

Flade, Amandus: naturalization case of, at Berlin, unfavorably settled 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 286]

Flag: American, use of, by foreign-built ships claimed to have been purchased by American citizens 824–826 [Pgs. 824–826 include portions of Doc. 522 and Doc. 523] of the French protectorate 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228] (See French protectorate.)

Foo-Chow: cargo-boat registration; Regulation X for British trade; number of boats to be limited; smugglers to be punished 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 180], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 180] efforts made by Chinese authorities to levy tax on cargo-boats 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 180]

inadequate compensation of interpreter at United States consulate 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131] (See Compensation.)

war power of; report of Consul De Lano 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 171], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 172] (See Education.)

Forced loan: upon American citizens resident in Chihuahua; suit for the recovery of, by Mr. P. B. Chishem; disposition of the Mexican Government to remit; lack of fund in treasury for that purpose 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 455], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

Foreigners: assumed right of expulsion of, in Hayti, &c. 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 405], 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406] (See Hayti.)

naturalization of 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219] (See Denmark.)

Foreign capital: desire for, in Hayti; proposed establishment of national bank under control of 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 397]

Fortune Bay outrage upon American fishermen: affidavits in reply, in cases of 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 361], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 361] appendices to Lord Salisbury’s answer to claims against Great Britain on account of 573–588 [Pgs. 573–588 include portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

contravention of the treaty of Washington by local legislation of Newfoundland; estimate of losses claimed by sufferers from 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 361], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 361]

efforts to expedite the answer of the British Government with reference to claims on account of 568–570 [Pgs. 568–570 include portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, and Doc. 375]

facts not to be disputed: 1. Twenty-two vessels go from Gloucester, Mass., to Fortune Bay for herring; 2. Vessels wait in harbor for arrival of schools of herring; 3. Fishing operations commenced Sunday morning; 4. Americans attacked by mob of natives and compelled to abandon their fishery; 5 & 6. Consequent loss to owners; 7. Seining at a distance from land; 8. Abandonment of the fishing-grounds by the United States vessels 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 361], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 361], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 361], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 361]

fisheries provisions of the treaty of Washington; the Halifax Commission 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 361], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 361] (See Halifax Commission.)

force of local laws which do not contravene existing treaties 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 361]

letter from Earl Granville to Mr. Lowell. (See Granville) 588–590 [Pgs. 588–590 include portions of Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377]

letter of Messrs. Foster and Trescott to the Secretary of State; provisions of the consolidated acts of Newfoundland; language of the treaty of Washington; British statement of the case; the privilege of procuring bait, &c 541–544 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 361]

list of vessels and owners; statement of expenses and claims 544 [Pg. 544 is part of Doc. 361], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 361]

Lord Salisbury’s comments with report of Captain Sulivan of the British Navy; three alleged breaches of the law by the Americans 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 361]

Messrs. Foster and Trescott to the Secretary of State in support of charges against Canadian fisherman: 1. List of United States vessels; 2. Affidavits of masters and crews; 3. Sworn statements of owners; 4. Statements of collector of port of Gloucester 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 361]

necessary delay on the part of the United States in discussing; investigation by Great Britain 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 361]

paragraph from the London Times of February 13, 1880; Canadian and Newfoundland fisheries 568 [Pg. 568 includes portions of Doc. 371, Doc. 372, and Doc. 373]

presentment of the statement of claims for damages, to the British Government; delay in Lord Salisbury’s answer to statement of losses; opinions of the saw officers of the crown necessary 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 361 and Doc. 362], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 363, Doc. 364, and Doc. 365], 565 [Pg. 565 includes portions of Doc. 366, Doc. 367, and Doc. 368], 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

statements of losses; claims against Great Britain 545–555 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 361]

three breaches of the local law alleged by Lord Salisbury: 1. The use of seines; 2. Fishing upon Sunday; 3. Barring fish; alleged interference with rights of British fishermen; treaty privileges not to be subjected to local legislation 530 [Pg. 530 includes portions of Doc. 360 and Doc. 361], 531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 361], 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 361], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 361]

unfavorable answer of the British’ Government to the claims of fishermen on account of 570–573 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 375]

Foster, Mr.: counsel for claimants in Fortune Bay outrage; letter from him on this question 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 361]

Foster, John W., United States minister to Mexico: his departure from Mexico; flattering attention extended by both Mexicans and foreigners; memorial from American residents in Mexico; banquet given him by the President; testimonial from British residents 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 467]

France: action of the government with regard to the Trans-Sahara Railway 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237] (See Railroads.)

budget for the international committee on weights and measures; increased expenses; table of quotas for contracting States 347–350 [Pgs. 347–350 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225] (See Weights and Measures.)

claims of non-belligerent sufferers from war with Germany presented through commissions and not through embassies 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229]

constitution of the republic 368–378 [Pgs. 368–378 include portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242] (See Constitution of the French Republic.)

determination of the cabinet in, to allow the Panama Canal enterprise to remain a private one 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249] (See Canal.)

flag of the protectorate of 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228] (See Flag.)

invitation to the United States to designate officers to witness manœuvers of French troops; appointment of officers 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241]

manœuvers of troops; officers of foreign armies invited to witness them 386 [Pg. 386 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

life-insurance companies 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227] (See American.)

liquidation of Egyptian debt: 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351] (See Egypt.)

railway policy of 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 270]

removal of the capital from Versailles to Paris; apprehensions of disturbance; speech of Mr. Gambetta, &c 351–355 [Pgs. 351–355 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

right of consul-general to administer, &c 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232] (See American citizen.)

Franco-American Union: work of; statue of liberty 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239]

French protectorate: foreigners allowed to sail under flag of, on payment of $100 per annum; request for regulation for sailing under flag of, among the Society Islands 357 [Pg. 357 includes portions of Doc. 228 and Doc. 229], 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231] navigation among Society Islands under the flag of 366 [Pg. 366 includes portions of Doc. 237, Doc. 238, and Doc. 239]

new measures regulating use of the flag of, among the Society Islands 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, and Doc. 245]

over Liberia; reasons for; inducements offered by natural advantages of Liberia 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441]

rumor of proposed, over Liberia unfounded 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 234]

Frye, Fred. P., schooner: claim against Great Britain 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Fudge, Silas: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 579 [Pg. 579 is part of Doc. 375]

Fukien: inhabitants of, unfriendly to foreigners; enforcement of obnoxious rules affecting the interests of foreign residents; sale or lease of lands 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 181], 299 [Pg. 299 is part of Doc. 181] (See American citizen.)

G.

Gabriel, Nicholas, V.: naturalization ease of, at Berlin, unfavorably settled 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Gambetta: his speech upon the removal of the capital from Versailles to Paris; his personal greatness; his authority as presiding officer 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 226], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 226]

Gardner, A. W., president of Liberia: message of, to Congress. (See Liberia.) 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 441]

Gazeta, Judicial, of Fayal: extract from, concerning gallant conduct of United States Consul Dabney and his son in rescuing wrecked sailors 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542]

Gehres: naturalization case of, at Berlin favorably settled 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Gentil: American citizen dying in France 364 [Pg. 364 is part of Doc. 235] (See American citizen)

Germany: additions to army of 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260] alliance with Austria-Hungary for the execution of the Berlin treaty 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 257]

close of the session of the Reichstag; bills failing to receive its sanction; the budget shows a deficit; taxes; bill relating to employers and employed; socialism; prolongation of treaties; sea traffic bill rejected; the conservatives and ultramontanes; new rules governing representation of States in the Federal Council 429–433 [Pgs. 429–433 include portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, Doc. 277, and Doc. 278]

death of Mr. von Bülow 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255] (See von Bülow.)

descriptions of railway lines, &c 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 270], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 270] (See Railroads.)

discussion in the Reichstag of a colonial policy; commercial interests of, in Samoa; Godeffroy & Co., of Hamburg; defeat of the Samoan bill; the chancellor’s speech 429 [Pg. 429 includes portions of Doc. 275, Doc. 276, and Doc. 277]

history of railway development in 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 270] (See Railroads.)

liquidation of Egyptian debt 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351] (See Egypt.)

military fines imposed upon American citizen revisiting 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282] (See American citizen, naturalization.)

natives of; naturalized American citizens fined or prosecuted for non-performance of military duty upon their visits to 441–461 [Pgs. 441–461 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

railway management in 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 270] (See Railroads.)

rumors regarding alliance between Austria-Hungary and; the currency 390 [Pg. 390 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

sale of diplomas in, by an American institution 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]

statistics of military expenditure 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 266], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 266]

unclaimed estates in; applications to the United States legation very numerous; claims barred by limitation; title to land; wills; certificates of heirship; estates awaiting distribution to unknown heirs 403–405 [Pgs. 403–405 include portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268]

Gladstone: the feeling against him in Austria-Hungary; his sympathy with the oppressed 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

Gonzales, General, candidate for the presidency of Mexico: while in command of force for the purpose of suppressing hostile demonstration against the government, is fired upon, together with his friends, by state troops of Guanaxoato; similar attack upon him at Leon 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482] receives a majority of the votes of the electoral college for the presidency of Mexico; rumors that he will not he declared president, on account of alleged frauds 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483]

Gonzales, minister for foreign affairs, Argentine Republic: resignation of 23 [Pg. 23 includes portions of Doc. 16 and Doc. 17]

Gorringe, Lieutenant Commander: (See Obelisk) 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630], 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632]

Goschen: (See Eastern question.) 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 281]

Grant, General: his mediation in a dispute between China and Japan 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 139] (See Lew Chew Islands.)

Granville, Earl: secretary for foreign affairs of Great Britain; letter to Mr. Lowell, United States minister to England, on Fortune Bay outrage questions; strand fishing not allowed under treaty of Washington 588–590 [Pgs. 588–590 include portions of Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377] desire of British Government to settle the Fortune Bay question 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 308], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 308]

Great Britain: case of John Anderson at Calcutta 479 [Pg. 479 includes portions of Doc. 307 and Doc. 308] (See Anderson.)

claims against, on account of Fortune Bay outrage, unfavorably answered by: (See Fortune Bay outrage) 570–573 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 375], 530–590 [Pgs. 530–590 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377]

customs authorities of, board the Constellation 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306] (See Constellation.)

desire to refer Moorish question to representatives of the powers at Madrid 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323] (See Moorish question.)

documents asked for, of the United States, by Nicaragua, relating to the latter’s dispute with 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 328, Doc. 329, and Doc. 330]

emigration of Mormons from, to the United States 465 [Pg. 465 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

exclusion of United States vessels from conveyance of stores of government of; disadvantage suffered by United States vessels in consequence; measures for obviating the difficulty; case of the Manilla 484–486 [Pgs. 484–486 include portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312]

expenses of extradition cases 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

invasion of the Yellowstone Valley by northern Indians 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

liquidation of Egyptian debt 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

order relating to prevention of collisions at sea 468–472 [Pgs. 468–472 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301] (See Shipping.)

outrage upon American fishermen at Fortune Bay 530–590 [Pgs. 530–590 include portions of Doc. 360, Doc. 361, Doc. 362, Doc. 363, Doc. 364, Doc. 365, Doc. 366, Doc. 367, Doc. 368, Doc. 369, Doc. 370, Doc. 371, Doc. 372, Doc. 373, Doc. 374, Doc. 375, Doc. 376, and Doc. 377]

proposed revision of the constitution of mixed tribunals in Egypt 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353] (See Mixed court.)

question between the United States and, with reference to wrecking and live-saving on the great lakes; reciprocity in facilitating aid; reports of two cases 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 331] (See Wrecking.)

stores for Arctic expedition 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, and Doc. 311]

thanks of the Government of, to Commodore Shufeldt 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 257] (See Liberia.)

thanks of the Queen and Government of, for provisions sent to Ireland by the United States steamer Constellation 514 [Pg. 514 includes portions of Doc. 339, Doc. 340, and Doc. 341]

transportation, of merchandise to, from, and through possessions of, in North America; revision of regulations recommended 508–510 [Pgs. 508–510 include portions of Doc. 333, Doc. 334, and Doc. 335]

Greece: “collective note” to the Porte and; drift of feeling in Europe favorable to Greece, in questions under the Berlin treaty 440 [Pg. 440 is part of Doc. 281]

Grievances: conference of diplomatic corps on trade in China; proposals of the Yamên; distribution of the questions to the several ministers 254–256 [Pgs. 254–256 include portions of Doc. 162, Doc. 163, and Doc. 164]

Grinnell: writing-table made from timbers of the Resolute presented to Mrs. by Queen Victoria 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355]

Grütliverein: (See Emigration, Switzerland.) 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603]

Grzechowiak, Andreas: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 286]

Guanaxuato: General Gonzalez’s friends fired upon, in his presence, by State, troops of 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

Guatemala: banquet at United States legation in honor of the president of Honduras: 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107] completion of a railroad by a company organized and headed by an American citizen; “opening” by the Central American presidents; interest paid by the government 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

consideration of the draft of a constitution; who are native citizens; conflict with the laws of the United States; military service; rights of natives; rights of foreigners 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 100], 114 [Pg. 114 includes portions of Doc. 100 and Doc. 101], 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

question as to the right of United States minister to celebrate marriage in District of Columbia; in foreign country; misunderstanding 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104]

Guayana: prompt action of the state authorities in preliminary investigation of outrage perpetrated upon Mr. John E. Wheelock, an American citizen 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658]

H.

Halifax Commission: argument of British counsel before; the privilege of procuring bait and suppliers, refitting, drying, transshipping, &c.,; herring fishery on coast of Newfoundland 535–537 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 361]

Hamburg: conference to examine question of a scientific international exploration of the Polar regions; interest and proposed work of the United States in this exploration 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597]

Hankow: report of consul at, on education of Chinese in foreign branches 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 172] (See Education)

Hansen, Hans: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 286]

Harbor: consuls at that of Shanghai to co-operate with Chinese authorities in giving effect to rules of 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145] establishment of light-houses in harbor and gulf of Port-au-Prince, Hayti 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 399]

rules of, at Shanghai; their non-enforcement; embarrassed by the consular body at Shanghai 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130]

Shanghai; rules of 1878 to govern foreign anchorage; new rules to govern native anchorage; control of 212 [Pg. 212 is part of Doc. 144], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

sixteen rules for the conservation of the Whangpoo; their approval by the diplomatic corps at Peking 203–206 [Pgs. 203–206 include portions of Doc. 141 and Doc. 142]

Harvest: results of in Hungary 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Haskell, Hattie: American trading vessel boarded and searched by Spanish naval officers 924 [Pg. 924 is part of Doc. 582]

Hatch, Colonel, United States Army: report of, concerning Indian raids on Mexican border; concert of action with Mexican troops suggested 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 450], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

Hay: Sir J. H. Drummond. (See Jews.) 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 327]

Hayes, R. B., President: proclamation suspending discriminating tonnage dues respecting Chinese vessels 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193]

Hawaii: case of Patrick Quinn 596–602 [Pgs. 596–602 include portions of Doc. 380, Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384] cotton, clothing manufactured in the United States from cotton grown in the United States, to enter free of duty 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 591 [Pg. 591 is part of Doc. 377]

custom-house statistics; importation of machinery from Great Britain and the United States; value of goods paying duty imported at Honolulu from different countries; value of goods and spirits bonded; value of duty-free goods from the United States; résumé; imports at islands 602–604 [Pgs. 602–604 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385]

illegal taxation of American citizens 598–602 [Pgs. 598–602 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384]

immigrants to, from Micronesia; clippings from the Pacific Commercial Advertiser; the strangers 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 380], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

large importations of foreign rice; precautions to prevent its export to the United States as product of; possible frauds upon United States revenue; Chinese capital alone invested in rice 606–614 [Pgs. 606–614 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391] (See Rice.)

register of American schooners under flag of 592 [Pg. 592 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

seizure and libel of the bark Kalakaua, late Mary Belle Roberts, under flag of, but owned in San Francisco, on account of allegations of smuggling. (See Kalakaua) 592–595 [Pgs. 592–595 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, and Doc. 380]

Hayti: address of the president at his reception; reorganization of the army; revision of the constitution. (See Salomon) 621–625 [Pgs. 621–625 include portions of Doc. 393, Doc. 394, and Doc. 395] alleged boarding of vessels by consuls and agents in, held contrary to law of nations; question as to this: revocation of the exequatur of consul or consular officer, the probable limit of jurisdiction 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407], 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

anniversary of her independence; reception by the President; festivities on January 1, 1880; address of the President; to the people and the army 626–628 [Pgs. 626–628 include portions of Doc. 395, Doc. 396, and Doc. 397]

assumption of right by government of, to expel foreigners; assumption of jurisdiction over foreign consuls, &c.; case of General Salomon; extracts from Le Moniteur 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 637 [Pg. 637 is part of Doc. 405], 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

conspiracy against the government; no further arrests in; increase, consolidation, and discipline of the army; public confidence in the government 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 638 [Pg. 638 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 639 [Pg. 639 includes portions of Doc. 406 and Doc. 407]

currency in 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

demand on the part of the United States for impartiality in light dues; opposition against enforcement of; exemption of the Royal Mail Steamship Company 640 [Pg. 640 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409], 641 [Pg. 641 includes portions of Doc. 409 and Doc. 410]

discovery of conspiracy against the government; consequent arrest of prominent persons; the movement considered foiled; General Duperval among conspirators 633 [Pg. 633 includes portions of Doc. 401 and Doc. 402], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

discriminating light-house dues upon foreign vessels; action of the British Government; co-operation of the government of the United States asked by Great Britain 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

division of the citizens of the republic into two classes; respective social rank of blacks and mulatto and mixed classes; the mulattoes chiefly control the liberal party, the blacks the national party; patriotism of both classes unquestioned, &c 619–621 [Pgs. 619–621 include portions of Doc. 392, Doc. 393, and Doc. 394]

election of General Salomon, a pure negro, to the presidency of the republic; his inauguration; his proclamation; duration of presidental term; President’s cabinet not yet announced; decree of election 614–617 [Pgs. 614–617 include portions of Doc. 390, Doc. 391, and Doc. 392]

foreign capital needed for development of agricultural and other resources in; proposition to establish a national bank; ordinance authorizing establishment of the bank; its character, privileges, and services; guarantees and restrictions; reported readiness of Paris bankers to entertain the scheme 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 629 [Pg. 629 is part of Doc. 397]

her relations with other and especially neighboring countries; a Cuban seeking recruits for insurrectionary movements in Cuba; relations with Santo Domingo; traffic with people of Santo Domingo 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 626 [Pg. 626 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

hydrographic announcement; lighting of the gulf and harbor of Port-au-Prince; light-house dues upon national vessels; upon foreign vessels discriminating dues are charged; exemptions 630–632 [Pgs. 630–632 include portions of Doc. 398, Doc. 399, and Doc. 400]

light dues on foreign ships 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349]

message, or “general exposé,” of the President of, to Congress; part relating to foreign relations; relations of, with Spain, Germany, Denmark, France, &c.; “St. Michel” affair; loan of 1875; provisions for its settlement; protest of United States Government against law concerning visas of consuls; relations with Santo Domingo; jurisdiction over foreigners; extension of commerce hoped for 641–644 [Pgs. 641–644 include portions of Doc. 409, Doc. 410, and Doc. 411]

revolutions in; an account of the last one; Bozelais and Canal both opposed by the revolutionary forces; short sketch of Salomon’s career. 617–619 [Pgs. 617–619 include portions of Doc. 391, Doc. 392, and Doc. 393]

success in Paris of the secretary of finances of, in efforts to establish national bank 632 [Pg. 632 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

Health, National Board of: information from president of, concerning fees allowed under act for prevention of introdution of contagious diseases 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

Hell rung, E. G.: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 286]

Hendriken, Richard: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 375]

Hereward, schooner: claim against Great Britain. (See Fortune Bay outrage) 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 361]

Hess, Francis and Theobald: naturalization case of, at Berlin, unfavorably settled 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 286]

Holland: state railways 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 270]

Honduras: banquet in the President’s honor at United States legation at Guatemala 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107] explanation demanded concerning treatment of American vessels entering Utilla and Bonca 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 99] (See Tonnage Dues)

Huascar: capture of the. (See Chili.) 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Huber, John: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 286]

Hungary: increasing emigration from; the subject before the Diet; statistics; restriction recommended 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44] the harvest in 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

I.

Immigration: of Mormons into the United States from Denmark 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222] (See Emigration.)

to Hawaii from Micronesia; discouragement of Chinese; work of the board of 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 380], 596 [Pg. 596 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Import: (See Commerce.) 602–604 [Pgs. 602–604 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385]

Indians: campaign against several tribes in Coahuila 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458] ground of the Mexican President’s refusal to permit the pursuit of, over the border, by United States troops; the power to permit this vested in Congress; the President authorized to enter into convention with the United States concerning this question 758–761 [Pgs. 758–761 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477]

hostile, in New Mexico; they cross over to Mexican territory; refusal of the President of Mexico to permit their pursuit by United States troops on Mexican soil 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 475]

incursions of, from Canada to the United States 497–499 [Pgs. 497–499 include portions of Doc. 323, Doc. 324, Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

incursions of Sioux, from Canada to the United States 507 [Pg. 507 includes portions of Doc. 332 and Doc. 333], 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

invasion of the Yellowstone valley by northern; their depredations; request to Canadian government for the return of those concerned; answer of the Canadian government; evidence not found 486 [Pg. 486 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 491 [Pg. 491 includes portions of Doc. 318 and Doc. 319], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 319] (See Great Britain.)

movements of hostile, in New Mexico; their escape into Mexico; letter of Colonel Hatch, United States Army 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 475]

on the frontier of Mexico; their purchase of arms and ammunition in Mexico and depredations therewith in the United States; failure of Mexican authorities to operate against them; gallant work of Colonel Hatch’s command 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

raid and depredation of, in Chihuahua; character and origin of the band referred to 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 450], 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

International exchange of works of science and art: appointment of commission for, in Russia; regulations governing 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570] letters of Professor Baird with reference to 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 570], 885 [Pg. 885 includes portions of Doc. 570 and Doc. 571]

International exploration of the Polar regions: conference concerning question of; proposed work of the United States in this exploration; the matter before Congress 940 [Pg. 940 includes portions of Doc. 595 and Doc. 596], 941 [Pg. 941 includes portions of Doc. 596 and Doc. 597]

International law. (See Law; Commerce; Shipping; Naturalization; Treaty; Mixed Court; Citizen.) 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

International sanitary conference: resolution of Congress to call, to meet in Washington; propositions to be submitted to 5–7 [Pgs. 5–7 include portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Interpreters: insufficiency of force of, at United States consulates in China; consulates falling behind in consequence; increase of salary recommended as well as increase in force 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

Iquique: letter of Mr. Christiancy to United States consul with reference to clearances to American vessels shipping nitrates from; this right not conceded to the consul 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 527], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 527 and Doc. 528], 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529]

Isaacs, Mr. Myer S.: letter concerning recognition of Roumania; persecution of the Jews by the Roumanians 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 27]

Isthmus of Panama 319 [Pg. 319 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201] (See Colombia.)

Italy: action of the Crown in declining to accept resignation of the ministry, unsatisfactory to the opposition; uncertainty as to the result of the election 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418] announcement by morning .journals of nominations of new senators by the King; opening of the session of Parliament; appropriation for army and navy asked for; lawlessness in Sicily; the King’s speech 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413], 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 413]

defeat of the ministry on the grist-tax bill; failure of crops; appearance of phylloxera in vineyards in; destitution and suffering among laboring classes; increase of crime, &c.; improvement in many branches of industry since the accession of the dynasty of Savoy 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 412 and Doc. 413]

discussion in Parliament of the diplomatic appropriation bill; resolution of confidence in the ministry; relations with Austria 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

emigration of Mormons from, to the United States 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

her jealousy excited; France in the Mediterranean, and movements for annexation of Tunis 649 [Pg. 649 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 650 [Pg. 650 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]

liquidation of Egyptian debt 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351] (See Egypt.)

monopoly of Pompeiian curiosities by government of; the desire of the United States to obtain some of these curiosities for National Museum; Professor Baird offers specimens of Pueblo pottery in exchange for Pompeiian curiosities 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418], 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

opening of the session of Parliament; the King’s speech; suppression of the tax on grist; the army and navy 647 [Pg. 647 is part of Doc. 413], 648 [Pg. 648 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

postponements the electoral reform question by Chamber of Deputies; passage of the financial bills proposed by the ministry; abolition of the grist tax; predictions of the opposition; end of the session 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 416, Doc. 417, and Doc. 418]

state railways 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 270] (See Railroads.)

“Itata”: case of the, at Lima 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 825 [Pg. 825 is part of Doc. 523], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 523] (See Shipping.)

Iversen, Iver: naturalization case of, at Berlin, unfavorably settled 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 286]

J.

Jacobson, Captain: arrest of, by custom-house authorities of Acapulco; his imprisonment, trial, and acquittal by the federal court 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462], 732–734 [Pgs. 732–734 include portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

Japan: address of the Emperor to the provincial governors; re-establishment of the general government and abolition of the feudal system; desire of the Emperor that his people shall progress toward constitutional and representative government 689 [Pg. 689 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438] army of 669–676 [Pgs. 669–676 include portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425] (See Conscription law.)

Asiatic cholera in 652 [Pg. 652 includes portions of Doc. 418 and Doc. 419]

burning of the consular agency of the United States at Hakodate; loss of “letters and archives,” and of everything, save fifteen books 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

character and good work of the Mikado; affection of the people for him 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

claims against the late Lew Chew Han 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]

decree regulating political meetings; unfavorable comments in both native and foreign journals thereon; permission for meeting to be obtained from police authorities, &c 687 [Pg. 687 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

dispute with China 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139] (See Lew Chew Islands.)

education in, assured by law to all children in the empire 655–657 [Pgs. 655–657 include portions of Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422] (See Education.)

establishment of branch office of the Imperial Mint, at Tokio 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 420] (See Currency.)

fire in Tokio 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428] (See Tokio.)

memorial to the prime minister on behalf of the local assembly of Miyagi; desire for a constitutional government, &c 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 684 [Pg. 684 is part of Doc. 433]

quarantine against plague-infected cattle from China 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430], 680 [Pg. 680 is part of Doc. 430]

ravages of cholera in; statistics 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 428, Doc. 429, and Doc. 430]

revision of conscription law 669–676 [Pgs. 669–676 include portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425] (See Conscription law.)

statistics from eighth report of the postmaster-general; number of letters transmitted during the year; length of mail routes; Paris postal convention of June 1, 1878; foreign mails; letters actually lost; value of postal money-orders; post-office savings banks 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

statistics of education 676 [Pg. 676 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 677 [Pg. 677 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

the chamber of commerce upon revision of existing treaties between the treaty powers and; the present treaty disadvantageous to all concerned; revision necessary; land taxes in, more burdensome than in any other country; statistics of customs dues; the nation, in future, must depend upon customs dues for revenue. (See Treaty) 657–661 [Pgs. 657–661 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422]

the Imperial Mint. (See Currency) 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

Jessen, Hans P.: naturalization case of, favorably settled at Berlin 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 286]

Jews: address of, to prime minister of Spain concerning the ill treatment of their race in Morocco 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509] burning of an aged Jew at Fez, Morocco 801–803 [Pgs. 801–803 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510]

Levi A. Cohen, sent by Hebrew congregation in New York, to Tangiers to look after the interests of his coreligionists there; desire that Mr. Matthews shall co-operate with him 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513]

negotiations in their behalf by the United States minister at Vienna, with Servia and Roumania; their case represented with exaggeration; rights of trade and religion, and the text of the Berlin treaty on these points 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31], 43 [Pg. 43 is part of Doc. 31]

subjected, in Russia, to many hardships by the government; desire of the United States to protect its Jewish citizens 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558]

subjects of the Emperor of Morocco; protection of; Mr. Löwry’s statements; Sir J. H. Drummond Hay’s reply; protection of, by foreign representatives 499–502 [Pgs. 499–502 include portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, Doc. 327, and Doc. 328]

their condition and persecution in Roumania; letter of Mr. Meyer S. Isaacs concerning this 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 27]

treatment of, in Morocco 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 506]

Johnson, W. W.: codefendant in trade-mark case 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Judicial: readiness of the Yamên to consider report on proceedings by diplomatic corps at Peking 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136] report on questions by diplomatic committee in China 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 133] (See Report.)

Judicial administration: conclusions of conference on, referred for a report 214 [Pg. 214 includes portions of Doc. 145, Doc. 146, and Doc. 147], 215 [Pg. 215 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

Judicial organization in Egypt: proposed commission to consider reforms; question discussed by consuls-general of the powers at Cairo; interest of the United States; importance of the commission 1013–1015 [Pgs. 1013–1015 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645]

Judicial proceedings: questions relating to; improvements in 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128] (See China.)

Judicial system: defects of the Chinese; what the better administration of justice requires in this respect; comments upon the requirements 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 133] report upon those of the United States, Great Britain, and France in Chiu a called for by the Department 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 131, Doc. 132, and Doc. 133]

Judicial torture in China: extracts from North China Herald and Supreme and Consular Gazette 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 160]

Jurisdiction: conflicts of, in cases of collisions on the high seas between vessels carrying different flags 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589]

K.

Kalakaua, bark: seizure and libel of, at Honolulu on account of alleged smuggling; convicted and condemned; opinion of the supreme court of Hawaii 592–595 [Pgs. 592–595 include portions of Doc. 378, Doc. 379, and Doc. 380]

Kearsarge: cessation of her operations ordered; unfriendly and hasty conduct of the Panama Executive; alteration of order in transmission by telegraph 328–330 [Pg. 328 is part of Doc. 209], 335 [Pg. 335 includes portions of Doc. 212 and Doc. 213], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 214], 339–343 [Pgs. 339–343 include portions of Doc. 215, Doc. 216, Doc. 217, Doc. 218, and Doc. 219] (See Coaling stations.)

Kemp, Mr.: arrest of, at Manzanilla for clerical error in consular invoice; his acquittal 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

Kerdijk, H.: defalcation of, at Rotterdam 809–813 [Pgs. 809–813 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

Key, D. M., Postmaster-General: letter to Mr. Evarts on Colombia’s relation to Postal Union 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

King: address by, of the Netherlands, at opening of the Staats General; the birth of aprincess; foreign relations; commerce; agriculture; labor of children; army and navy; the colonies; important projects of law 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518]

Kitchener, Arthur B.: statement of, concerning murder of three American citizens in Mexico; answers to questions of the United States minister with reference to the murder; indifference of the Mexican Government; failure to punish the murderers 741–744 [Pgs. 741–744 include portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 748–751 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 472]

Klein, Edward: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282], 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 286]

Klein, E. F. O.: naturalization case .of, at Berlin, favorably settled 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286]

Knowlton, Moses, schooner: claim against Great Britain 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage,)

Koernicke, C. J.: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 286]

Kuldja: occupation of, by Russia; the population; insurrections in; value of the district 207 [Pg. 207 is part of Doc. 142] (See Chung How.)

the treaty; its rejection by the Chinese, &c. 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 155] (See Chung How.)

Kummeran, Colonel: murdered in Turkey; narrow escape of his companion the Russian chargé d’affaires; trial of his murderer; action of the diplomatic corps; probability that the murderer will escape punishment; the Government of the Porte promise that just punishment shall be inflicted 974–1177

Kung, Prince: counsels of, in the ascendency, in the case of Chung How 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173] (See Chung How.)

his defense of Chung How 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157] (See Chung How.)

Kunz, Alexander: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 286]

L.

Labor: scarcity of, in Brazil; Chinese immigration to be induced 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72] (See Brazil.)

Lake Ontario: wrecking in 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 331] (See Wrecking.)

Latorre, Lorenzo: resigns the Presidency of the Republic of Uruguay; election of Dr. Francisco Vidal as his successor; nomination of new ministry 1027 [Pg. 1027 is part of Doc. 655]

Lauber, Joseph: naturalization case of, unfavorably settled at Berlin 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 286]

Law: conscription, in Japan 669–676 [Pgs. 669–676 include portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425] contraband, of Mexico, if too rigidly applied likely to cause irritation between Mexico and the United States 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467]

contraband, passed by Mexican Congress; penalties for its violation; cases of Kemp and Jacobson 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

custom-house, in China 173–175 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 134], 177–184 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 134], 218–220 [Pgs. 218–220 include portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 158]

governing mixed courts in China: (See Mixed courts.) 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 133]

international, concerning foreigners; (See Hayti.) 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399]

Mexican customs: (See Metzger.) 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

Mexican penal code: article 186 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]

naturalization: in Germany 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 285 and Doc. 286] in Morocco 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 505]

natives of Alsace-Lorraine 441–461 [Pgs. 441–461 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

penal code of China: character of 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 133]

proposed urgence of the adoption of the “Code Napoleon” upon the Chinese, for government of mixed courts 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 133]

shipping: (See Shipping.) 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Swiss federal, relating to the social state and marriage 941–951 [Pgs. 941–951 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598]

trade-mark, decided unconstitutional by United States Supreme Court 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76]

La Cotera, General de: his conduct and character in late revolution in Peru 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 522], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 522]

La Puerta, General: first vice-president of Peru, left as President on departure of President Prado; his defeat by General Piérola 819–824 [Pgs. 819–824 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523]

Lee, Edward, whaling schooner: driven from her fishing-ground by Spanish gun-boat; reparation demanded; violation of treaty; claim against Spain disallowed 887–889 [Pgs. 887–889 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574]

Lekin tax: discussion of 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 134], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 134] (See China, Taxation, Treaties, &c.)

its commutability argued 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 134]

on opium: committed to guilds of native merchants 191 [Pg. 191 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

the German Government does not object to it, if it be moderate, and guarantees for the security of commerce be given 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 134], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 134]

Lesseps, Mr. de: interoceanic canal 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249] (See Canal.)

Lew Chew Han: claims against 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435] (See Claims.)

Lew Chew Islands: pending dispute regarding them between China and Japan; their dependence upon China; interference of General Grant at the request of China 194–199 [Pgs. 194–199 include portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139] request for investiture; proclamation of investiture; patent of investiture; list of articles bestowed on the King of the state; list of articles bestowed on the Queen 199–201 [Pgs. 199–201 include portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Liberia: boundary commission for 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 257] confirmation by the Senate of the President’s cabinet; the secretary of the interior 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

desire of the Pope to be represented in 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

interest of the United States in the extension of the foreign commerce of 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

legislature adopts a resolution for the settlement of claim of the United States for ordnance 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

message of the President; aborginal inhabitants; extent of sea-coast; ports of entry; consolidation of public debt; education; thanks of, to Commodore Shufeldt for services in adjustment of northwest boundary question; appropriation asked 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 441], 695–700 [Pgs. 695–700 include portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

mining project presented for the President’s signature; proposed contract; convention not entered into, as it was found to be in conflict with mining laws of 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441]

proposed treaty of commerce between King Blanco Sissi, of Mandingo and; advice of the United States minister to the President of; diversion of interior African trade from Sierra Leone to Monrovia, and the benefits likely to arise therefrom 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 439], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

question of French protectorate; good reasons for the desire of France to possess; valuable inducements offered by trade in products of 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441]

rumor of French protectorate over, unfounded; interest of the United States in colony of 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Liberia College: Dr. E. W. Blyden elected president; his name to attract many students who would otherwise be sent to Europe or America 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Life-insurance companies: favorable action with reference to American, in France 367 [Pg. 367 includes portions of Doc. 239, Doc. 240, and Doc. 241] the New York; its footing unequal to companies of other nations in France 384 [Pg. 384 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Life-Saving Service: demoralization of, in Turkey; the question discussed by representatives of the maritime powers at Constantinople; collective note to the Porte, calling its attention to this question 972–974 [Pgs. 972–974 include portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612] inadequacy of; the station on the Black Sea 965–968 [Pgs. 965–968 include portions of Doc. 606, Doc. 607, and Doc. 608]

Lima: meeting of the diplomatic corps; unanimous resolution; collective note to the Chilian admiral, reserving all questions in regard to damages to persons and property of neutrals arising out of bombardment 843–845 [Pgs. 843–845 include portions of Doc. 533, Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536]

Liverpool: departure of Mormons from, for the United States 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306] (See Mormon.)

Lizzie and Namari, schooner: claim against Great Britain 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Lloyds: agents of, complain of loss by fire of cotton-laden ships at Charleston and Mew Orleans 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

Loan, domanial, in Egypt: proposed decree; test of decree as issued 992–994 [Pgs. 992–994 include portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, Doc. 630, and Doc. 631], 995–997 [Pgs. 995–997 include portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632]

questions arising under it 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

Loan, Rothschild: assent of the United States Government asked to the proposed disposition of the balance of this loan to arrears of tribute and pension, &c. 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637]

Lobos Islands and Eten: depredations of Chilian fleet at 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532]

London Times: extract from, on the slave traffic in Egypt; letter from British and Foreign Anti-slavery Society 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 653], 1025 [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 653]

Lopez, Alonzo: seriously wounded in attack made upon General Gonzales, at Leon 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

Lord, E. C., United States consul: (See War Power of China) 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 171] definiteness required in treaties; the seventh rule of trade; China’s unwillingness to make the treaties 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 153] (See China.)

extraterritoriality; inconsiderate charge against foreigners 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 153] (See Extraterritoriality.)

language used in communication with Chinese officials; treaties stipulating the use of the representative’s language with Chinese translation; conditional recommendations to the United States consul to discontinue the use of Chinese translation 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174], 289 [Pg. 289 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

lekin taxes only a temporary expedient; Chinese surprise at foreigners’ complaints of lekin tax; extent of exemption 231 [Pg. 231 is part of Doc. 153] (See China.)

limitation of taxes upon foreign goods; absurdity of the Chinese construction of the treaties; importance of a mutual understanding of stipulations 229 [Pg. 229 is part of Doc. 153]

merchants as consuls objectionable; the missionary question 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 153]

opinions concerning the trade grievance of foreigners in China 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 153]

taxes levied on foreign goods in China, 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 153] (See Taxes.)

Lower California: revolution in 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

Löwy: (See Jews) 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 327]

Lütz, Frank: naturalization case of, at Berlin, unfavorably settled 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282], 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 286]

M.

MacDonald, Wm. E., schooner: claim against Great Britain 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Machinery: importation of, to Hawaii from Great Britain and the United States 603 [Pg. 603 is part of Doc. 384]

MacManus, & Sons: case of loan forced upon, at Chihuahua; the United States consul being a member of the firm does not give exemption from search of premises 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 455], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 734 [Pg. 734 includes portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463], 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464]

Madrid: protection of Moorish subjects to be discussed at 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335] (See Moorish subjects.)

Morocco conference at; proceedings of each session 897–914 [Pgs. 897–914 include portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579]

Malanson, David: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 375]

Manila: conveyance of British government stores by 484–486 [Pgs. 484–486 include portions of Doc. 309, Doc. 310, Doc. 311, and Doc. 312] (See Great Britain.)

Manzanillo: arrest, trial and acquittal of Mr. Frank B. Kemp, by authorities at 730–732 [Pgs. 730–732 include portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

Margouiner, Samuel: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 286]

Maritime law: necessity for adoption of regulations governing cases of collision on the high seas, of ships sailing under different flags 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587], 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589]

Maritime regulations 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300] (See Shipping.)

Marriage: question as to the right of United States ministers abroad to celebrate it 117 [Pg. 117 includes portions of Doc. 103 and Doc. 104] (See Guatemala.)

Swiss federal law concerning; circular of the chargé d’affaires of the United States 941–951 [Pgs. 941–951 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 603]

Martin, Robert: leader of a band of robbers; letters from the governor of Chihuahua with reference to depredations committed by band of robbers led by; pursuit of the robbers and fight 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, and Doc. 499], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 503], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504]

Mary M., schooner: claim against Great Britain 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Matacong: seizure of the Island by the French for purposes of revenue; protest of the governor of Sierra Leone, who claims the island on ground of cession to British Government by treaty; this treaty never ratified; action of the governor of Sierra Leone towards American vessels going to; threatened disaster to trade; demand of native authorities to be left to themselves by both England and France 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Matthews, Felix A., United States consul at Tangier: letter to the grand vizier of the Emperor of Morocco, in remonstrance against persecution of Jews: his course cordially approved by Department of State 794–797 [Pgs. 794–797 include portions of Doc. 505, Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508], 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511], 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513]

Maud and Effie, schooner: claim against Great Britain 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Maynard, Horace, minister of the United States, at Constantinople: his departure from Turkey; testimonial of American residents 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618], 983 [Pg. 983 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619]

Mazatlan: arrest of Captain Metzger, a citizen of the United States, for alleged smuggling 711 [Pg. 711 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

McAulay, Peter: (See Fortune Bay outrage) 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 361], 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 361]

McCrary, Geo. W., Secretary of War: letter to Mr. Evarts. (See Mexico) 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 450]

McDonald, James: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 375]

McDonald, Wm. H.: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 582 [Pg. 582 is part of Doc. 375]

McNamara, T. E.: co-defendant in trade-mark case 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

McPherson, J. R., Senator from New Jersey: letter to Mr. Evarts in case of Captain Metzger 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 451]

Medhurst, W. H., English consul at Shanghai: rules for mixed courts 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 133]

Mediation: in the affairs of Chili and Peru discussed by national authorities of the Argentine Republic 9 [Pg. 9 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7] offers of, by the United States minister at Buenos Ayres, in dispute over the presidential election; answers of national and provincial governments 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 21], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

offers of, on the part of Colombia to Chili 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 106 and Doc. 107] (See Colombia.)

of the United States in war between Chili and Peru 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 317]

rumor of offers on the part of the United States in the affairs of Chili, Peru, and Bolivia 121 [Pg. 121 includes portions of Doc. 107, Doc. 108, and Doc. 109] (See Chili.)

Melikoff, General: appointed chief of supreme executive commission in Russia; his powers and functions 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555]

Mély, August: naturalization case of, at Berlin 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282]

Memorandum: of the United States minister in China; criminal matters; foreigners subject to same rules as natives, in many cases, though not in others; divergence in treatment of cases of foreigners and natives violating the same laws; criminal proceedings against natives may become civil against foreigners 146–148 [Pg. 146 is part of Doc. 133] of the United States minister in China; civil matters; debts; their collection and payment through consular officers; cases under the treaty between China and the United States; mixed courts; ambiguity in British treaty with China, of 1858 148–154 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 133]

on mixed courts at Shanghai 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 133] (See Mixed courts.)

Merrill, George: letter to Mr. Evarts, on foreign corporations in France; recommending treaty to cover the question 355 [Pg. 355 includes portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227], 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228]

Merritt, Ethel A.: American trading schooner boarded and searched by Spanish naval officers 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 582]

Message of the President of Liberia: aboriginal inhabitants of the country; ports of entry; public debt; education 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 441], 695–700 [Pgs. 695–700 include portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

Metzger, Capt. William: arrest and imprisonment of, by Mexican authorities at Mazatlan; tried for alleged smuggling; the United States minister to investigate case of, and demand redress 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 323], 711–713 [Pgs. 711–713 include portions of Doc. 450, Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453] (See Newbern.)

Mexico: address of the President to the Congress of; foreign relations; commerce; public debt; railroads; military training; depredations of Indians on the frontier 768–774 [Pgs. 768–774 include portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, Doc. 486, and Doc. 487] arrival of Mormon church officials in. (See Mormon) 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 459, Doc. 460, and Doc. 461]

arrest by United States forces of eight individuals suspected of revolutionary intentions against the government of; their extradition asked; specific allegations and charges necessary to the granting of extradition 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502]

better condition of order and peace on the frontier states of; good disposition of President Diaz’s administration; no guarantee of a continuance of peace and order 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 457], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

campaign against Indians 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]

coast survey of the United States steamer Tuscarora; government of, ask that notice of similar expeditions in the future be given 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

contraband law passed by Congress of; penalties for its violation; cases of Mr. Kemp and Captain Jacobson 730–734 [Pgs. 730–734 include portions of Doc. 461, Doc. 462, and Doc. 463]

contract for construction of a railroad and telegraph line from Acapulco to City of Mexico, approved by the President; authority of the governor and the company; representation of the government on board of directors; company to be Mexican; the subsidy; need of foreign capital 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 483 and Doc. 484]

conviction and execution of a Mexican soldier by Mexican court, for murder of another Mexican committed in Texas; request of United States minister for copy of record of the trial, and his inability to procure it; question as to the significance of the case; letter of Mr. Ruelas to Mr. Foster; value of precedent established by this case 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 713–719 [Pgs. 713–719 include portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, Doc. 453, and Doc. 454], 730 [Pg. 730 includes portions of Doc. 461 and Doc. 462]

customs regulations of; case of the United States steamer Newbern 495–497 [Pgs. 495–497 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

departure of Mr. Foster from; attention shown him 737–739 [Pgs. 737–739 include portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, Doc. 467, and Doc. 468]

depredations of a band of robbers, led by Robert Martin 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, and Doc. 499], 787 [Pg. 787 includes portions of Doc. 499 and Doc. 500], 788 [Pg. 788 includes portions of Doc. 500, Doc. 501, and Doc. 502], 789 [Pg. 789 is part of Doc. 503], 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504]

disbandment of raiding parties organized for invasion of Sonora 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497], 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, and Doc. 499]

election of presidential electors; prospects of the candidates; result of failure to elect by the electoral college; purchase of arms by governors of several states 761 [Pg. 761 includes portions of Doc. 476 and Doc. 477]

escape of Victorio and his band into. (See Victorio) 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486]

government of, asked to co-operate with the United States in the suppresion of Indians and outlaws on the borders between the two countries; report of General Pope 708–711 [Pgs. 708–711 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451]

government of, to be held responsible to the United States for depredations of Indians on American soil, to whom it gives asylum; desire of government of, to suppress the hostile Indians, and its refusal to accept the responsibility 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 764 [Pg. 764 includes portions of Doc. 480 and Doc. 481], 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482]

ground of the President’s refusal to permit United States troops to cross into, in pursuit of hostile Indians; authority to grant such permission vested in Congress alone; the President of, authorized to enter into convention with the United States upon the subject of either government being allowed to pursue depredators across the borders; orders for co-operation of Mexican with United States forces in pursuit of marauders 758–761 [Pgs. 758–761 include portions of Doc. 475, Doc. 476, and Doc. 477]

impressment of American citizens for service in the army of; the United States minister instructed to demand their instant release, and pecuniary indemnity for detention and annoyance; case of Burnato 776–780 [Pgs. 776–780 include portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

inhabitants on the border between the United States and, diverting the waters of the Rio Grande during the dry season; consequent injury to agriculturists across the river in Texas; letter of the Governor of Texas to Mr. Evarts 752 [Pg. 752 includes portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473]

instructions to General Ord to pursue raiders across border into, no longer operative 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

interview between the United States minister to, and the President of: vain endeavor of the minister to procure the consent of the President to pursuit of hostile Indians escaping to, by United States troops 774–776 [Pgs. 774–776 include portions of Doc. 486, Doc. 487, and Doc. 488]

murder of three American citizens in the State of Michoacan; prompt and energetic action of the government expected for the arrest and punishment of the guilty parties; Mexican officer implicated in the murder; delay of government in bringing the murderers to trial 739–744 [Pgs. 739–744 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 745–752 [Pgs. 745–752 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

opposition in Congress of, to construction of railroads by American corporations or capitalists; discriminations against foreigners; transfer of the Blair charter; probable enterprise of the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fé Railroad 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 454] (See Railroads.)

purchase of ammunition in, by hostile Indians; the consequent depredations in United States territory; inactivity of Mexican authorities; work of Colonel Hatch’s command on the frontier of Mexico 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490], 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491]

refusal of the President of, to permit United States troops to pursue hostile Indians across the border 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 475]

release of cattle thieves; their transportation at the expense of the Mexican government, to the scene of their former depredations 756 [Pg. 756 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

restoration of diplomatic relations between Belgium and; letter of Belgian minister to Mr. Foster, thanking him for protection rendered by United States legation to Belgian subjects during the interruption of diplomatic relations 737 [Pg. 737 includes portions of Doc. 465, Doc. 466, and Doc. 467]

revolutionists bombard, and capture the city of Mazatlan; interference of foreign consuls; recapture of the city by the government troops; disturbed condition of the country 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483]

rumors of formation of raiding parties on Mexican frontier for incursions into Sonora; General McDowell ordered to prevent their invasion of Mexican territory 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495], 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

state troops of Guanaxuato fire upon General Gonzalez and his friends 762 [Pg. 762 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

telegraph lines 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 486]

the Zona libre and its commercial effects upon the United States 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 456]

Michoacan: imprisonment of eighteen of the rioters and two ringleaders concerned in the murder of the three American citizens in; the case following the usual legal course; the trial ordered to be proceeded with 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 483 and Doc. 484], 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486] murder of three American citizens in 739–744 [Pgs. 739–744 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 745–752 [Pgs. 745–752 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

Mikado: his return to Tokio from the western provinces; his character; abolition of the feudal system; reorganization of society; the army and navy; the press, telegraph, railway, steam navigation, postal and savings system, and educational system instituted and promoted by; great affection of his people for him 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

Military duty: enforcement of, on the part of naturalized American citizens returning to Germany 441–461 [Pgs. 441–461 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

Miltz: property damaged by Guard Mobile during siege of Paris 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231] (See Claims.)

Mining: proposed contract for, in Liberia, in conflict with laws of the republic 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441]

Mixed courts: at present bearing the semblance of a temporary expedient 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 160] commission for revision of the constitution of, in Egypt; proposed powers of the commission; the United States to appoint two delegates; delegates from powers not participating in the organization of 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 351 and Doc. 352], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358], 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 358]

district magistrate conjointly with magistrate of, should try grave criminal cases 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 160], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 160]

divergency of the views of consuls at Shanghai concerning opinions as to admission of foreign lawyers; French special court 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 162]

efforts by consuls at Shanghai to secure its establishment; jurisdiction of the court; rank of the magistrates and insufficiency of their salaries; advantages of the system in spite of the absence of a definite code, unsatisfactory punishments, and want of permanence in offices 157–159 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 133]

inadequate compensation and allowances of magistrate 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 160], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 160], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 162]

in China; Mr. Stahel recommends the appointment of assessors by each government concerned; consuls, however irreproachable, should not have this additional duty imposed upon them 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 143]

in Egypt 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 351] (See Egypt.)

inhuman methods of extracting evidence from witnesses in; judicial torture in China; cases cited 292–294 [Pgs. 292–294 include portions of Doc. 177, Doc. 178, and Doc. 179]

its establishment a step of importance; failure of the magistrate at Shanghai to enforce judgments of; the judicial question one of embarrassment; mode of procedure; rank of consuls in 250–253 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 162]

joint note of the powers in reference to, at Shanghai; recommendations and suggestions as to improvements 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

mass of duties in; difficulty in punishment of literary graduates 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 160]

ordinary cases where foreigners are defendants to be tried in; no attorneys to be employed in mixed cases 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 160], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 160], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 162]

proposal to give the magistrate imperial authority 253 [Pg. 253 is part of Doc. 162]

proposal to urge the adoption of the “Code Napoleon” upon the Chinese; recommendation that the magistrate be ranked higher by direct commission; the failures of the penal code in; the necessity of a code for commercial issues 159–162 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 133]

protocol inviting attention to, at Shanghai 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 133]

rules of, at Shanghai 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 133]

the Chinese deputy should have an official seal 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 160]

the prison used by; lack of room for prisoners 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 160], 248 [Pg. 248 is part of Doc. 160]

Miyagi, Japan: memorial to Emperor’s prime minister on behalf of local assembly of; demand for constitutional form of government; change in organization of imperial government; extract from the Japan Weekly Mail 683–685 [Pgs. 683–685 include portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

Mollendo: blockade of, by Chilian squadron; question of its validity 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526], 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 526], 837 [Pg. 837 includes portions of Doc. 528 and Doc. 529]

Monrovia: arrival of French frigate “Talisman,” Captain Thierney; the captain, in the absence of the French consul, depends upon the United States minister; interview with the President; expression of good will; departure of the vessel 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448] diversion of trade of Central Africa from Sierra Leone to 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 439], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Montenegro: visit to Cettinje by the United States minister at Vienna; population and organization; religion and education; the country, its products and commerce; the ports; foreign representation in 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Montenegro and Albania: affairs causing anxiety; determination to cut loose from the Porte; proclamation designed to check Austria 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42]

Montjoy, S. C., United States consul at Lambayeque: his protest against depredations of Chilian fleet at Lobos Islands and at Eten 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536]

Moorish subjects: alleged abuses of the privilege of protection of, by foreign representatives 893–895 [Pgs. 893–895 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, and Doc. 577], 896 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 577] exposition of treatment of Jews in Morocco; address of Jews to prime minister of Spain 801 [Pg. 801 includes portions of Doc. 508 and Doc. 509]

protection of; desire, by Great Britain, to refer question 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323] (See Tangier.)

protection of Jewish and Mohammedan subjects in Morocco 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505] (See Jews.)

question of protection of naturalized, and other, by foreign representatives; letter for information of, proposed conference at Madrid 797–801 [Pgs. 797–801 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509], 893–895 [Pgs. 893–895 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, and Doc. 577], 896 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 577]

question of their protection to be discussed by the powers at Madrid; Mr. Fairchild to represent the United States 510 [Pg. 510 includes portions of Doc. 334 and Doc. 335], 893 [Pg. 893 includes portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

Mormon: Accessions to colony in Utah, from Belgium; publication of the United States laws applicable to polygamy, in the official organ of the Belgian Government 69 [Pg. 69 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54] arrival in Mexico of a high official of church with avowed object of propagating their faith 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 459, Doc. 460, and Doc. 461]

emigration of converts to the United States from Switzerland 951 [Pg. 951 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 600]

emigration of, from Italy to the United States 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

emigration from Great Britain to the United States; English Government without power to prohibit; notice to emigrants and emigration agents; company to start from Liverpool on April 10, 1880 465–468 [Pgs. 465–468 include portions of Doc. 298, Doc. 299, and Doc. 300], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 301 and Doc. 302], 475 [Pg. 475 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 476 [Pg. 476 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

emigration from Norway and Sweden, of converts to Mormonism, to the United States; measures taken by Swedish and Norwegian Government to avert this 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, and Doc. 591], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594]

immigration to the United States from Denmark 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]

recruits in Europe for the practices of Mormonism; note from the Austrian foreign office 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34]

Moro Castle, schooner: claim against Great Britain 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Morocco: action of the governor of the city, on hearing that foreign protection to Jews had been withdrawn 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 506] alleged abuses by foreign representatives of the privilege of protection of Moorish subjects in employ of foreigners 893–895 [Pgs. 893–895 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, Doc. 576, and Doc. 577], 896 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 577]

atrocities committed on Jews; case of Isaac Amar; appeals to the United States consul at Tangier for intervention and protection 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 506]

burning of an aged Jew at Fez 801–803 [Pgs. 801–803 include portions of Doc. 508, Doc. 509, and Doc. 510]

circulars of minister of foreign affairs with reference to Moorish subjects naturalized in foreign countries who may return to; protests against the tenor of the circulars by several foreign ministers; barbarous treatment of Jews; manner of official appointments, pernicious; the Koran the source of law; Spanish treaty stipulations 791–794 [Pgs. 791–794 include portions of Doc. 504, Doc. 505, and Doc. 506]

letter to the grand vizier, from United States Consul Matthews upon persecution of Jews; agitation excited in Europe and America; results of of such persecution in other countries 795–797 [Pgs. 795–797 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

naturalization laws of, inquired into with reference to proposed international conference at Madrid; question of protection to Moorish subjects by foreign representatives; absence of mixed tribunals in Morocco; absence of system in levying taxes 797–801 [Pgs. 797–801 include portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, Doc. 508, and Doc. 509]

prospects of good harvests rendered hopeful by copious falls of rain; suffering in southern provinces from famine; pitiable condition of the peasantry; damage to crops and property caused by floods at Tangier 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505]

rebellion of several interior tribes in consequence of exorbitant imposts; reverse of the imperial troops; consequent stagnation of trade, commerce, and agriculture 804 [Pg. 804 includes portions of Doc. 510 and Doc. 511]

Spanish subjects residing in, free from taxation and from civil and criminal jurisdiction of the Emperor; other exemptions; exemptions claimed for Moorish subjects in service of foreign representatives, or agents and brokers of foreign merchants 895 [Pg. 895 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577], 896 [Pg. 896 is part of Doc. 577]

Morocco conference at Madrid: Austro-Hungarian representative instructed to endeavor to secure religious liberty for all classes in Morocco 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579] convention as signed acceptable to the United States, though, regret is expressed that there was not embodied in the convention itself a provision recognizing liberty of conscience and worship 922 [Pg. 922 includes portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582]

failure of prior negotiations at Tangier 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585], 931 [Pg. 931 includes portions of Doc. 585 and Doc. 586]

list of representatives of the powers participating; articles agreed upon in convention 917–920 [Pgs. 917–920 include portions of Doc. 579 and Doc. 580]

ratification to be given at an early day; address on religious liberty to Sultan readily signed by all the plenipotentiaries 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 579]

reports of the proceedings of each session 897–914 [Pgs. 897–914 include portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579]

sessions of: first meeting: title of plenipotentiary decided upon; no government to take precedence; Señor Canovas del Castillo chosen president; secretaries and aids chosen; observations of Sid Mohammed Vargas 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579], 898 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 579]

second meeting: presentation in writing of observations of Sid Mohammed Vargas; modifications proposed; irregular protection; difference between demands at Tangier and Madrid 898–900 [Pg. 898 is part of Doc. 579]

third meeting: further consideration of demands of Sid Mohammed Vargas; adoption of terms of Spanish and English treaties 900–902 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 579]

fourth meeting: employment of persons under prosecution; execution of sentence not to be interfered with; list of protected persons to be furnished by consuls and agents; persons not allowed protection 902 [Pg. 902 is part of Doc. 579], 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 579]

fifth meeting: proposition to consider several articles together; observations of the British representative; discussion as to order of procedure 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 579], 904 [Pg. 904 is part of Doc. 579]

sixth meeting: the French representative on the proposition presented by Great Britain 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 579]

seventh meeting: new propositions prepared by Austrian representative; discussion upon these new propositions; adoption of one 905 [Pg. 905 is part of Doc. 579], 906 [Pg. 906 is part of Doc. 579]

eighth meeting: discussion of propositions presented by Austria and Italy 906 [Pg. 906 is part of Doc. 579], 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 579]

ninth meeting: withdrawal of Austrian and Italian propositions; payment of imposts by protégés; agricultural tax; other taxes 907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 579], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 579]

tenth meeting: abuses arising from return of subjects of the Sultan, who had been naturalized in foreign countries 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 579], 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 579]

eleventh meeting: naturalization discussion continued; Italy in regard to number and quality of protégés in Morocco 909 [Pg. 909 is part of Doc. 579], 910 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 579]

twelfth meeting: irregular protection not to be accorded in future; proposition of the Pope to be presented; religious belief 910–912 [Pg. 910 is part of Doc. 579]

thirteenth meeting: review of articles already adopted 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 579]

fourteenth meeting: amendments to article 16; adoption of amended article; time and place of ratifications 912 [Pg. 912 is part of Doc. 579], 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 579]

fifteenth meeting: Italian representative authorized to sign convention upon stated condition 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 579]

sixteenth meeting: last meeting; signing of the convention and of address to Sultan of Morocco in regard to religious liberty; results of the convention 913 [Pg. 913 is part of Doc. 579], 914 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 579]

the United States minister at Madrid designated as the representative of the United States in the conference 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 586 and Doc. 587]

Morrill, August, United States consul at Manzanillo: letter upon case of Mr. Kemp, an American citizen 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 462], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 462]

Mosel, steamer: arrest of Weinrebe on board, by United States officers, under treaty of 1877, for violation of revenue laws 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

Moustier: one of the discoverers of the sources of the Niger 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Murray, Michael B.: (See Fortune Bay outrage) 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 361], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 361]

N.

Naturalization: case of George Setschel, a native of Baden 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 601], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602] cases of, in Germany under the military service laws 441–461 [Pgs. 441–461 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293]

laws of, in Morocco, as stated in circular of the minister of foreign affairs; refusal of the United States consul at Tangier to be governed by, in his right of protection to American citizens; this action approved by the Secretary of State; denial of right of Moorish subjects to be naturalized by foreign powers 790 [Pg. 790 includes portions of Doc. 503 and Doc. 504], 793 [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 505], 794 [Pg. 794 includes portions of Doc. 505 and Doc. 506], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 506, Doc. 507, and Doc. 508]

of foreigners in the United States 343 [Pg. 343 includes portions of Doc. 218 and Doc. 219] (See Denmark.)

Navigation: closing of the Orinoco to 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658] of rivers in China; the Whangpoo; the lighting of the coast 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Netherlands: abolition of discriminating duties in East Indian colonies; continuance by the United States of discriminating duties; results of this, particularly with reference to coffee 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522] answer of the minister of foreign affairs to interrogatories of committee of the Staats General; relations with Venezuela; extradition treaty with the United States; differential duties in the United States upon indirect importations of colonial produce 805 [Pg. 805 includes portions of Doc. 511, Doc. 512, and Doc. 513], 806 [Pg. 806 is part of Doc. 513]

claimants of estates in. (See Estate; Bove) 813–816 [Pgs. 813–816 include portions of Doc. 515, Doc. 516, and Doc. 517]

defalcation of Messrs. Pincoffs and Kerdijk at Rotterdam 809–813 [Pgs. 809–813 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

opening of the annual session of the Staats General; address by the King 816 [Pg. 816 includes portions of Doc. 516 and Doc. 517]

recognition by the King, of Roumania as a principality; the religious question settled; the consulate-general at Bucharest raised to the rank of diplomatic agency; similar action on part of the United States 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519], 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]

Neutrality laws: violation of, apprehended by Chilian minister at Washington 135 [Pg. 135 includes portions of Doc. 122 and Doc. 123], 136 [Pg. 136 includes portions of Doc. 123 and Doc. 124] (See Chili.)

Neutrals: injury suffered by, through hostile acts of belligerent does not always give right of indemnity; transfer of property to, by belligerents 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 125]

Newbern, United States steamer: case of the, at Mazatlan 495–497 [Pgs. 495–497 include portions of Doc. 322, Doc. 323, and Doc. 324], 499 [Pg. 499 includes portions of Doc. 325, Doc. 326, and Doc. 327]

New Chwang: war power of; report by Consul Bandinel 277 [Pg. 277 is part of Doc. 171], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 171], 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 172] (See Education.)

Newcomb, Eunice P.: American trading schooner boarded and searched by Spanish naval officers 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 582]

New England, schooner: claim against Great Britain 561 [Pg. 561 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Newfoundland: statutes of, applicable to fisheries 585–588 [Pgs. 585–588 include portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376] (See Fisheries.)

New Orleans: loss of cotton-laden ships by fire at 511 [Pg. 511 includes portions of Doc. 336, Doc. 337, and Doc. 338]

Nicaragua: request of governor of, to the United States, for papers relating to dispute of, with Great Britain 502 [Pg. 502 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 503 [Pg. 503 includes portions of Doc. 328, Doc. 329, and Doc. 330]

Niger: an account of the discovery of its source, from the bulletin of the Geographical Society of Marseilles; discovery made by Messrs. Zweifel and Moustier; the route followed; extracts from letters of the explorers; hardships encountered 701–704 [Pgs. 701–704 include portions of Doc. 443, Doc. 444, and Doc. 445]

Nihilists: attempt upon life of Emperor of Russia by explosion in winter palace; the Emperor unharmed, but many others killed and injured 869–871 [Pgs. 869–871 include portions of Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, and Doc. 555] attempt upon life of Emperor of Russia by wreck of a part of imperial train; escape of Emperor and passengers 866–869 [Pgs. 866–869 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc. 552]

seizure by the police of printing-press belonging to, and arrest of persons connected with it; subsequent murder of the informant; great excitement in St. Petersburg; many people leaving the city; all houses searched and inspected by the police 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556]

Ningpo: war power of; report by Consul Lord. (See Education) 278–280 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 171], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 172]

Nitrates: shipment of, from Peru, in vessels owned by citizens of the United States directly covered by treaty 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

Noel, Alfred: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 573 [Pg. 573 is part of Doc. 375]

Nordenskjold, Professor: entertained by Mr. Bingham, United States minister to Japan 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423] reception of, by the people and government of Sweden and Norway; short sketch of him 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593]

“Northwest boundary question” in Liberia: thanks of Government of Liberia to Commodore Shufeldt, for his services in the adjustment of 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 441], 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

Norway: (See Sweden and Norway) 933–941 [Pgs. 933–941 include portions of Doc. 588, Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, Doc. 592, Doc. 593, Doc. 594, Doc. 595, Doc. 596, and Doc. 597]

Norway and Sweden: emigration of Mormon converts to the United States 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, and Doc. 591]

Note: identic, to Chinese government, transmitting statement of grievances; imperial decree promising inquiry and redress, referred to 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 134] joint, of the foreign representatives at Peking, upon the mixed court at Shanghai. (See Mixed court) 165–167 [Pgs. 165–167 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

verbal, of the German minister, on non-observance of certain treaty stipulations with reference to inland taxes in China. (See Treaties) 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 134], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 134]

Noyes, E. F.: minister of the United States to France; appointed as delegate to International Industrial Property Congress 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

Nute, Charles H.: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 583 [Pg. 583 is part of Doc. 375]

O.

Obelisk: departure from Alexandria of Commander Gorringe with the; arrival at Gibraltar 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 647 and Doc. 648] presentation to the United States of the obelisk known as “Cleopatra’s Needle” 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630]

work preparatory to its removal progressing satisfactorily; description of the obelisk 994 [Pg. 994 includes portions of Doc. 630 and Doc. 631], 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 631 and Doc. 632]

Official intercourse: discussion of the question of language in communications with Chinese officials. (See Lord) 288 [Pg. 288 includes portions of Doc. 173 and Doc. 174] protocol concerning report on, in China. (See China) 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

questions relating to; improvements in. (See China) 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

readiness of the Yamên to consider report on by diplomatic corps at Peking. (See Judicial) 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

reform in methods of communication slow; the Chinese Government should provide its own translators 294 [Pg. 294 includes portions of Doc. 178 and Doc. 179], 295 [Pg. 295 includes portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180]

report of the diplomatic committee upon; access of foreign to native officials should be assured 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

rules regulating the forms of correspondence, by Mr. Devèria 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 135] (See Devèria.)

terms of address recommended; terms to be retained; rules for official correspondence, by Mr. C. Arendt. (See Arendt) 186–188 [Pg. 186 is part of Doc. 135]

Olliver, G. S. J., an American citizen, resident at Fayal, Azores: letter giving an account of gallant conduct of United States Consul Dabney and his son, in rescuing wrecked sailors of a French bark 856–858 [Pgs. 856–858 include portions of Doc. 541, Doc. 542, and Doc. 543]

Ontario, schooner: claim against Great Britain. (See Fortune Bay outrage) 560 [Pg. 560 is part of Doc. 361]

Opium: inland duties on, in China 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 134 and Doc. 135]

Ord, General: order instructing him to pursue marauders across the Mexican border into Mexico, revoked; better state of affairs on the border 735 [Pg. 735 includes portions of Doc. 463 and Doc. 464], 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 744 [Pg. 744 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 781 [Pg. 781 includes portions of Doc. 490 and Doc. 491], 782 [Pg. 782 includes portions of Doc. 491 and Doc. 492]

Ordnance: claim of United States against Liberia for, to be paid 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

Orinoco: closing of, to commerce 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658]

P.

Packard, S. B., United States consul at Liverpool: Mormon emigration 467 [Pg. 467 is part of Doc. 299]

Pacquet, Michael: naturalization case of, at Berlin, unfavorably settled 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 286]

Palermo: report of United States consul at, on Mormon emigration from; absence of Mormons from; difficulty of inducing Sicilians to emigrate, or change their religion 644 [Pg. 644 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

Panama: canal. (See Canal) 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 248 and Doc. 249]

Paris: removal of capital from Versailles to; speech of Gambetta; the senate and deputies chambers; the Bourbon palace; French oratory; the debates. (See Gambetta) 351–355 [Pgs. 351–355 include portions of Doc. 226 and Doc. 227]

Parry, Francis: judicial torture in China. (See Mixed court) 293 [Pg. 293 is part of Doc. 178]

Parsons, Rev. Dr.: an American missionary murdered in Turkey; the presence of a vessel of war desirable, as evidence of the solicitude of the United States for protection of citizens abroad; capture of the murderers; account of the crime; delays of Turkish law in trial of Mohammedans for murder of Christians 983–986 [Pgs. 983–986 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621] the Government of the United States demands the immediate and condign punishment of his murderers, and the enforcement of measures for the protection of citizens of the United States in Turkey; a United States vessel of war to be sent to cruise in Turkish waters; the United States chargé d’affaires authorized to employ counsel to assist in the prosecution of the murderers 986–988 [Pgs. 986–988 include portions of Doc. 620, Doc. 621, Doc. 622, Doc. 623, and Doc. 624], 989 [Pg. 989 includes portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, and Doc. 626]

transfer of his murderers to Constantinople for trial; no apparent cause for delay in trying them; counsel for the prosecution to be employed by United States chargé d’affaires 988 [Pg. 988 includes portions of Doc. 623 and Doc. 624], 989 [Pg. 989 includes portions of Doc. 624, Doc. 625, and Doc. 626]

trial of his murderers; one convicted of murder in the first degree and sentenced to death; two, as accomplices, Sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment; solicitude of the United States Government to have these sentences promptly executed 990–992 [Pgs. 990–992 include portions of Doc. 627, Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630]

Passport: application of Carl Rau, to the United States legation at Berne 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606]

Passport fees: (See American: Students, &c.) 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

Peace committee of Buenos Ayres: they temporarily avert civil war; reply of General Roca to their demand for his withdrawal as a presidential candidate 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 11 and Doc. 12], 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Peace: efforts in the interest of, in Chili, on the part of France, Italy, and Great Britain-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

Peru: blockade of Mollendo by Chili; rights of foreigners affected by; letter of the Peruvian admiral in command at Arica concerning alleged running of blockade by foreign vessels 834 [Pg. 834 is part of Doc. 526] Chilians in full command of the sea; projected blockade and bombardment of Callao; eight, and afterwards ten, days given to non-belligerants and neutrals to withdraw from the town, and for neutral vessels to leave the port; flight of inhabitants of Callao to Lima; appeal of American citizens to United States legation for protection 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533], 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 533 and Doc. 534]

circular alleging inhumanity in Chili’s method of warfare; strong feeling produced among foreign representatives at Lima; suggestion that reasonable notice and time be given non-belligerents and neutrals to remove themselves and property from coastwise towns to be bombarded by Chilian forces 838–840 [Pgs. 838–840 include portions of Doc. 529, Doc. 530, and Doc. 531]

decree regulating the prices of the necessities of life; list of prices; effect of decree; paper soles, the only currency in circulation, much depreciated 845–847 [Pgs. 845–847 include portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, Doc. 536, and Doc. 537]

departure of President Prado; his decree on leaving the country; General La Puerta left as President; his political creed; martial law in Lima and Callao; mutiny of troops; conduct and character of La Cotera; the revolution an accomplished fact 819–823 [Pgs. 819–823 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]

depredations of Chilian fleet at Lobos Islands and at Eten; letter of protest from United States Consul Monuoy to Mr. Christiancy 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 530 and Doc. 531], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 534, Doc. 535, and Doc. 536]

dictatorship of Piérola; decrees with reference to government 827–833 [Pgs. 827–833 include portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526]

incensed at exportation of nitrates for benefit of her adversary; consequent action in violation of neutrality laws 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 529 and Doc. 530], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 531 and Doc. 532], 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

mediation of the United States 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 312, Doc. 313, and Doc. 314] (See Mediation.)

proposed bombardment of sea coast towns by Chilian fleet 125 [Pg. 125 includes portions of Doc. 110, Doc. 111, and Doc. 112] (See Chili.)

protocol of preliminary bases of federal union of Bolivia and 848–851 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 537] (See Union.)

question of peace with Chili; extract from South Pacific Times; projected union of Peru and Bolivia; publication of protocol concerning the bases of union has a beneficial effect upon value of paper currency 847 [Pg. 847 includes portions of Doc. 536 and Doc. 537], 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 537]

signing and ratification of treaty of peace and friendship between Spain and 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 538]

the currency; value of the paper note; circulars referring to war with Chili 830–833 [Pgs. 830–833 include portions of Doc. 524, Doc. 525, and Doc. 526]

treaty between the United States and, protects United States vessels carrying nitrates from 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

Pew, John & Son.: (See Fortune Bay outrage) 557–559 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 361]

Piérola: his accession to dictatorship of Peru; decree accepting the position; letter to the Pope; decree with reference to the constitution; military organization of the republic 827–830 [Pgs. 827–830 include portions of Doc. 524 and Doc. 525]

Pincoffs, Lode wick: defalcation of, at Rotterdam 809–813 [Pgs. 809–813 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

Pinkos, Henry: a Jewish citizen of the United States, ordered to leave St. Petersburg; extension of time granted him; probability that he will be permitted to remain if he desires it 873–877 [Pgs. 873–877 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, and Doc. 563] he sells his property and prepares to embark at Cronstadt; difficulty about his passport; he is sent back to St. Petersburg to procure a proper passport; ship sails with his baggage; he is left dependent upon private charity; his final departure from Russia; his grounds for reclamation and indemnification 878–882 [Pgs. 878–882 include portions of Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, and Doc. 569]

Political meetings in Japan: regulations governing; jurisdiction and authority of police over them; open air meetings prohibited; police officers must attend them; penalties for breach of regulations; regulations do not extend to those held in accordance with established custom 687–689 [Pgs. 687–689 include portions of Doc. 435, Doc. 436, and Doc. 437]

Polk, James K.: proclamation by, with reference to discriminating tonnage dues 104 [Pg. 104 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 105 [Pg. 105 includes portions of Doc. 93, Doc. 94, and Doc. 95]

Poole, Willard G.: (See Fortune Bay outrage) 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 361]

Pope, Ambrose: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 375]

Pope: desire of the, to be represented in Liberia; constitution of the country as to religion is liberal; the people consist of Protestants and heathen 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449] letter of Piérola to the, annonncing his election to the dictatorship of Peru 827 [Pg. 827 is part of Doc. 524]

Pope, General: letter to Colonel Whipple; Indians not under control of the Army; protests against the Army being held responsible, in official communications, for the conduct and movements of Indians not under its control; report of Colonel Hatch 708–711 [Pgs. 708–711 include portions of Doc. 449, Doc. 450, and Doc. 451]

Population: organization of, in Montenegro 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Port-au-Prince: erection of two light-houses in bay of; discriminating light dues on foreign ships 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349] hydrographic announcement; light-houses, dues, &c. 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 398 and Doc. 399], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 399] (See Harbor.)

visit of Spanish war vessels to 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Portugal: close of the session of the Cortes; financial measures passed; new loan authorized; practical rejection of the convention respecting Anglo-Portuguese treaty; consequent indignation of the British minister, Mr. Minor, one of the signers 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546], 866 [Pg. 866 includes portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, and Doc. 548] extraordinary measures to cover deficit in receipts; additional taxes decreed 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

opening of the Cortes by the King; speech by the King; public loan; ministerial responsibility; decentralization of government of colonies; foreign relations; the budget and proposition for organizing system of public accounts; railway to be constructed; popular instruction; freedom of elections; representative system; collection of taxes 858–860 [Pgs. 858–860 include portions of Doc. 542, Doc. 543, and Doc. 544]

tariff privileges of Annex B of Franco-Portuguese treaty of 1866 asked for by the United States; the United States entitled to these privileges; letter of the Secretary of the United States Treasury; the United States admitted to the privileges 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 860–864 [Pgs. 860–864 include portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

United States naval cemetery at Porto Grande, Cape Verd Islands: transfer of the dead from the old to the new; letter of Mr. Terry, U. S. consul 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 539], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542]

Postal Union: adhesion of Colombia to 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204] law authorizing incorporation of Colombia into; Colombia willing to enter for all territory except Panama; the Panama Railroad Company’s agreement to carry the mails 332–334 [Pgs. 332–334 include portions of Doc. 210 and Doc. 211]

Post-office: work of, in Japan 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

Prado: late President of Peru; his departure from the country 819 [Pg. 819 includes portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, and Doc. 522]

Priesthood, the: opposition to the Belgian school-bill 65 [Pg. 65 is part of Doc. 49]

Prison: the United States, at Smyrna; facilities for prison discipline very primitive 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635]

Protestantism in Turkey: tolerated, but not sanctioned by the government; failure of the German and British embassies to place Protestant community on an equality with other religious communities 961–965 [Pgs. 961–965 include portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607]

Protocol: attention of Chinese Government invited to report on official intercourse 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136] inviting attention of Chinese Government to matters relating to mixed court at Shanghai; the United States minister requested to prepare draft of collective note; the questions considered to be submitted to the governments represented at the conference 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 133]

modification of transit across Isthmus of Panama 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

on inland taxation in China; statement of grievances referred to in 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 134], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 134] (See Statement of grievances.)

preliminary bases of the federal union of Peru and Bolivia; complementary, of the preliminary bases, &c 848–851 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 537]

Putnam, James O., United States minister to Belgium: appointed delegate from the United States to International Industrial Property Congress in France 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 389 [Pg. 389 includes portions of Doc. 253, Doc. 254, and Doc. 255]

Q.

Quinn, Patrick: an American citizen illegally taxed by Hawaiian authorities at Hilo: threatened with imprisonment, he pays under protest; statement of the points in the case of 597 [Pg. 597 is part of Doc. 381], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 381] the tax assessor’s error; taxed as an employé on a plantation; the Hawaiian minister of finance directed to refund amount of tax; discussion of assessor’s responsibility in case of; attention of minister called to twelve cases similar to this of 598–602 [Pgs. 598–602 include portions of Doc. 381, Doc. 382, Doc. 383, and Doc. 384], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 385, Doc. 386, and Doc. 387], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 388 and Doc. 389]

R.

Railroads: Austria-Hungary; most of the great lines in, owned by the State 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34] European States: increase in ownership by; adjustment of tariffs by government; this system growing; expressions in treaties guarding American merchandise in transit 48 [Pg. 48 includes portions of Doc. 32 and Doc. 33]

France: action of the government regarding the trans-Sahara railway 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237] policy of 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 270]

Germany: description of lines; statistics 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 270], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 270] economic considerations; in France, Holland, Austria-Hungary, Roumania, Italy, Russia, Turkey, Spain, and Belgium; State possession of, in Germany in time of war an advantage; the Empire of Germany has only certain general powers of control 419–422 [Pgs. 419–422 include portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

opposition to imperial control of 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 270] (See Bavaria and Saxony.)

sketch of; different plans of different States of the empire; examination of the question of, First from the point of view of individual States; secondly, the federation and the empire; thirdly, the relation of the two preceding 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 270], 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 270]

under management of minister of public works; guarantees given to prevent the abuse of power by the minister; profits, debts, interest, tariff, &c; statistics 418–420 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 270]

Guatemala: completion of road in; subsidized by government 118 [Pg. 118 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105] (See Guatemala.)

Mexico: contract for, from Acapulco to City of Mexico 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483], 767 [Pg. 767 includes portions of Doc. 483 and Doc. 484] failure of Congress to approve contracts for, to connect with American frontier; opposition to American connections; proposed amendment to new charter prohibiting foreigners to acquire lands within twenty miles of American frontier; the Blair charter transfer and concessions under it; construction of road to be undertaken by Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fé road 719 [Pg. 719 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 454]

Portugal: provisional contract by the government for the construction of a railway from Pampilhosa to Figueira 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 543]

Prussia: development of private and state 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 270] history of, in; first built in 1835 by a joint stock company; law of November 3, 1838, main points of the law; concession must be applied for; shares; expropriation of property; tariff; profits; postal service; tax; state’s right of purchase 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 270], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 270]

first period only private railways built; second period till 1859 von der Heydt the leading man; his policy was the purchase of the roads by the state; third period, government policy undetermined 410–412 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 270]

law transferring all roads, rights, and obligations to the empire; the “States Rights” people 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 270]

question decided in favor of state railways in 1866; excited discussion in the Prussian Parliament; resignation of Count Itzenplitz; arguments of Bismarck for imperial control of roads 412 [Pg. 412 is part of Doc. 270], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 270]

Sonora; agreement of the Mexican minister of public works to the amendments to be made in concession 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 454], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

Venezuela: contract for construction of railways between La Guayra and Caracas, and Puerto Cabello and Valencia 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662]

Rasch, Los Aurel: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 286]

Ran, Carl Gottlieb: his application for passport to the United States legation at Berne; views of the United States as to expatriation; passport to be given to Rau 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605], 961 [Pg. 961 includes portions of Doc. 605 and Doc. 606]

Reeder, N. S.: codefendant in trade-mark case 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Regulations for preventing collisions at sea: list of countries to which they are applicable 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301] sound signals-for fog, &c.; speed of ships in fog; steering and sailing rules; no ship to neglect proper precautions; reservation of harbor and inland navigation rules; special lights for squadrons and convoys 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 300], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

steamers under sail and not under steam to be considered sailing ships; steamers under steam considered steamships; rules concerning lights 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 300], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 300]

suspension of article 10 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339] (See Fisheries.)

the United States must be considered as outside of the proposed, until action of Congress upon; probable results; executive departments of the United States without power to authorize adoption of; order of the Navy Department 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 355 and Doc. 356], 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 356, Doc. 357, and Doc. 358]

Religion: constitution concerning, in Liberia, very liberal; people of the country Protestants and heathen; desire of the Pope to be represented in Liberia 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

Religious toleration: in Morocco: letter of Cardinal Nina; letter of Señor Canovas del Castillo. 897 [Pg. 897 includes portions of Doc. 578 and Doc. 579], 914–917 [Pg. 914 is part of Doc. 579] in Turkey: position of the Protestant community in Turkish Empire; statement by the secular agent of the community 961–965 [Pgs. 961–965 include portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607]

Remusat: letter to Mr. Washburne in relation to case of Mr. Miltz. (See Miltz) 358 [Pg. 358 includes portions of Doc. 229, Doc. 230, and Doc. 231]

Report: on judicial questions in China; desirability of all governments having treaties with China adopting same principle in civil and criminal cases, viz, the defendant to be tried in court of his own nationality; important measures recommended; rules of procedure, &c., recommended 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 133], 164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 133]

Resolute, Arctic discovery ship: piece of furniture made from timbers of, to be presented by Queen Victoria to the President of the United States; table presented to Mrs. Grinnell 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 353, Doc. 354, and Doc. 355]

Retschel, George: claims to be a naturalized citizen of the United States; the chargé d’ affaires of the United States at Berne asked to furnish him and his family with means of subsistence 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 601], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

Revolution: in Chihuahua. (See Chihuahua) 722–724 [Pgs. 722–724 include portions of Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456] in Lower California; letter of Consul Turner upon 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

in Mexico over the presidential election 765 [Pg. 765 includes portions of Doc. 481 and Doc. 482], 766 [Pg. 766 includes portions of Doc. 482 and Doc. 483]

in Peru 819–824 [Pgs. 819–824 include portions of Doc. 520, Doc. 521, Doc. 522, and Doc. 523]

Rice: importation of foreign, into Hawaiian Islands facilitates exportation of native rice to the United States duty free; evasion of the United States customs duty on foreign, shipped as native; alleged reasons why such frauds cannot be practised; statistics of importations of, under the treaty; discussion of the question; an act to impose specific duties on 606–614 [Pgs. 606–614 include portions of Doc. 388, Doc. 389, Doc. 390, and Doc. 391]

Rich, Isaac, schooner: claim against Great Britain 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Richter, Edward: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 286]

Rio de Janeiro: scenes of violence; the military called upon to preserve order; quiet restored; the Emperor 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77] (See Treasury.)

Rio Grande: waters of, diverted by Mexicans; consequent injury to Texan agriculturists along the river; such violation of the rights of riparian proprietors likely to cause bitter feelings and possible breaches of the peace 752–755 [Pgs. 752–755 include portions of Doc. 472 and Doc. 473], 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495]

Roach: steamship line 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81] (See Steamship line.)

Roberts, O. M.: governor of Texas: (See Rio Grande.) 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 473]

Roca, General: interview with Tejedor 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 16] refusal of his party to vote; his resignation demanded 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 11]

report that he will invade province of Buenos Ayres; determination to repel him 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 15]

reply to demand of peace committee, that he withdraw as a presidential candidate 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

Rocedo in command of national troops: engagement with Arias, commanding the Buenos Ayres troops 25 [Pg. 25 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Rogers, Herbert M., schooner: claim against Great Britain 553 [Pg. 553 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Roman Catholicism; representative from the Pope in Liberia 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

Rome: New Year receptions and festivities; absence of the Queen; work of the two legislative chambers; defeat of the project for abolition of grist-tax, and consequent prorogation of Parliament; probable dissolution of Parliament and re-election 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

Rörden, Arfst A.: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 286]

Rotterdam: defalcation of Messrs. Pincoffs and Kerdijk; refuge of the former in the United States; absence of treaty of extradition between the United States and the Netherlands; an account of the business standing, character, &c., of the defaulters 809–813 [Pgs. 809–813 include portions of Doc. 514, Doc. 515, and Doc. 516]

Roumania: identical notes of recognition from England, France, and Germany; delay of the three powers; Austria’s note of mediation; the Jewish question 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 38], 53 [Pg. 53 includes portions of Doc. 38 and Doc. 39] postponement of trade-mark convention with the United States 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

recognition of; condition and persecution of the Jews in 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 27]

recognition of, by England, France, and Germany; recognition by the Netherlands; letter of the President of the United States to Prince Charles 51 [Pg. 51 includes portions of Doc. 36 and Doc. 37]

recognition of, by the King of the Netherlands 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 518 and Doc. 519]

state railways 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 270] (See Railroads.)

Ruelas, Señor: his death; expressions of regret on the part of the United States, at the sad news 780 [Pg. 780 includes portions of Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490] letter on murder case to Mr. Foster: (See Mexico.) 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 708 [Pg. 708 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

Rules: of court at; Shanghai 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 133] (See Mixed courts.)

Rumsey, John: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 574 [Pg. 574 is part of Doc. 375]

Russia: appointment of commission for international exchange of works of science and art; regulations of the commission 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 568 and Doc. 569], 883 [Pg. 883 includes portions of Doc. 569 and Doc. 570] attempt upon the life of the Emperor: by explosion in the winter palace; from fifty to sixty soldiers killed; the Emperor unharmed; the Empress’s health 869–871 [Pgs. 869–871 include portions of Doc. 552, Doc. 553, Doc. 554, and Doc. 555] by the wrecking of railway train; the Emperor’s escape; destruction of baggage-cars; passengers unharmed; congratulations of the government and people of the United States to the Emperor on his escape 866–869 [Pgs. 866–869 include portions of Doc. 546, Doc. 547, Doc. 548, Doc. 549, Doc. 550, Doc. 551, and Doc. 552]

case of Henry Pinkos, a Jew and a citizen of the United States, ordered to leave St. Petersburg 873–882 [Pgs. 873–882 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, and Doc. 569]

change among high officers; General Melikoff appointed chief of the supreme executive commission; seizure of Nihilist printing-press in St. Petersburg, and arrest of persons connected with it; murder of the police’s informant; many persons leaving the city 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556]

death of the Empress; expressions of sympathy by the President of the United States 874 [Pg. 874 includes portions of Doc. 558, Doc. 559, and Doc. 560], 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 560 and Doc. 561]

expulsion of foreign Jews, as suspected persons: (See Pinkos.) 873–882 [Pgs. 873–882 include portions of Doc. 557, Doc. 558, Doc. 559, Doc. 560, Doc. 561, Doc. 562, Doc. 563, Doc. 564, Doc. 565, Doc. 566, Doc. 567, Doc. 568, and Doc. 569]

Jews in, alleged to be subjected to hardships by Government of 873 [Pg. 873 includes portions of Doc. 557 and Doc. 558]

reception by the Emperor of the diplomatic corps; congratulations of the President of the United States to the Emperor upon the twenty-fifth anniversary of his accession to the throne 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556]

rule concerning admission of printed matter into Russia; permission granted the United States consul-general to receive printed matter addressed to him, unopened 877 [Pg. 877 includes portions of Doc. 562 and Doc. 563], 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 563 and Doc. 564]

S.

Sahara: railway across 365 [Pg. 365 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Salisbury, Marquis of: (See Extradition.) 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Salomon, General: elected President of Hayti. 614 [Pg. 614 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391] (See Hayti.)

President of Hayti, address of; the country at peace; the election; necessity of adopting the new constitution; finances of the republic in bad condition; reforms 623–625 [Pgs. 623–625 include portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Salvador: visit of the United States minister in Central America to; his reception; remarks, and the reply of the President 115 [Pg. 115 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 102]

Sandwich Islands: emigration to, from China 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157] (See Emigration.)

Santa Cruz: financial condition of 345 [Pg. 345 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222] (See Denmark.)

Saunders, John: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 375]

Saxony: opposition to imperial control of railroads in Germany 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 270]

Schehr, John: an American citizen, fined for non-performance of military duty in Germany 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 282], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282], 457 [Pg. 457 includes portions of Doc. 286 and Doc. 287] (See Alsace-Lorraine.)

Schmidt, P. C.: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 286]

Schools: in Japan: regulations governing conduct of 655–657 [Pgs. 655–657 include portions of Doc. 420, Doc. 421, and Doc. 422]

Schuchardt, Wm.: United States consul at Piedras Negras: (See Army.) 776–780 [Pgs. 776–780 include portions of Doc. 487, Doc. 488, Doc. 489, and Doc. 490]

Scott, Louis H., United States consul at Chihuahua: complaints of 722–724 [Pgs. 722–724 include portions of Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456]

Scott, Matthew: citizen of the United States who died at Kobé; the Japanese Government appropriates 900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 579] yen for a suitable monument to his memory 686 [Pg. 686 includes portions of Doc. 434 and Doc. 435]

Scruggs, W. M., United States consul: (See War power of China) 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 171]

Servia: mintage laws of; statistics of coinage; circulation of other coins in; non-existence of paper money 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44] postponement of trade-mark convention with the United States 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

rights of the Jews; their rights of trade and commerce, religion, and citizenship; negotiations by the United States minister at Vienna 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 30 and Doc. 31]

Seward, G. F.: United States minister to China; appreciation of his services on diplomatic committee 273 [Pg. 273 includes portions of Doc. 169, Doc. 170, and Doc. 171]

Shanghai: harbor rules 142 [Pg. 142 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 143 [Pg. 143 includes portions of Doc. 129 and Doc. 130], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 141] mixed courts at 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 162]

rules of mixed courts at 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 133]

Shepard, I. F.: United States consul; report on education in China 284 [Pg. 284 is part of Doc. 172]

Shipping: alleged overcharge of tonnage dues in New York on Brazilian vessel; restitution ordered 102–106 [Pgs. 102–106 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96] custody of registers of American vessels; no discriminations practiced in the ports of Colombia 321 [Pg. 321 includes portions of Doc. 202 and Doc. 203]

custody of records of United States vessels; mail steamers of the United States; objectionable system; passage of a bill modifying the annoyances; conflict of jurisdiction between the Panama Railroad Company and the Colombian Government; neutrality of the Isthmus 312–315 [Pgs. 312–315 include portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

discriminating light dues upon foreign vessels in Hayti 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346], 519 [Pg. 519 includes portions of Doc. 347, Doc. 348, and Doc. 349], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 399]

first Chinese steamer to enter an American port 303 [Pg. 303 includes portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, and Doc. 188] (See Wo Chung.)

foreign built ships owned by citizens of the United States; status of, &c. 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2] (See Consuls.)

order of the Queen relating to collisions at sea to apply to all ships whether in British jurisdiction or not 468–472 [Pgs. 468–472 include portions of Doc. 299, Doc. 300, and Doc. 301] (See Collisions at sea.)

proposed revision of Japanese treaties with reference to; right of coasting trade; the Japanese mercantile marine; protected by the government; the Mitsu Bishi Company; shipbuilding, in Japan, docks, &c.; marine insurance by foreign companies 662–664 [Pg. 662 is part of Doc. 422]

question of granting clearances to American vessels in Peru, during the war with Chili 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 527]

regulations governing ships under sail; under steam 468 [Pg. 468 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

rules in Colombia for the deposit of ship’s papers 315 [Pg. 315 includes portions of Doc. 197 and Doc. 198]

status of foreign built ships owned by Americans; rights of Americans to buy and carry on commerce in foreign built vessels; duties of consuls; right of appeal to diplomatic officers 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

the case of the “Itata” at Lima 123 [Pg. 123 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Shufeldt, Commodore: arbitration in Liberian boundary question 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 257] (See Great Britain.)

thanks of Liberian Government to, for services rendered in the adjustment of the “Northwest boundary question” 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 440 and Doc. 441], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 441], 700 [Pg. 700 includes portions of Doc. 441 and Doc. 442]

Siberia: commerce may be opened with interior by means of the Lena River, easily reached from the Pacific 668 [Pg. 668 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Sierra Leone: interference of governor of, in affairs of the island of Matacong 704 [Pg. 704 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Silver: amount of coin imported into and exported from Hayti (see Currency, Coinage) 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 404]

Slaves: Brazil: emancipation of slaves in Brazil 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 69 and Doc. 70], 88 [Pg. 88 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

Cuba: improbability that system of guardianship proposed for emancipated slaves will prove feasible 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 574] proposed law for the emancipation of 891–893 [Pgs. 891–893 include portions of Doc. 574, Doc. 575, and Doc. 576]

Egypt: application of five, at the United States consulate general in Cairo; an account of them; their liberation accomplished after considerable trouble 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 648], 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, and Doc. 651] arrest of slave dealers and rescue of 130 slaves in district of Berber; prompt action of Egyptian officials; freedom obtained for two slaves by the United States consular clerk at Cairo; article from the London Times on the slave traffic; circular of the minister of the interior defining the laws and penalties 1023–1026 [Pgs. 1023–1026 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654]

rescue of 20 at railway station in Cairo on train from Assioût; surprise of a caravan of slave traders and rescue of 90 slaves; action of the British consul-general; slavery favored by the natives 1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 642 and Doc. 643], 1013 [Pg. 1013 includes portions of Doc. 643 and Doc. 644]

Slave trade at Assioût: facilities in surrounding country for the secreting of slaves by Arab traders; arrest of traders and liberation of slaves found in their possession; this trade encouraged by natives 1008–1012 [Pgs. 1008–1012 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, and Doc. 643]

Smith, F. A., schooner: claim against Great Britain 548 [Pg. 548 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Smith, Peter: (See Fortune Bay outrage) 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 361]

Snellgrove, George: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 375]

Society Islands: flag of the French protectorate among 356 [Pg. 356 includes portions of Doc. 227 and Doc. 228] (See French Protectorate.)

Sonora: disbandment of forces intended for invasion of, in consequence of the action of United States military authorities; desire of the United States to co-operate in frustrating all such attempts 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497], 786 [Pg. 786 includes portions of Doc. 497, Doc. 498, and Doc. 499] formation of raiding parties on the Mexican frontier for invasion of; order of the Secretary of War to General McDowell 784 [Pg. 784 includes portions of Doc. 493, Doc. 494, and Doc. 495], 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 495, Doc. 496, and Doc. 497]

railway: (See Railroads) 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 454], 722 [Pg. 722 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

South Pacific Times: extract from; proclamation Of the President of Peru 848 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 537]

Spain: American vessels boarded by Spanish naval officers on the high seas; Spanish Government orders an immediate investigation 929 [Pg. 929 includes portions of Doc. 583 and Doc. 584], 930 [Pg. 930 includes portions of Doc. 584 and Doc. 585] case of the whaling schooner, Edward Lee 887–889 [Pgs. 887–889 include portions of Doc. 572, Doc. 573, and Doc. 574]

conduct of Spanish naval vessels on the high seas; interference with American trading vessels; four separate instances of American trading vessels boarded by officers of Spanish navy and searched; gravity of these offenses; maritime dominion under law of nations 922–927 [Pgs. 922–927 include portions of Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582]

question of various reforms in Cuba; gravity of the question not fully comprehended 889 [Pg. 889 includes portions of Doc. 573 and Doc. 574], 890 [Pg. 890 is part of Doc. 574]

transit of criminals whose extradition has been conceded by third power through territory of; articles of existing conventions between Spain and other countries; no objections to the application of these articles to cases where the United States are concerned 920–922 [Pgs. 920–922 include portions of Doc. 579, Doc. 580, Doc. 581, and Doc. 582]

treaty of peace and friendship between Peru and, signed and ratified 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 538]

Stahel: letter on mixed courts in China 211 [Pg. 211 is part of Doc. 143] (See Mixed courts.)

Stapleton, Edward: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 375]

Statement of grievances: unauthorized inland taxation on imports in China; value of foreign coins arbitrarily fixed; excessive tonnage dues 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 134], 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 134]

Statistics: Brazilian finances 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71] (See Brazil.)

coinage in Servia 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

emigration from Switzerland 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603]

German army: expenditure in military and naval support 401–403 [Pgs. 401–403 include portions of Doc. 266 and Doc. 267] (See Army.)

Hungarian emigration 58 [Pg. 58 includes portions of Doc. 43 and Doc. 44]

in message of Chilian President to Congress, on commerce 132 [Pg. 132 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

marriages, births, and deaths, under Swiss federal law 942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 597]

of currency in Hayti 635 [Pg. 635 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404], 636 [Pg. 636 is part of Doc. 404]

of custom-house at Hawaii. (See Hawaii) 602–604 [Pgs. 602–604 include portions of Doc. 383, Doc. 384, and Doc. 385]

of railroads in Germany 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 270], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 270]

population of Bosnia, Herzegovina 64 [Pg. 64 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

population of the “new annexed provinces” of Austria-Hungary 50 [Pg. 50 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

proposed additions to the army of Germany 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 259 and Doc. 260]

provisioning of Vienna 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

the floating debt of Egypt 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 630]

Steamships: Chinese Steam Navigation Company’s encouragement to emigrants. (See Emigration) 237 [Pg. 237 includes portions of Doc. 155, Doc. 156, and Doc. 157]

Steamship lines: contemplated withdrawal of that one between New York and Brazil; the trade of Brazil of much value to our country 96 [Pg. 96 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79] (See Brazil.)

recommendation by Brazilian minister that subsidy be granted to line running between Canada, the United States, and Brazil, &c.; refusal of minister to meet requirements of subsidy contract with the Roach line 97 [Pg. 97 includes portions of Doc. 80 and Doc. 81]

Steffens, Emil: defendant in trade-mark case; law held to be unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of the United States 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Steig, George: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 286]

Stephenson, Emily, Schooner: alleged trespass of, on British Columbian fishing-grounds 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 330], 515 [Pg. 515 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

Students: hardship in charging passport fees upon American, in Germany 423 [Pg. 423 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 433 [Pg. 433 includes portions of Doc. 277 and Doc. 278], 434 [Pg. 434 includes portions of Doc. 278, Doc. 279, and Doc. 280]

St. Petersburg: seizure of Nihilist printing press; murder of informant; search and inspection of dwelling-houses by the police; many people leaving the city 871 [Pg. 871 includes portions of Doc. 554 and Doc. 555], 872 [Pg. 872 includes portions of Doc. 555 and Doc. 556]

St. Thomas: reported transfer of, by Denmark, to Great Britain denied 344 [Pg. 344 includes portions of Doc. 219, Doc. 220, and Doc. 221]

Sutter, John A., jr., United States consul at Acapulco: letter on case of Captain Jacobson, an American citizen 732–734 [Pgs. 732–734 include portions of Doc. 462 and Doc. 463]

Sweden and Norway: change of ministry; this change caused by defeat of the army bill; organization of new cabinet; short sketches of several of the ministers 934–936 [Pgs. 934–936 include portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, Doc. 591, and Doc. 592] emigration of converts to Mormonism to the United States; measures taken by the government to dissuade this 933 [Pg. 933 includes portions of Doc. 588 and Doc. 589], 934 [Pg. 934 includes portions of Doc. 589, Doc. 590, and Doc. 591], 939 [Pg. 939 includes portions of Doc. 593 and Doc. 594]

political thought and feeling in Norway; proposed amendment to the constitution; refusal of the King to sanction an amendment adopted by the Storthing; question as to the limit of the King’s veto power 937–939 [Pgs. 937–939 include portions of Doc. 592, Doc. 593, and Doc. 594]

reception by people and government of, to Professor Nordenskjold; received by the King in person, &c.; dinner given by the King 936 [Pg. 936 includes portions of Doc. 591 and Doc. 592], 937 [Pg. 937 includes portions of Doc. 592 and Doc. 593]

Switzerland: application to United States legation in, for certificates as to validity of marriages of citizens of the United States in that country 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603], 958 [Pg. 958 is part of Doc. 603] emigration of persons intending to join Mormon community in the United States; disposition of the President to render assistance in arresting this emigration; letter of the President 951 [Pg. 951 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598], 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600], 954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 600]

financial measure introduced in the national council; rejection of the measure and consequent popular dissatisfaction 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 604], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 604 and Doc. 605]

property in, claimed by natives of that country, naturalized in the United States; laws governing such cases. 952 [Pg. 952 includes portions of Doc. 598 and Doc. 599], 953 [Pg. 953 includes portions of Doc. 599 and Doc. 600]

text of the Swiss federal law of 1874, concerning the social state and marriage; this law not entirely free from objections by United States citizens; statistics 941–951 [Pgs. 941–951 include portions of Doc. 596, Doc. 597, and Doc. 598]

the government abstains from participation in colonization and emigration schemes; declaration of the Grütlivere in 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 602 and Doc. 603]

the government asks the chargé d’affaires of the United States to furnish means of subsistence to an alleged naturalized citizen of the United States and his family 955 [Pg. 955 is part of Doc. 601], 956 [Pg. 956 includes portions of Doc. 601 and Doc. 602]

text of the Swiss federal law, &c.: final provisions 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 597], 951 [Pg. 951 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598] general provisions 944 [Pg. 944 is part of Doc. 597], 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 597]

penal provisions 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 597]

special provisions as to divorce, nullity of marriage, and as to entries to be made in such cases 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 597], 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 597]

special provisions upon the keeping of register of births 945 [Pg. 945 is part of Doc. 597], 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 597]

special provisions upon the keeping of the register of deaths 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 597], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 597]

special provisions for keeping of register of marriage; qualifications and conditions necessary to marriage; formalities relative to celebration of marriage 947–949 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 597]

transitory provisions 951 [Pg. 951 includes portions of Doc. 597 and Doc. 598]

Symon, Robert R.: transfer of Blair charter to representatives of 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 454], 721 [Pg. 721 is part of Doc. 454]

Synge, Colonel: captured and abducted by brigands in Thessaly; his account of his captivity, &c.; his ransom 978–981 [Pgs. 978–981 include portions of Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

T.

Talisman, French frigate: her arrival at Monrovia; interview of her captain with the Liberian President; her departure for Gaboon 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

Tangier: damage to property and crops by floods at 791 [Pg. 791 includes portions of Doc. 504 and Doc. 505] protection of Moorish subjects in Morocco; desire of Great Britain to refer the question to representatives of the powers at Madrid 495 [Pg. 495 includes portions of Doc. 322 and Doc. 323] (See Moorish subjects.)

Tariff: abolition by the Netherlands of all discriminating duties in East Indian colonies 817 [Pg. 817 includes portions of Doc. 517 and Doc. 518] exorbitant, on foreign vessels in Hayti 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 399] (See Law, Taxation, Duties, Commerce.)

penalties for evading customs, in Mexico 496 [Pg. 496 is part of Doc. 323]

privileges of Annex B of Franco-Portuguese treaty of 1866; the United States entitled to the enjoyment of these privileges; admission of the United States to these privileges; decree of the King 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 860–864 [Pgs. 860–864 include portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

Taxation: additional, decreed in Portugal to cover deficit in government receipts 864 [Pg. 864 includes portions of Doc. 544 and Doc. 545], 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546] differential duties levied by the United States on indirect colonial products of the Netherlands; interpretation of Article V of convention with reference to this question 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 514], 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515]

exemption from, of Spanish subjects resident in Morocco 895 [Pg. 895 includes portions of Doc. 576 and Doc. 577]

extension of income tax in Portugal 865 [Pg. 865 includes portions of Doc. 545 and Doc. 546]

on foreign goods in China. (See Lord) 232 [Pg. 232 is part of Doc. 153]

questions relating to. (See China) 140 [Pg. 140 includes portions of Doc. 126 and Doc. 127], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 127 and Doc. 128]

the tribute in Egypt; extract from the Egyptian Gazette 1021 [Pg. 1021 is part of Doc. 651], 1022 [Pg. 1022 includes portions of Doc. 651 and Doc. 652]

unauthorized, &c., in China. (See Treaties) 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 134], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 134]

Tejedor: annual message to the provincial chambers; defining rights of the national government 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 15] governor at Buenos Ayres; arming of troops in city 10 [Pg. 10 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

he accepts the offers of mediation tendered by the United States minister 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

his friends refuse to accept his renunciation of the candidacy for President 17 [Pg. 17 includes portions of Doc. 12 and Doc. 13]

his surrender and resignation 26 [Pg. 26 includes portions of Doc. 19, Doc. 20, and Doc. 21]

interview with Roca 22 [Pg. 22 is part of Doc. 16]

refusal to disarm the troops; declines to be a candidate for the Presidency 12 [Pg. 12 includes portions of Doc. 9, Doc. 10, and Doc. 11]

Terry, Thomas W., United States consul at Santiago, Cape Verd Islands 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 539] (See United States Naval Cemetery.)

Tharnell, James: deposition of, in Fortune Bay outrage 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 375]

Thessaly: capture and abduction of Colonel Synge by bandits; ransom of $50,000 demanded; account of his captivity by himself 978–981 [Pgs. 978–981 include portions of Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

Thierry. (See Talisman and Monrovia) 705 [Pg. 705 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 706 [Pg. 706 includes portions of Doc. 446, Doc. 447, and Doc. 448]

Tientsin: inadequate compensation of interpreters to United States consulate 144 [Pg. 144 includes portions of Doc. 130 and Doc. 131] war power of; report by Consul Denny. (See Education) 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 171], 286 [Pg. 286 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

Times, London: letter to, on slave traffic in Egypt 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 152], 225 [Pg. 225 includes portions of Doc. 152 and Doc. 153]

Tokio: Earthquake at, on the 22d February, 1880; no lives lost, though many houses destroyed; extract from Japan Daily Herald 682 [Pg. 682 is part of Doc. 432], 683 [Pg. 683 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433] fire in; great loss of property; 10,000 houses and large quantities of goods consumed; danger of the United States legation; assistance rendered the United States minister; recommendation that Congress appropriate $25,000 for the building, &c., of a legation on ground offered by the Emperor to the United States 678 [Pg. 678 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

return of the Emperor from his progress through the western provinces; his character and good work, &c. (See Mikado) 690 [Pg. 690 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

Tonnage dues: cases of the American vessels Santos Oteri and Susan Scranton at Honduras 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 99] case of the Brazilian vessel Foster at New York 102–106 [Pgs. 102–106 include portions of Doc. 88, Doc. 89, Doc. 90, Doc. 91, Doc. 92, Doc. 93, Doc. 94, Doc. 95, and Doc. 96]

case of the Wo Chung; proclamation of the President of the United States concerning; suspension of discriminating dues in this case 303–309 [Pgs. 303–309 include portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, Doc. 190, Doc. 191, Doc. 192, Doc. 193, and Doc. 194]

Chilian vessels not to pay more than thirty cents per ton; proclamation by the President of the United States concerning 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126] (See Treasury.)

excessive in China 175 [Pg. 175 is part of Doc. 134] (See Statement of grievances.)

in China on lighters; claim not admitted by diplomatic corps at Peking 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 158], 240–242 [Pgs. 240–242 include portions of Doc. 158, Doc. 159, and Doc. 160], 296 [Pg. 296 is part of Doc. 180], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 180]

in China on lighters; necessity of registration; prevention of smuggling 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 159 and Doc. 160]

on cargo boats 295–297 [Pgs. 295–297 include portions of Doc. 179 and Doc. 180] (See Foochow.)

on lighters unauthorized; illegality of registration fee on lighters 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 158] (See China.)

treaties with China provide for buoys, light-houses, and beacons to be paid from 220 [Pg. 220 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

$20 to be paid in, or as registration-fee for lighters reported by consuls in China 241 [Pg. 241 includes portions of Doc. 158 and Doc. 159]

Trade-marks: act of July 8, 1870, declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of the United States; effect of decision in Brazil; treaty-making aspect of the question left untouched 90 [Pg. 90 includes portions of Doc. 75 and Doc. 76] convention with Servia and Roumania concerning 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 28 and Doc. 29]

cases decided by Supreme Court 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

decision of the United States Supreme Court in cases of; laws of, unconstitutional 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

decision of the United States Supreme Court prejudicial to the interests of importers of French goods; letter of certain importers at New York to Mr. Outrey 380–382 [Pgs. 380–382 include portions of Doc. 243, Doc. 244, Doc. 245, and Doc. 246]

laws concerning, in treaties, left to Congress; consequent delay of convention with Servia and Roumania 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

unwillingness of the United States to submit questions of, to International Industrial Congress in France 378 [Pg. 378 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242], 379 [Pg. 379 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Transit: privilege of, accorded American cattle through Canada 512 [Pg. 512 includes portions of Doc. 338 and Doc. 339]

Transit passes: China; desirability of a uniform system of; circular to consuls in China 194 [Pg. 194 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Transportation: of merchandise to, from, and through Canada 508 [Pg. 508 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Treasury: Brazilian; issue of paper money; loan to consolidate floating debt and liquidate budget of 1878–’79; success of the loan; railway projected; statistics of finances 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71] decision of the Secretary in the matter of tonnage-tax on Chilian vessels (See Tonnage dues) 139 [Pg. 139 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

tax proposed in Brazil upon transportation companies; popular excitement thereat; conference between the minister of finance and the head of an American company 91 [Pg. 91 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Treaty: Bolivia with the United States; decree authorizing privateers to search neutral vessels, except those flying the United States flag 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64] (See Bolivia.)

China’s compliance with stipulations of; rights of foreigners under those of Tientsin; transit; lekin taxation; exterritoriality; the most-favored-nation clause; the missionary question; treaty revision; jurisdiction; desire on the part of China to carry out the treaties 177–180 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 134]

commissioners to negotiate, with China appointed by the President of the United States 302 [Pg. 302 includes portions of Doc. 184, Doc. 185, and Doc. 186]

desire for extradition, between the United States and the Netherlands 809 [Pg. 809 includes portions of Doc. 514 and Doc. 515]

intent of, with China; position of Chinese Government with reference to; certain stipulations of, referred to; new proposals; plan of the British and German ministers; probability of a discussion of grievances between the diplomatic body and the foreign office 167–173 [Pgs. 167–173 include portions of Doc. 133 and Doc. 134]

nature of the Russo-Chinese, negotiated by Chung How; the Marquis Tseng’s instructions; memorial to the throne; explanatory notes 266–271 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 168]

necessity for revision of Japanese, reasons for their revision, &c 657–662 [Pgs. 657–662 include portions of Doc. 421 and Doc. 422] (See Shipping.)

of Berlin; apprehension that certain of its articles may not be observed 54 [Pg. 54 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

of peace and friendship between Spain and Peru, signed and ratified 852 [Pg. 852 is part of Doc. 538]

of Washington: articles concerning the fisheries 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

privilege of Annex B of the Franco-Portuguese, of 1866, asked for by the United States; admission of the United States to participation in these privileges 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 860–864 [Pgs. 860–864 include portions of Doc. 543, Doc. 544, and Doc. 545]

proposed, between Liberia and the King of the Mandingo negroes in African interior 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 439], 692 [Pg. 692 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

protection by, between the United States and Peru, of United States vessels carrying nitrates from Peru 842 [Pg. 842 includes portions of Doc. 532 and Doc. 533]

revision of Chinese; negotiations in progress at Peking; illegality of lekin and other analogous taxes 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 134], 182 [Pg. 182 is part of Doc. 134]

Russo-Chinese, negotiated by Chung How; text of original 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 168]

verbal note of the German minister on non-observance of certain treaty stipulations in China; unauthorized taxes levied on imports; stoppage of imports under transit passes; lekin taxes; unauthorized tax stations inland; difficulties in the way of foreigners obtaining transit passes; deprivation of rights of foreigners to visit the interior; value of foreign coins arbitrarily fixed 173 [Pg. 173 is part of Doc. 134], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 134]

with China, the understanding of, by the Tsung-li Yamên 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

with Germany, of 1868, does not extend to Alsace-Lorraine 441 [Pg. 441 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 282], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282] (See Alsace-Lorraine.)

former decisions of the imperial government under, as bearing upon Alsace-Lorraine; Mr. Bancroft’s view 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282]

Trescott, letter of Mr. (counsel for claimants): on Fortune Bay outrage 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Trinidad Chronicle: letter to, from Mr. John E. Wheelock, an American citizen illegally arrested and maltreated by an official of the Venezuelan Government 1029–1031 [Pgs. 1029–1031 include portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657]

Trojes Mining Company: murder of American employés of, in Mexico 739–744 [Pgs. 739–744 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 745–752 [Pgs. 745–752 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

Tseng, Marquis: instructions to 267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 168] (See Treaties.)

Tsung-li Yamên: considers that intercourse between various nations is like that between host and guest 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 136] its readiness to consider report of diplomatic committee at Peking on trade, justice, and official intercourse 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136] (See Commerce.)

Tunis: commemoration of the one hundred and third anniversary of American Independence by display of the flags of their respected countries at all the consulates; the Bey sends assurances of his friendship for the United States 1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 653 and Doc. 654]

Turkey: Albania repudiates the government of the Sultan; Ottoman employés expelled from the public bureaus 55 [Pg. 55 includes portions of Doc. 41 and Doc. 42] murder of Colonel Kummeran, military attaché of the Russian legation; arrest of the murderer; deed attributed to a plot of the Nihilists; narrow escape of the Russian chargé d’affaires; trial of the murderer; his chance of escaping punishment; action of the diplomatic corps; promises of the Ottoman Government 974–977 [Pgs. 974–977 include portions of Doc. 610, Doc. 611, Doc. 612, and Doc. 613]

Turkish Empire: change in the imperial ministry; the successors of the prime minister and the minister of foreign affairs 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618] dispatches sent from foreign offices to ministers of Turkey at Washington, Stockholm, and Brussels, notifying them of the discontinuance of their legations; the latter two restored; the Secretary of State of the United States asks that the legation at Washington be continued 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 614 and Doc. 615], 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

financial affairs; disastrous results of the decree of. October, 1875; suspending payment of interest on public debt; subsequent operations of the Treasury; relative value of Ottoman moneys; depreciation of paper currency; devices for retiring it; copper money; report of the Imperial Ottoman Bank; redemption of the caïmé 968–971 [Pgs. 968–971 include portions of Doc. 607, Doc. 608, and Doc. 609]

testimonial from the American colony in Constantinople to Mr. Maynard 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 617 and Doc. 618], 983 [Pg. 983 includes portions of Doc. 618 and Doc. 619]

the Armenian people; character of the race; missionary work among them; the moral influence of America in the East 971 [Pg. 971 includes portions of Doc. 608 and Doc. 609], 972 [Pg. 972 includes portions of Doc. 609 and Doc. 610]

Egypt: assent of the United States desired to the proposed disposition of the balance of the Rothschild loan 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636], 1001 [Pg. 1001 includes portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637] causes of the debt of; political and social status of the Fellah; England’s power in this country; extract from the Egyptian Gazette 1020–1022 [Pgs. 1020–1022 include portions of Doc. 648, Doc. 649, Doc. 650, Doc. 651, and Doc. 652]

decree of the Khedive appointing members of commission of liquidation; declaration of the governments concerned 1005–1007 [Pgs. 1005–1007 include portions of Doc. 639, Doc. 640, and Doc. 641]

floating debt; of what composed 993 [Pg. 993 is part of Doc. 630]

imperative necessity for the appointment of a commission of liquidation; proposition of the French Government; probable work of the commission; affairs in the hands of France and England; decree instituting , commission 1001–1003 [Pgs. 1001–1003 include portions of Doc. 636 and Doc. 637], 1004 [Pg. 1004 includes portions of Doc. 638 and Doc. 639]

need of prison for incarceration of persons sentenced by United States consular courts in; prisoners to be confined in United States prison at Smyrna; no facilities for enforcing sentence at “hard labor” 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 633, Doc. 634, and Doc. 635], 999 [Pg. 999 includes portions of Doc. 635 and Doc. 636]

presentation of an obelisk to the United States, by the late Khedive 992 [Pg. 992 includes portions of Doc. 628, Doc. 629, and Doc. 630]

proposed commission for elaboration of the judicial organization and the codes; meeting of the consuls-general at Cairo; conclusions arrived at by the meeting; action of the United States relating to continuance of the courts unnecessary; assistant commissioner to be appointed by the United States 1013–1015 [Pgs. 1013–1015 include portions of Doc. 643, Doc. 644, and Doc. 645]

slave trade in 1008–1013 [Pgs. 1008–1013 include portions of Doc. 641, Doc. 642, Doc. 643, and Doc. 644]

slave trade by Arabs at Assioût; arrest of thirty-five traders 1008 [Pg. 1008 includes portions of Doc. 641 and Doc. 642]

slave traffic; extract from the London Times; circular of the minister of the interior 1023–1026 [Pgs. 1023–1026 include portions of Doc. 652, Doc. 653, and Doc. 654]

Thessaly: capture and abduction of Colonel Synge by brigands; ransom of $50,000 demanded; Colonel Synge’s account of his captivity 978–981 [Pgs. 978–981 include portions of Doc. 614, Doc. 615, Doc. 616, and Doc. 617]

Turkey: life-saving service on the Black Sea; question considered by the diplomatic representatives of the maritime powers; demoralization of the service; collective note to the Porte urging attention to this subject 972–974 [Pgs. 972–974 include portions of Doc. 609, Doc. 610, Doc. 611, and Doc. 612] life-saving service; station on the Black Sea described by Sir George Thomas 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 606 and Doc. 607], 968 [Pg. 968 includes portions of Doc. 607 and Doc. 608]

murder of the Rev. Dr. Parsons, an American missionary, and his servant; the minister of foreign affairs promises energetic search for murderers; arrest of the murderers; an account of the crime; delays of the law in trying Mohammedans for the murder of Christians 983–986 [Pgs. 983–986 include portions of Doc. 618, Doc. 619, Doc. 620, and Doc. 621]

religious toleration; present position of the Protestant community in the Turkish Empire 961–965 [Pgs. 961–965 include portions of Doc. 605, Doc. 606, and Doc. 607]

Turner, David, United States consul: letter to Consul-General Strother on revolution in Lower California 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 728 [Pg. 728 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

Tuscarora, United States steamer, engaged in the coast survey: landing of a part of her crew on coast of Oaxaca; Mexican authorities ordered to furnish officers of, any assistance required; notice of future works of this nature asked for by Mexican Government, for convenience 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 451, Doc. 452, and Doc. 453]

U.

Union: protocol complementary of the preliminary bases of union of Peru and Bolivia; protocol to be accepted by the people: formation of federal government; election of President and Vice-President; provisional senate; abolition of custom-houses between the two countries; constitution to be provisionally in force for five years; government of the States; the public debt; territorial demarcation of the States; coat of arms; war flag; vacancy of President or Vice-President’s office 850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 537], 851 [Pg. 851 is part of Doc. 537] protocol of preliminary bases of federal, of Peru and Bolivia; nation to be called Pern-Bolivian United States; based on American public law; status of governmental departments; federal districts; state sovereignty; rights and powers granted and denied the States; constitution of the national government; Congress; the President; the judiciary; foreign relations 848–850 [Pg. 848 is part of Doc. 537]

United States naval cemetery, Cape verd Islands: formation of a new one; removal of dead to 853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 539], 854 [Pg. 854 includes portions of Doc. 539 and Doc. 540], 855 [Pg. 855 includes portions of Doc. 540 and Doc. 541], 856 [Pg. 856 includes portions of Doc. 541 and Doc. 542] citizens of, in other countries 149 [Pg. 149 is part of Doc. 133], 359 [Pg. 359 includes portions of Doc. 231 and Doc. 232], 441–461 [Pgs. 441–461 include portions of Doc. 281, Doc. 282, Doc. 283, Doc. 284, Doc. 285, Doc. 286, Doc. 287, Doc. 288, Doc. 289, Doc. 290, Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 722–724 [Pgs. 722–724 include portions of Doc. 454, Doc. 455, and Doc. 456], 739–744 [Pgs. 739–744 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 776 [Pg. 776 includes portions of Doc. 487 and Doc. 488] (See American citizens; Naturalization.)

interests of, in the welfare of Liberia 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 234]

Uruguay: resignation of the presidency by Colonel Latorre; his letter of resignation and proclamation; he believes his country to be ungovernable; meeting of Congress and election of his successor; nomination of new ministry 1027 [Pg. 1027 is part of Doc. 655], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 655 and Doc. 656]

V.

Vast, Dr. F. P.: naturalization case of, at Berlin, unfavorably decided 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 286]

Venezuela: article in constitution contemplating alliance with other American governments; commission to report upon the confederation or alliance of all the nations of South America; decree appointing this commission 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666] assembling of Congress; the message of the provisional President as tending to affect foreign commerce 1034 [Pg. 1034 includes portions of Doc. 659 and Doc. 660]

contract with Mr. Bandman for construction of railways 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662]

insurrection at Ciudad Bolivar; marine station and tribunal removed and established at Carúpano 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658]

message of the provisional President to Congress; constitutional reform; the seven great States; elections; the provisional presidency; insurrection suppressed; road, school, and immigration funds expended on soldiers 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 660], 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662]

outrage upon Mr. John E. Wheelock, an American citizen, by a civil officer of the government of 1028–1032 [Pgs. 1028–1032 include portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, Doc. 657, and Doc. 658], 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1038 [Pg. 1038 includes portions of Doc. 663, Doc. 664, and Doc. 665], 1039 [Pg. 1039 includes portions of Doc. 665 and Doc. 666], 1040–1044 [Pgs. 1040–1044 include portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667]

rupture between the provisional President and Mr. Delort, chief of the French commission, on account of Mr. Bandman’s railway contract 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 660, Doc. 661, and Doc. 662], 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663]

the government of the State of Guayana denounces the outrage perpetrated by a minor official upon Mr. Wheelock; the United States demands the speedy and condign punishment of persons implicated; indemnity to be demanded 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 656 and Doc. 657], 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1037 [Pg. 1037 includes portions of Doc. 662 and Doc. 663], 1044 [Pg. 1044 is part of Doc. 667]

the President of, purchasing iron-clad vessels and arms in Europe, for the purpose of war with Colombia 311 [Pg. 311 includes portions of Doc. 195 and Doc. 196]

two decrees, the first closing port of Ciudad Bolivar and substituting that of Barcelona, announcing blockade of the Orinoco, &c.; the second providing for a marine station and tribunal at Carúpano 1032 [Pg. 1032 includes portions of Doc. 657 and Doc. 658], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 658]

Versailles: removal of capital from, to Paris. (See Paris) 351 [Pg. 351 is part of Doc. 226]

Victorio: depredations of his band on the United States border; their escape into Mexico; necessity that Mexico shall either permit United States troops to follow or shall assume the responsibility herself 768 [Pg. 768 includes portions of Doc. 484, Doc. 485, and Doc. 486]

Vidal, Francisco: elected President of Uruguay, upon the resignation of Latorre 1027 [Pg. 1027 is part of Doc. 655]

Vienna: statistics of the provisioning of the city; vigilance of inspection 63 [Pg. 63 includes portions of Doc. 46 and Doc. 47]

Volland, P. C. E.: case of spurious diploma used by, in Germany 458 [Pg. 458 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

W.

Wackermann, Joseph: naturalization case of, at Berlin 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282]

War: between Peru and Chili; circulars of the Peruvian Government to representatives of friendly nations. (See Bolivia, Chili, Peru, Mediation) 75 [Pg. 75 includes portions of Doc. 60, Doc. 61, and Doc. 62], 832 [Pg. 832 is part of Doc. 525], 833 [Pg. 833 includes portions of Doc. 525 and Doc. 526]

War power of China: reports of consuls on; Amoy; Canton; Chin Kiang; Foo Chow; New Chwang; Ningpo; Tientsin 274–280 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 171] (See cities named.)

Warren, Chas. E., schooner: claim against Great Britain 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Washington, George: American trading vessel boarded and searched by Spanish naval officers 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 582]

Webster, Edward E., schooner: claim against Great Britain 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Wehrung, George: naturalization case of, at Berlin 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282]

Weights and measures: proposed budget for international committee for 1880 347–350 [Pgs. 347–350 include portions of Doc. 224 and Doc. 225] report of the international committee; abbreviations 361 [Pg. 361 includes portions of Doc. 232 and Doc. 233], 362 [Pg. 362 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Weil, Simon: naturalization case of, at Berlin 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 282]

Weill, Aaron: naturalization case of, at Berlin, favorably settled 459 [Pg. 459 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 460 [Pg. 460 includes portions of Doc. 289 and Doc. 290]

Weinrebe: arrest of, by United States officers, on steamer Mosel, for violation of United States revenue laws 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 291, Doc. 292, and Doc. 293], 462 [Pg. 462 includes portions of Doc. 293 and Doc. 294]

Wetherell, Maud B., schooner: claim against Great Britain 554 [Pg. 554 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Wheelock, Mr. John E., an American citizen: outrage inflicted upon, by a civil officer of the Venezuelan Government; Mr. Wheelock’s letters to the United States minister resident and to the Trinidad Chronicle 1028–1031 [Pgs. 1028–1031 include portions of Doc. 655, Doc. 656, and Doc. 657] statement of his case against the Venezuelan Government by Mr. Evarts; illegally arrested while in legitimate pursuit of his business; inhumanly treated by Venezuelan official; apparent indifference of Venezuelan Government 1041–1044 [Pgs. 1041–1044 include portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667]

views of the minister of foreign affairs of Venezuela in relation to outrage upon Mr. Wheelock; alleged exaggeration; no grounds upon which to proceed against the official of the government charged with the outrage; Venezuela owes no indemnity to the complainant 1040 [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 666], 1041 [Pg. 1041 includes portions of Doc. 666 and Doc. 667]

White, A. D., minister of the United States at Berlin: his speech at the opening of the fishery exhibition; industrial and social matters; political relations between Germany and the United States 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 273], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 273]

Wildnre, schooner: claim against Great Britain 550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 361] (See Fortune Bay outrage.)

Wiltz, L. A., governor of Louisiana: proclamation by. (See Cotton) 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 345 and Doc. 346]

Witteman, Adolph, defendant in trade-mark case: law held to be unconstitutional 38 [Pg. 38 includes portions of Doc. 29 and Doc. 30]

Wo Chung: Chinese steamer, first to enter an American port; discriminating tonnage dues; alien rates; reciprocal exemption between the United States and China unprovided for by treaty 303–305 [Pgs. 303–305 include portions of Doc. 186, Doc. 187, Doc. 188, Doc. 189, and Doc. 190] the President of the United States suspends the discriminating duties of tonnage, &c 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 192 and Doc. 193] (See Tonnage dues.)

Wrecking: on the great lakes; cases of, on Lake Ontario 505 [Pg. 505 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 331]

Y.

Youmans, Henry: an American citizen murdered in Michoacan, Mexico 739–744 [Pgs. 739–744 include portions of Doc. 467, Doc. 468, and Doc. 469], 745–752 [Pgs. 745–752 include portions of Doc. 470, Doc. 471, Doc. 472, and Doc. 473]

Z.

Zona libre: its commercial effects upon the United States 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 455 and Doc. 456], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 456]

Zweifel: one of the discoverers of the sources of the Niger 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]
