Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume I, Vietnam, 1964 (U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian, 1992)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. Department of State, Office of the Historian: Foreign Relations of the United States (https://history.state.gov/historicaldocuments/frus1964-68v01).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Vietnam, 1964 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume I)

Title pageForeign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968

Volume I

Vietnam, 1964

United States Government Printing Office
Washington

U.S. Department of State
Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

This ebook was generated on May 30, 2018.
Please visit the Office of the Historian ebooks web page to access updates.

About the Electronic Edition About the Electronic Edition

The Office of the Historian at the U.S. Department of State has embarked on a program to release an ebook edition of the Foreign Relations of the United States (FRUS) series, which was established in 1861. Far lighter and more portable than printed editions of FRUS, the ebook edition offers the full content of each volume and makes use of the full-text search and other reading features of most ebook devices and applications, including bookmarking and note-taking. Unlike the web-based edition of FRUS, the ebook edition, once downloaded, can be accessed even without internet connectivity.

In creating the FRUS ebook edition, we endeavored to maintain fidelity with the original printed edition. One challenge in this respect is representing original page numbers from printed editions in ebooks. For readers who need to cite material in this ebook, we recommend citing document numbers instead of page numbers, since document numbers are persistent, media-neutral identifiers. In older FRUS volumes (before the subseries covering the Johnson administration), where cross references use page numbers rather than document numbers, we append to each page number a bracketed list of the document numbers that correspond to it.

The Office of the Historian has worked to ensure that this ebook is error-free and works on a broad range of devices. Please email history_ebooks@state.gov with any feedback.

To learn about updates to this ebook, other ebooks, and the ebook initiative in general, visit our ebooks homepage, and follow us on Twitter at @HistoryAtState and Tumblr at HistoryAtState.

Office of the Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs
U.S. Department of State
May 2018

Vietnam, 1964 (Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Volume I)Contents

Preface

List of Sources

List of Abbreviations

List of Persons

VietnamI. The Khanh Coup, January 1–31 (Documents 1-27)

II. U.S. Assessment of the Khanh Government, February 1–March 4 (Documents 28-69)

III. The McNamara-Taylor Mission To Vietnam and the McNamara Report, March 4–April 3 (Documents 70-107)

IV. The Rusk Mission To Vietnam, April 17–19, and Planning for Pressures Against the North, April 4–May 7 (Documents 108-145)

V. The Second McNamara-Taylor Mission To Vietnam And Planning Discussions, May 8–26 (Documents 146-180)

VI. The Second Rusk Visit To Saigon; The Honolulu Meeting; The De Gaulle-Ball Conversation; Seaborn’s Discussions in Hanoi, May 26–June 25 (Documents 181-225)

VII. Taylor’s First Month as Ambassador; the Increase in U.S. Advisory Forces in Vietnam, June 25–July 31 (Documents 226-254)

VIII. U.S. Reaction To Events in the Gulf of Tonkin, August 1–10 (Documents 255-308)

IX. Changes in the Government of South Vietnam, August 11–September 5 (Documents 309-338)

X. Ambassador Taylor’s Visit to Washington, September 6–10 (Documents 339-345)

XI. U.S. Efforts To Strengthen the Government of South Vietnam, September 11–October 31 (Documents 346-392)

XII. Proceedings of the NSC Working Group on Vietnam, November 1–December 7 (Documents 393-440)

XIII. U.S. Response to the Governmental Crisis In South Vietnam, December 8–31 (Documents 441-479)

Index

Preface Preface

The Foreign Relations of the United States series the presents official documentary historical record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant diplomatic activity of the United States Government, including the reports and intelligence that contributed to the formulation of policies and the documentation of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.

The Historian of the Department of State is responsible for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series. The editing of the series in the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, is guided by principles of historical objectivity and accuracy. Documents are not altered or deletions made without indicating where changes have been made. Every effort is made to identify lacunae in the record and to explain why they have occurred. Certain omissions may be necessary to protect national security or to condense the record and avoid needless repetition. The published record, however, omits no facts that were of major importance in reaching a decision, and nothing has been excluded for the purpose of concealing or glossing over a defect in policy.

At the time of the compilation of this volume in 1984, the Department was guided in the preparation of the Foreign Relations series by official regulations first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg on March 26, 1925. A new statutory charter for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series was established by Title IV of Public Law 102–138, the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1992 and 1993, which was signed by the President on October 28, 1991. That new charter requires that the Foreign Relations series “shall be a thorough, accurate, and reliable documentary record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity.” The new charter also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published “not more than 30 years after the events recorded.”

Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations of the United States Series

This volume is the first in a comprehensive subseries that will document the most important issues in the foreign policy of President Lyndon B. Johnson’s administration. The subseries covers the years 1964 through 1968, although the editors may in a few cases include documents from 1963 or 1969 to round out and make more understandable the documentation regarding particular topics.

Continuing the longstanding tradition of the Foreign Relations series and in compliance with the legislation of October 28, 1991, the editors have planned a comprehensive subseries of volumes to record the most important issues in the foreign affairs of the United States during the Johnson administration. The diplomacy of U.S. involvement in the civil war in Vietnam during the decade of the 1960s was a matter of overwhelming importance in the conduct of foreign affairs and is a primary topic documented in the Foreign Relations volumes covering the years 1964 through 1968. Volumes I through VII in the subseries for 1964–1968 are devoted to U.S. policy toward Vietnam. These volumes focus on that nation alone and do not record activities throughout the remainder of Indochina except as they may relate immediately to the conduct of the war in Vietnam. The record of U.S. relations with and policies toward Laos and Cambodia is the subject of a separate volume in the Foreign Relations series.

In preparing the volumes of Foreign Relations regarding U.S. involvement in Vietnam, the editors have given the highest priority to the inclusion of documents on: 1. The formulation of U.S. national goals regarding policy toward Vietnam.

2. The international diplomatic background of the conflict.

3. The search by the United States for international support for its war aims.

4. U.S. relations with the Republic of Vietnam.

5. Major political-military decisions regarding U.S. involvement in Vietnam and strategies to be followed, including military assistance to the Republic of Vietnam.

6. The search for a peaceful end of the war, including direct and indirect contacts with the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and with various Communist powers.

7. Economic assistance and social reform programs for Vietnam.

The record of military operations in Vietnam, operational intelligence activities, the conduct (as opposed to the policy considerations) of covert actions, the broad range of Foreign Service activities and the administration of overseas posts, and routine or ceremonial diplomatic exchanges are outside the terms of reference of the Foreign Relations volumes. Important military and intelligence activities bearing upon the diplomatic context of U.S. involvement in Vietnam are, however, covered in the many high-level papers and discussions that are included in the volumes of the series.

Sources for the Foreign Relations Series

The longstanding 1925 charter of the Foreign Relations series and the law of October 28, 1991, on the series require that the published record reflect all major foreign policy decisions and activities and include necessary documentation from all government agencies and entities involved in foreign policy formulation, execution, or support. The historical records of the Presidents and their national security advisers together with the still larger body of documentation in the Department of State are the principal sources of the Foreign Relations series. The National Archives and Records Administration, including the Presidential libraries which it administers, is the main repository and coordinating authority for historical government documentation.

The official documentary record on U.S. foreign affairs available for preparing the published Foreign Relations volumes must on occasion be supplemented by information from private collections of papers of historical significance and from interviews with U.S. officials who were involved in the events documented. This was particularly true in research for the volumes documenting U.S. involvement in the Vietnam war. Interviews by Department historians are conducted in accordance with professional scholarly practices and existing government procedures regarding their preparation and preservation. Oral histories, where already available, are also reviewed and used.

In the case of the volumes documenting U.S. involvement in the Vietnam war, the editors reviewed the documents included in the 12-volume study prepared by the Department of Defense, United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967, printed for the use of the Committee on Armed Forces of the U.S. House of Representatives (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1971), the so-called “Pentagon Papers.” Particular documents from this version of the “Pentagon Papers” are included in Foreign Relations volumes, in their most authentic version, when their inclusion is vital to understanding the published record. Not all of the diplomatic documentation in the “Pentagon Papers” will, however, be reprinted or even accounted for in the Foreign Relations series.

Particular sources used in preparing the volume presented here are described in detail in the List of Sources.

Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, Volume I

On the basis of preliminary research and review of already-published documentation, including the 1971 “Pentagon Papers,” the editors developed the following five areas of focus for the research and selection of documents for inclusion in this volume: 1) discussion and formulation of policy in Washington; 2) missions of high-level Johnson administration officials to South Vietnam and their recommendations; 3) planning for military operations against North Vietnam and the actual implementation of U.S. military operations in Vietnam; 4) the relationship among the U.S. Government, the Khanh government, and opposition elements in South Vietnam; 5) the implementation of policy in South Vietnam.

Discussion and formulation of policy in Washington: President Lyndon B. Johnson made the important policy decisions on Vietnam. He received advice from the Washington foreign affairs community, either orally at meetings or in documents. The records of these meetings with the President and advice provided to him in writing are the primary focus of this volume. The editors are confident that they have had complete access to all the Presidential written records bearing on important decisions relating to Vietnam.

The most important repository for records on the formulation of U.S. policy toward Vietnam in 1964 is the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library. The records of the Department of State, to which the editors also had complete access, include a large segment of Presidential and National Security Council documentation, but the Johnson Library remains the single most comprehensive source. Department of Defense records located at the Washington National Records Center, especially the files and papers of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, are also an important source.

Missions of high-level Johnson administration officials to South Vietnam: Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Maxwell Taylor each made two fact-finding visits to Vietnam in 1964. The recommendations resulting from these missions provided President Johnson with a means of focusing on the problems in Vietnam. They also forced the competing elements in the government in Washington to negotiate their different policy alternatives. The approval of recommendations of these missions by the President and his national security advisers provided guidelines for government-wide policy. Records at the Johnson Library, McNamara’s files, Taylor’s papers at the National Defense University, and records in the Department of State provided the principal sources for these missions and their results.

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: The editors sought to include documentation that illustrates the relationship between military planning and strategy and the conduct of relations with the Republic of Vietnam and other countries. The editors have concentrated on policy discussions of the feasibility and desirability of covert or overt action against North Vietnam. Overt military action superseded policy deliberation and planning with the U.S. response to the incidents in the Gulf of Tonkin in August 1964. The documents presented on the Gulf of Tonkin episode do not resolve the question of whether the second North Vietnamese attack actually took place, but they do indicate that the Johnson administration at the time believed that the attack had occurred. Subsequent U.S. military action was based on that presumption. The Johnson Library, files of the Secretary of Defense and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs at the Washington National Records Center, and the decentralized files of the Department of State’s Vietnam Working Group are the principal sources for this topic.

The relationship among the U.S. Government, the Khanh government, and opposition elements in South Vietnam: In 1964, the United States supported the Republic of Vietnam, but never felt totally at ease with General Nguyen Khanh who took power in late January 1964. The extensive reports of U.S. Embassy relations with the Khanh regime come primarily from the central files of the Department of State. In addition, the editors have included a considerable number of telegraphic reports from the Embassy in Saigon on relations with dissident and opposition Vietnamese. The Central Intelligence Agency records on these contacts were obtained from the Johnson Library and Department of State files.

Policy implementation in Vietnam: The editors have also selected documentation that covers the implementation of policy established by the President and a small range of lesser policy decisions that did not reach the President or were resolved in the Department of State or other agencies of the foreign affairs community. The files of the Department of State, the Johnson Library, and the United States Information Agency are the primary documentary sources for these decisions.

For this volume, which was prepared in 1984, the editors have not attempted to document particular U.S. intelligence operations or any significant contribution that U.S. intelligence made to the formulation of foreign policy. The editors closely reviewed the intelligence documentation, including records originated by the Central Intelligence Agency, included in the Johnson Library. That research was accomplished with the full cooperation and assistance of the CIA. It resulted in the inclusion in this volume of some key intelligence analyses that contributed to major political and diplomatic actions.

Completion of the declassification of this volume and the final steps of its preparation for publication coincided with the development of procedures since early 1991 by the Central Intelligence Agency in cooperation with the Department of State that have expanded access by Department historians to high-level intelligence documents from among those records still in the custody of the Central Intelligence Agency. The Department of State chose not to postpone the publication of this volume to ascertain how such access might affect the scope of available documentation and the changes that might be made in the contents of this particular volume. The Department of State, however, is making good use of these new procedures, which have been arranged by the CIA’s History Staff, for the compilation of future volumes in the Foreign Relations series.

The editors of the volume are confident that the documents printed here provide a comprehensive and accurate foreign affairs record of U.S. policy toward and involvement in Vietnam during 1964. The declassification review process for the documents originally selected for this volume, outlined in more detail below, resulted in withholding from publication only 2.5 percent of the original manuscript.

The editors wish to acknowledge the assistance of officials at the National Archives and Records Administration’s Lyndon B. Johnson Library, in particular David Humphrey. Susan Lemke at the National Defense University and Sandra Meagher at the Department of Defense deserve special thanks, as do former government officials who consented to interviews for this volume.

Editorial Methodology

The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time. Incoming telegrams from U.S. missions are placed according to time of receipt in the Department of State, and memoranda of conversations are placed according to the time and date of the conversation. President Johnson maintained regular contact with both Ambassadors Henry Cabot Lodge and Maxwell Taylor in messages sent to and received from Saigon as telegrams. These are printed as messages to and from the President, and information about the telegrams is included in the first footnote.

Editorial treatment of documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the Editor in Chief and the chief technical editor. The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes. Obvious typographical errors are corrected, but other mistakes and omissions in the source text are corrected by bracketed insertions: a correction is set in italic type; an omission in roman type. Bracketed insertions are also used to indicate text that has been omitted because it deals with an unrelated subject (in roman type) or because it remained classified after the declassification review process (in italic type). The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted. The amount of material omitted because it was not related to the subject, however, has not been accounted for. All ellipses and brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.

The first footnote to each document indicates the document’s source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information. The source footnote also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President and/or his major policy advisers read it. Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this information has been included in the source footnote.

Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in this volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and summarize and provide citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents. Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts have been used when applicable to supplement or explicate the official record.

Declassification Review Procedures

Declassification review of the documents selected for publication was conducted by the Division of Historical Documents Review, Bureau of Diplomatic Security, Department of State. The review was made in accordance with the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy Act, the criteria established in Executive Order 12356, and the act of October 28,1991, regarding: 1) military plans, weapons, or operations;

2) the vulnerabilities or capabilities of systems, installations, projects, or plans relating to the national security;

3) foreign government information;

4) intelligence activities (including special activities), or intelligence sources or methods;

5) foreign relations or foreign activities of the United States;

6) scientific, technological, or economic matters relating to national security;

7) U.S. Government programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or facilities;

8) cryptology; and

9) a confidential source.

Declassification decisions entailed concurrence of the appropriate geographic and functional bureaus in the Department of State, other concerned agencies of the U.S. Government, and appropriate foreign governments regarding documents of those governments. The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security and law.

Edward C. Keefer and Charles S. Sampson compiled and edited the volume under former Editor in Chief John P. Glennon. General Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie supervised the final steps in the editorial and publication process. Suzanne E. Coffman and Jeffrey A. Soukup prepared the lists of names and abbreviations. Rita M. Baker and Althea W. Robinson performed the technical editing. Barbara A. Bacon of the Publishing Services Division (Natalie H. Lee, Chief) oversaw production of the volume. Max Franke prepared the index.

William Z. Slany
The Historian
Bureau of Public Affairs

January 1992

List of Sources List of Sources

Unpublished Sources

Department of State 1. Subject-Numeric Indexed Central Files. In February 1963, the Department changed its decimal central files to a subject-numeric central file system. The subject-numeric system was divided into broad categories: Administration, Consular, Culture and Information, Economic, Political and Defense, Science, and Social. Within each of these divisions were subcategories. For example, Political and Defense contained four subtopics: POL (politics), DEF (defense), CSM (communism), and INT (intelligence). Numerical subdivisions further defined them.

The following were the most important files used in this volume: POL 1 FR–VIET S, general policy, France-South Vietnam

POL 1 US–VIET, general policy, U.S.-Vietnam

POL 1 US–VIET S, general policy, U.S.-South Vietnam

POL 1 VIET N–VIET S, general policy, North Vietnam-South Vietnam

POL 1–1 VIET S, development and coordination of future policies

POL 7 US (LODGE), visits of Ambassador Lodge

POL 8 CAMB, neutralism and non-alignment of Cambodia

POL 13 VIET S, non-party blocs

POL 13–2 VIET S, students and youth groups

POL 15 VIET S, government

POL 15–1 VIET S, head of government/Executive branch

POL 15–1 US/Johnson, Executive branch, President Johnson

POL 15–4 VIET S, administration of government

POL 16 CHICOM, recognition of the People’s Republic of China

POL 16 VIET S, recognition

POL 27 LAOS, military operations, Laos

POL 17 CHINA–VIET S, diplomatic representation, China-South Vietnam

POL 17–5 US–VIET S, diplomatic representation, changes in status, U.S.-South Vietnam

POL 23 VIET S, internal security and counterinsurgency

POL 23–7 VIET S, infiltration and subversion

POL 23–8 VIET S, demonstrations, protests and riots

POL 23–9 VIET S, rebellions and coups

POL 27 VIET S, military operations

POL 27–3 LAOS–VIET N, use of force in Laos against North Vietnam

POL 27–14 VIET S, truce, cease-fire, and armistice

POL 32 CAMBODIA–VIET S, boundaries, Cambodia-South Vietnam

POL 33–6 US–VIET N, waters and boundaries, high seas

POL CAN–US, U.S.-Canadian relations

POL FR–US, U.S.-French relations

POL FR–VIET S, general policy, France-South Vietnam

POL US–VIET S, general policy, U.S.-South Vietnam

DEF 1 ASIA SE, plans and policy, Southeast Asia

DEF 1 US–VIET S, plans and policy, U.S.-South Vietnam

DEF 6–3 VIET S, air force, South Vietnam

DEF 9–3 VIET S, morale and discipline, South Vietnam

DEF 19 PHIL–VIET S, military assistance, Philippines-South Vietnam

DEF 19 US–VIET S, military assistance, U.S.-South Vietnam

DEF 19–9 US–VIET S, advisory assistance and training, U.S.-South Vietnam

SOC 10 VIET S, disaster relief, South Vietnam

SOC 12 VIET S, religion, South Vietnam

AID (US) 8 VIET S, grants and technical assistance, U.S. aid to South Vietnam

AID (US) VIET S, general policy and technical assistance, U.S. aid to South Vietnam

E 12 VIET S, land reform, South Vietnam

INCO–RICE 14 VIET S, rice prices, South Vietnam

INF 8 US–VIET S, U.S. psychological operations, South Vietnam

ORG 7 VIET S, field trips to South Vietnam

SEATO 3 PHIL (MA), SEATO meeting, Manila

2. Lot Files. Documents from the central files have been supplemented by materials from decentralized office files, the lot files of the Department of State. A list of the major lot files used or consulted follows: Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272 Files of Under Secretary of State George Ball, 1961–1967.

Bundy Files: Lot 85 D 240 Files of William P. Bundy for the 1960s, first as Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs and then Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs after 1964 (cited as Bundy Files/WPB Special Papers without Lot File number).

Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110 Collection of documentation on International conferences abroad attended by the President, the Secretary of State, and other U.S. officials, May 1961–December 1964.

Har-Van Files Files created for Ambassador W. Averell Harriman and Cyrus Vance, Delegates to the Paris Peace Conference in 1968. Background documents beginning in the early 1960s. The file contains texts of documents found nowhere else.

INR Files: Lot 81 D 343 Consolidated files of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204 Exchanges of correspondence between the President and heads of foreign governments, 1953–1964, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163 Correspondence between Presidents Kennedy and Johnson and the Chairman of the Soviet Union, Prime Minister of Great Britain, and President of France, 1961–1964.

Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149 Cleared memoranda of Presidential conversations with foreign visitors, 1956–1964, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Presidential Reading File: Lot 74 D 164 Department of State material included in the President’s evening reading items. 1964–1973; also Secretary-President luncheon meetings, 1964–1969.

Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192 Files of Secretary of State Dean Rusk, 1961–1969, including texts of speeches, miscellaneous correspondence files, White House correspondence, chronological files, and memoranda of telephone conversations.

Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8 Top Secret subject files of the Embassy in Saigon, 1964.

Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330 Memoranda of conversation of the Secretary and Under Secretary of State, 1961–1964.

Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147 Minutes of the Secretary of State staff meetings, 1961–1964.

S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199 Files of the Policy Planning Council for the yeas 1963–1964.

S/P Files: Lot 71 D 273 Files of Ernest K. Lindley, member of the Policy Planning Staff, 1961–1968.

Special Group for Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451 Memoranda and minutes of the meetings of the Special Group, Counterinsurgency, 1961–1966, and “eyes only” material for 1964.

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265 Master set of papers pertaining to National Security Council meetings, including policy papers, position papers, and administrative documents for the years 1961–1966, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316 Master file of National Security Action Memoranda (NSAMs) for the years 1961–1968, maintained by the Executive Secretariat.

Vietnam Negotiating Files: Lot 69 D 412 Files of negotiations for a possible peace in Vietnam, including the efforts of countries, international organizations and individuals, 1961–1967.

Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219 Top Secret files of the Interagency Vietnam Working Group, 1963–1967.

Massachusetts Historical Society. Boston, Massachusetts Lodge Papers Personal papers of Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., 1928–1968.

Washington National Records Center, Suitland, Maryland Record Group 84, Records of the Foreign Service Posts of the United States

Saigon Embassy Files: FRC 68 A 1814 Classified and unclassified files of the Embassy in Saigon for 1964 (formerly Lot 67 F 26).

Saigon Embassy’s Coordinator Files: FRC 68 A 5612 Classified sensitive captioned files of the coordinator, Embassy in Saigon, 1964–1965 (formerly Lot 68 F 32).

Record Group 306, Records of the United States Information Agency

USIA Psychological Operations Files: FRC 68 A 4933 Vietnam Working Group files, 1962–1964 (formerly Lot 67 D 444).

Record Group 319, Records of the Army Staff

Headquarters, Department of the Army Microfilm files of incoming and outgoing messages, 1945 ff.

Record Group 330, Records of the Office of the Secretary of Defense

McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470 Files of Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara for the years 1961–1968.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 306 Secret and lower-classified general files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1964.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023 Top Secret files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1964.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926 Miscellaneous Top Secret and sensitive files of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, 1961–1964.

OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425 Official Records of the Secretary of Defense, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, and the Special Assistant, 1964.

National Defense University, Fort McNair, Washington, D.C. Taylor Papers Papers of General Maxwell D. Taylor, Chief of Staff of the Army, 1955–1959; Military Adviser to the President, 1961–1962; and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff 1962–1964.

John F. Kennedy Library, Boston, Massachusetts Thompson Papers Files of the Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, 1960–1966.

Lyndon B. Johnson Library, Austin, Texas Papers of President Lyndon B. Johnson, National Security File Agency File (cited as Agencies File)

Aides Files

Heads of State Correspondence

Intelligence File

Memos to the President

National Intelligence Estimate File

NSC Meetings

Vietnam Country File

Papers of President Lyndon B. Johnson, Special Files Meeting Notes File

President’s Daily Diary

Papers of President Lyndon B. Johnson, White House Central Files Confidential Files

Rusk Appointment Book

Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, Washington, D.C. Harriman Papers Special files of W. Averell Harriman, Public Service, Kennedy and Johnson administrations

U.S. Army Center for Military History, Washington, D.C. Westmoreland Papers Records of General William C. Westmoreland, Commander, Military Assistance Command Vietnam, 1964–1968.

Published Sources

Documentary Collections, Congressional Documents, and Periodicals The Declassified Documents Quarterly Catalog and microfiche. Woodbridge, CT: Research Publications (formerly Washington: Carrollton Press), 1974 and onwards.

Joint Chiefs of Staff Historical Division. History of the JCS: The War in Vietnam, 1960–1968.

The Pentagon Papers: The Department of Defense History of United States Decisionmaking on Vietnam [The Senator Gravel Edition]. 4 vols. Boston: Beacon Press, 1971.

U.S. Department of State. Aggression From the North. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1965. ____. American Foreign Policy: Basic Documents, 1950–1955. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1957.

____. American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, 1963, and 1964. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

____. Department of State Bulletin, 1964. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–1964. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964.

Memoirs Note: The Department of State takes no responsibility for the accuracy of these memoirs nor endorses their interpretation of the events.

Ball, George. The Past Has Another Pattern: Memoirs. New York, 1982.

Colby, William, and Forbath, Peter. Honorable Men: My Life in the CIA. New York, 1978.

Hilsman, Roger. To Move a Nation. Garden City, NY, 1967.

Johnson, Lyndon Baines. The Vantage Point: Perspectives of the Presidency, 1963–69. New York: Holt, Reinhardt and Winston, 1971.

Johnson, U. Alexis with Jeff Olivarius. The Right Hand of Power. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1984.

Nguyen Cao Ky. Twenty Years and Twenty Days. New York, 1976.

Nitze, Paul. From Hiroshima to Glasnost: At the Center of a Decision, A Memoir. New York, 1989.

Rusk, Dean as told to Richard Rusk. As I Saw It. New York, 1990.

Sullivan, William. Obbligato, 1939–1979: Notes on a Foreign Service Career. New York, 1984.

Taylor, Maxwell D. Swords and Plowshares: A Memoir. New York, 1972.

List of Abbreviations List of Abbreviations

AA, anti-aircraft

AAA, anti-aircraft artillery

ABG, air base group

AC&W, aircraft control and warning

AFC, Armed Forces Council

AFP, Agence France Presse (French Press Agency)

AID, Agency for International Development

ALO, Air Liaison Officer

AP, Associated Press

ARVN, Army of the Republic of Vietnam

ASAP, as soon as possible

ASW, anti-submarine warfare

AWOL, absent without leave

Bks, barracks

BLT, battalion landing team

Bn/Dist Adv, Battalion District Advisers

BNA, Office of British Commonwealth and Northern European Affairs, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State BOQ Bachelor Officers Quarters

BTL, Battalion

CAP, Combat Air Patrol

CARE, Cooperative for American Relief Everywhere

CAS, controlled American source

ChiCom, Chinese Communists

CIA, Central Intelligence Agency

CIDG, Citizens’ Irregular Defense Group

CINCPACFLT, Commander in Chief, Pacific Fleet

CINCRVNAF, Commander in Chief, Republic of Vietnam Air Force

CINCUSARPAC, Commander in Chief, U.S. Army Pacific

CINCVAF, Commander in Chief. Vietnamese Armed Forces

CIP, counterinsurgency program

CJCS, Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

CVN, Central Vietnam COM7FLT. Commander Seventh Fleet

COMUSMACV, Commander, United States Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

CONUS, continental United States

CP, command post

CP, Communist Party

CPR, Chinese People’s Republic

C/S, Chief of Staff

CTV, Confederation Travailleurs du Vietnam (Vietnamese Confederation of Labor)

CT, Country Team

CVA, attack aircraft carrier

CVTC, Confederation of Vietnamese Trade Congresses

DCI, Director of Central Intelligence

DCM, Deputy Chief of Mission

DepPriMin, Deputy Prime Minister

Deptel, Department of State telegram

DIA, Defense Intelligence Agency

DMZ, demilitarized zone

DOD, Department of Defense

DRV, Democratic Republic of Vietnam

DTG, date-time group

EDT, Eastern Daylight Time

KG, escort group

EmbOff, Embassy officer

Embtel, Embassy telegram

EST, Eastern Standard Time

EUR, Bureau of European Affairs, Department of State

ExCom, Executive Committee

Exdis, Executive distribution only

FAC, Forward Air Controllers FBI, Federal Bureau of Investigation

FE, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

FE/SEA, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

FonOff, Foreign Office

FSO, Foreign Service officer

GCI, Ground Controlled Interception

GNZ, Government of New Zealand

GOA, Government of Australia

GRC, Government of the Republic of China

GVN, Government of Vietnam

HMG, Her Majesty’s Government

HNC, High National Council

ICC, International Control Commission

INR, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

IO, Bureau of International Organizations Affairs, Department of State

ISA, Office of International Security Affairs, Department of Defense

J–1, Personnel, JCS

J–2, Intelligence, JCS

J–3, Operations, JCS

J–4, Logistics, JCS

JCS, Joint Chiefs of Staff

JCSM, Joint Chiefs of Staff Memorandum

JGS, Joint General Staff

Limdis, limited distribution restriction on telegrams

LOC, lines of communication

MAAG, Military Assistance Advisory Group

MAC J00, series indicator for telegrams from MACV

MACV, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

MAP, Military Assistance Program

MAROPS, Maritime Operations

MEB, Marine Expeditionary Brigade

MEDICO, Medical International Cooperation

MEF, Marine Evacuation Force Emergency

MiG, Soviet-built fighter aircraft

MinDef, Minister of Defense

MLF, multilateral force

MOH, Ministry of Health

MRC, Military Revolutionary Council

NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization

NCO, non-commissioned officer

NFLSVN, National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam

NLF, National Liberation Front

NM, nautical miles

NMCC, National Military Communications Center

Nodis, no distribution

Noforn, no foreign dissemination

NOTAL, telegram code, “not all,” indicating that corresponding reference telegram was not sent to all addressees

NSA, National Security Agency

NSAM, National Security Action Memorandum

NSCWG, National Security Council Working Group

NVN, North Vietnam

OASD/ISA, Office of Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

ODMA, Office of the Director for Military Assistance

OPLAN, Operations Plan

OSD, Office of the Secretary of Defense

OSS, Office of Strategic Services

PA, Bureau of Public Affairs, Department of State

PACAF, Pacific Air Forces (USAF)

PACOM, Pacific Command

PAVN, People’s Army of Vietnam

PDJ, Plaine des Jarres

PL, Pathet Lao

PL, Public Law

PM, Prime Minister

PNG, persona non grata

P/ON, Office of News, Bureau of Public Affairs

POL, petroleum, oil, lubricants

POLAD, Political Adviser

PRC, People’s Republic of China

PRC, People’s Revolutionary Council

PriMin, Prime Minister

psyops, psychological operations

PT, patrol

RCI, Office of Current Intelligence Indications, Bureau of Intelligence and Re search, Department of State

reftel, reference telegram

RFE, Office of Research and Analysis for Far East, Bureau of Intelligence and Re search, Department of State

RG, Record Group

RKG, Royal Khmer government

RLAF, Royal Laotian Air Force

RLG, Royal Laotian government

RTG, Royal Thai Government

RVN, Republic of Vietnam

RVNAF, Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces

SACSA, Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities, JCS

SAM, surface-to-air missile

SAR, search and rescue

SC, Security Council

SDC, Self Defense Corps

SEA, Southeast Asia

SEATO, Southeast Asian Treaty Organization

SecDef, Secretary of Defense

septel, separate telegram

SKZ, Chinese recoilless rifle

SLF, Special Landing Force

SNIE, Special National Intelligence Estimate

S/P, Policy Planning Council, Department of State

SPECAT, special category, military telegram

S/S, Executive Secretariat, Department of State

S/VN, Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs

SVN, South Vietnam

TACS, Tactical Air Control System

tel, telegram

TG, Thai Government

UK, United Kingdom

UN, United Nations

UNESCO, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization

UNSC, United Nations Security Council

UPI, United Press International

USAF, United States Air Force

USG, United States Government

USIA, United States Information Agency

USIS, United States Information Service

USOM, United States Operations Mission

USNS, United States Naval Ship

USS, United States Ship

USSF, United States Special Forces

VC, Viet Cong

VM, Viet Minh

VNAF, Vietnamese Air Force

VNN, Vietnamese Navy

VNQDD, Viet Nam Quoc Dan Dung (National Party of Vietnam)

VOA, Voice of America

WESTPAC, Western Pacific

ZI, Zone of Interior

List of Persons List of Persons

Note: The identification of persons in this list is limited to circumstances and positions relevant to the events documented in the volume. All titles and positions are American unless otherwise indicated.

Alphand, Herve, French Ambassador to the United States

Anthis, Brigadier General Rollen H., USAF, Commander U.S. 2d Air Force advanced air echelon headquarters in Saigon; Chief, Air Force Section, Military Assistance Advisory Group, Vietnam

Asbjornson, Mildred, secretary to Secretary of State Rusk

Ball, George W., Under Secretary of State

Bell, David E., Administrator, Agency for International Development

Blouin, Rear Admiral F. J., USN, Director, Far East Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Bohlen, Charles E., Ambassador to France

Breckon, M. Lyall, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until March 1, 1964; thereafter Office of the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs

Brent, Joseph L., Director, United States Operations Mission in Vietnam

Brubeck, William H., Secretary of State’s Special Assistant and Executive Secretary of the Department of State until July 20, 1964

Bundy, McGeorge, President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs

Bundy, William P., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs until March 10, 1964; Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs after March 16, 1964

Butler, Richard A., British Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Caccia, Sir Harold A., Permanent Under Secretary, British Foreign Office; later, Head of Diplomatic Service

Carter, Lieutenant General Marshall S., Deputy Director, Central Intelligence Agency

Cater, S. Douglass, President’s Special Assistant

Chadbourn, Philip H., Counselor of the Embassy in Vientiane

Chu, see Nguyen Xuan Chu

Cleveland, James H., Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs

Cline, Ray S., Deputy Director, Central Intelligence Agency

Coffin, Frank M., Deputy Administrator for Operations, Agency for International Development

Colby, William E., Chief, Far East Division, Central Intelligence Agency

Coote, Wendell B., Deputy Director for Far Eastern Affairs, Office of Eastern and Southern African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State, until August 16, 1964 Cooper, Chester, Member of the National Security Council Staff, on detail from the Central Intelligence Agency

Couve de Murville, Maurice, French Foreign Minister

Cox, Gordon E., Canadian Commissioner, International Supervision and Control Commission, until April 1964

De Gaulle, Charles, President of France

De Silva, Peter, Chief of Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon

Defferre, Gaston, Socialist candidate for President of France

Denney, George C., Jr., Deputy Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Dillon, C. Douglas, Secretary of the Treasury

Do Mau, Brigadier General, ARVN, Vietnamese Vice Prime Minister for Cultural and Social Affairs, February 4–November 4, 1964

D’Orlandi, Giovanni, Italian Ambassador to the Republic of Vietnam

Douglas-Home, Sir Alec, British Prime Minister until October 1964

Dunn John M., Special Assistant to the Director, United States Operations Mission in Saigon

Duong Van Duc, Brigadier General, ARVN, Commander of IV Corps and leader of abortive coup of September 13, 1964

Duong Van Minh (“Big Minh”), Lieutenant General, ARVN, Chairman of the Military Revolutionary Council until January 30, 1964; Chief of State of the Republic of Vietnam, February 8–October 26, 1964

Engle, F. Byron, Director, Office of Public Safety, Agency for International Development

Felt, Admiral Harry D., Commander in Chief, Pacific, until February 1964

Fischel, Wesley, Professor of Political Science, Michigan State University

Flott, Frederick W., First Secretary and Special Assistant to the Ambassador, Embassy in Saigon

Forrestal, Michael V., member of the National Security Council Staff until July 1964; thereafter Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam Affairs

Fredericks, J. Wayne, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of African Affairs

Fulbright, J. William, Senator (D–AR), Chairman, Senate Foreign Relations Committee

Furness, George A., Jr., Office of Research and Analysis for Far East, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, from April 1964

Gard, Richard A., political officer in the Consulate at Hong Kong, February 2–April 3, 1964; thereafter Consul at Hong Kong

Gilpatric, Roswell L., Deputy Secretary of Defense until January 1, 1964

Goldwater, Barry, Senator (R–AZ), Republican Presidential candidate, 1964

Goodpaster, Lieutenant General Andrew J., USA, Assistant to the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

Gore, Sir David Ormeby, then Lord Harlech, British Ambassador to the United States

Green, Marshall, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Gromyko, Andrei A., Soviet Foreign Minister

Halleck, Charles A., Congressman (R–IN), House Minority Leader

Harkins, General Paul D., USA, Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam until June 20, 1964

Harriman, W. Averell, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Helble, John J., Consul at Hue

Helms, Richard R., Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency

Hoan, see Nguyen Ton Hoan

Ho Chi Minh, President of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam

Hughes, Thomas L., Director, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Humphrey, Hubert H., Senator (D–MN) and Vice President-designate

Jenkins, Walter, Administrative Assistant to the President

Johnson, Lyndon Baines, President of the United States

Johnson, Robert H., member of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State

Johnson, U. Alexis, Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs until July 1, 1964; thereafter Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam

Kaysen, Carl, Deputy Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

Kennedy, John F., President of the United States, January 20, 1961–November 22, 1963

Kennedy, Robert F., Attorney General of the United States

Kent, Sherman, Chairman, Board of National Estimates, Central Intelligence Agency

Khanh, see Nguyen Khanh

Khrushchev, Nikita S., Soviet Premier until mid-October; thereafter, Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers

Killen, James S., Director, United States Operations Mission in Saigon

Kim, see Le Van Kim

Koren, Henry L.T., Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State, until April 7, 1964; thereafter Deputy Director for Coordination, Bureau of Intelligence and Research, Department of State

Krulak, Major General Victor H., USMC, Special Assistant for Counterinsurgency and Special Activities to the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Ky, see Nguyen Cao Ky

Lam Van Phat, Brigadier General, ARVN, leader of the abortive coup of September 16, 1964

LeMay, General Curtis E., USAF, Chief of Staff of the Air Force

Le Van Kim, Major General, ARVN, Secretary General and Foreign Affairs member of the Executive Committee of the Military Revolutionary Council until January 30, 1964

Lippmann, Walter, newspaper columnist

Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr., Ambassador to Vietnam until June 28, 1964

Macapagal, Diosdado, President of the Philippines

MacDonald, Admiral David L., USN, Chief of Naval Operations

Macmillan, Harold S., British Prime Minister until October 1963

Maechling, Charles, Jr., Special Assistant to the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

Manhll, Melvin L., Counselor for Political Affairs in the Embassy in Saigon

Manning, Robert J., Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs until July 31, 1964

Mansfield, Michael J., Senator (D–MT), Senate Majority Leader

Mao Tse-tung, Chairman, Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party

Martin, Graham A., Ambassador to Thailand

Martin, Paul J., Canadian Minister of External Affairs

McCafterty, Arthur, member, National Security Council staff

McCone, John A., Director of Central Intelligence

McCormack, John W., Congressman (D–MA), Speaker of the House

McNamara, Robert S., Secretary of Defense

McNaughton, John T., Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs after March 1964

Mendenhall, Joseph A., Deputy Director of the Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, Department of State, until April 12, 1964

Minh, see Duong Van Minh

Moore, Major General Joseph H., USAF, Commander, 2d Air Division after January 31, 1964

Morgan, Thomas E., Congressman (D–PA), Chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee

Moyers, Bill D., Deputy Director of the Peace Corps; thereafter Special Assistant to the President

Murrow, Edward R., Director, United States Information Agency, through January 1964

Nes, David G., Deputy Chief of Mission in Saigon until July 1964

Ngo Dinh Can, brother of Ngo Dinh Diem, convicted of murder, extortion, and misuse of power and executed on May 9, 1964

Nguyen Cao Ky, Colonel and then Air Commander, VNAF, Commander of the Republic of Vietnam Air Force; member and spokesman of the Armed Forces Council after December 18, 1964

Nguyen Khanh, Major General, ARVN, Commander of I Corps; leader of coup of January 30, 1964; Prime Minister of the Republic of Vietnam, February 4–October 30, 1964; thereafter Commander in Chief of Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces; Chairman of the Armed Forces Council after December 18, 1964

Nguyen Luu Vien, General, ARVN, Vietnamese Minister of the Interior after November 4 and member of the Armed Forces Council after December 18, 1964

Nguyen Ngo Tho, Vietnamese Prime Minister and Minister of Economy and Finance until January 30, 1964

Nguyen Ton Hoan, Vietnamese Vice Premier for Civil Pacification Affairs, February 4–November 4, 1964

Nguyen Van Thieu, Brigadier General, ARVN, Chief of Staff of the Joint General Staff and Commander of the ARVN after February 4, 1964

Nguyen Xuan Chu, Chairman of the Vietnamese High National Council, October 30–November 5, 1964

Nguyen Xuan Oanh, Vietnamese Minister of Finance and Vice Minister for Economy, February 4–November 4, 1964

Oanh, see Nguyen Xuan Oanh

O’Brien, Lawrence F., Special Assistant to the President

Pearson, Lester B., Canadian Prime Minister

Pham Huy Quat, Vietnamese Minister of Foreign Affairs, February 4–November 4, 1964

Pham Khac Rau, Counselor and Charge d’Affaires ad interim, Vietnamese Embassy in Washington

Pham Khac Suu, Chairman of the Vietnamese High National Council, September 26, 1964; Chief of Staff of the Republic of Vietnam after October 26, 1964

Pham Van Dong, Prime Minister of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam

Poats, Rutherford M., Assistant Administrator for the Far East, Agency for International Development

Procter, Carolyn J., Personal Assistant to Secretary of State Rusk after January 15, 1964

Pye, Lucian, Professor of political Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Read, Benjamin H., Secretary of State’s Special Assistant and Executive Secretary of the Department of State

Reedy, George E., Press Secretary to the President

Rosenthal, James D., consular Officer at the Consulate at Hue

Rostow, Walt W., Counselor and Chairman of the Policy Planning Council, Department of State

Rowan, Carl T., Director, United States Information Agency, January 21, 1964

Rusk, Dean, Secretary of State

Russell, Richard, Senator (D–GA), member, Senate Armed Services Committee

Sarit Thanarat, Field Marshal, Thailand Prime Minister until December 8, 1963

Seaborn, J. Blair, Canadian Commissioner, International Supervision and Control Commission, April 1964

Sharp, Vice Admiral Ulysses S.G., Jr., USN, Commander, Pacific Fleet (CINCPACFLT), April 26, 1964; Commander, Pacific Command (PACOM), April 30, 1964

Shenstone, Michael, First Secretary of the Canadian Embassy in Washington

Shriver, Sargent, Director, Peace Corps

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, Chief of State of Cambodia

Silver, Solomon, Assistant Program Director with the Agency for International Development in Saigon; after November 8, 1964, Director, Office of Development Planning, Bureau of Far East Affairs

Smart, General Jacob E., USAF, Commander, Pacific Air Forces

Smith, Bromley, Executive Secretary, National Security Council

Smith, Colonel William Y., USA, member, National Security Council staff

Solbert, Peter, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs

Stevenson, Adlai E., Representative to the United Nations

Stilwell, Major General Richard G., USA, Commander, U.S. Army Support Command, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, March 1, 1964

Stoneman, Walter G., Director, Office of Vietnam Affairs, Agency for International Development, through winter 1964; Deputy Assistant Administrator, Bureau of Far East Affairs, April 26, 1964

Sukarno, President of Indonesia

Sullivan, William H., Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs and head of the interagency Vietnam Coordinating Committee until July 1964; Ambassador to Laos, November 25, 1964

Suu, see Pham Khac Suu

Sylvester, Arthur, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, March 1964

Tam Chau, Buddhist leader

Taylor, General Maxwell D., USA, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until June 30 1964; thereafter Ambassador to Vietnam

Thant, U, Secretary-General of the United Nations

Thieu, see Nguyen Van Thieu

Tho, see Nguyen Ngo Tho

Thompson, Llewelyn E., Ambassador at Large; Acting Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs, April 29, 1964

Thompson, Robert G. K., RAF Retired, Chief of the British Advisory Mission to the Republic of Vietnam

Thomson, James C., Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Far Eastern Affairs; thereafter member, National Security Council staff

Throckmorton, Lieutenant General John L., USA, Deputy Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, August 2, 1964

Ton That Dinh, Major General, ARVN, Vietnamese Minister of Interior until January 30, 1964

Tran Thien Khiem, Lieutenant General, ARVN, Vietnamese Minister of National Defense, February 4–September 30, 1964

Tran Van Don, General, ARVN, Commander in Chief of the Vietnamese Armed Forces and Minister of National Defense, until January 30,1964

Tran Van Huong, Vietnamese Prime Minister after November 4,1964

Tran Quoc Buu, President of the Confederation of Vietnamese Trade Congresses

Trimble, William C., Director, Office of West African Affairs, Bureau of African Affairs, Department of State; former Ambassador to Cambodia (1959–1962)

Tri Quang, Buddhist leader and official of General Buddhist Association

Trueheart, William C., Counselor and Consul General at the Embassy in Saigon until May 10, 1964; thereafter Director, Office of Southeast Asian Affairs, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, Department of State

Tyler, William, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs

Unger, Leonard, Ambassador to Laos until December 1, 1964

Valeo, Francis R., Secretary for the Majority, U.S. Senate

Valenti, Jack, Special Consultant to the President

Vance, Cyrus R., Secretary of the Army until January 28, 1964; thereafter Deputy Secretary of Defense

Vien, see Nguyen Luu Vien

Vinson, Carl, Congressman (D–GA), Chairman of the House Armed Services Committee

Vo Nuyen Giap, Vice Premier for Defense, Democratic Republic of Vietnam

Waters, General John K., USA, Commander, U.S. Army, Pacific

Westmoreland, General William C., USA, Deputy Commander of the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, January 27–June 19, 1964; thereafter Commander

Wheeler, General Earl G., USA, Chief of Staff of the Army until July 1, 1964; thereafter Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

Wilson, Donald M., Deputy Director, United States Information Agency

Wilson, James Harold, British Prime Minister from October 16, 1964

Wilson, Colonel Jasper, USA, adviser, Senior Military Assistance Advisory Group, I Corps

Yost, Charles W., former Ambassador to Laos (1954–1956); Deputy Representative to the United Nations Security Council from February 13, 1961

Zorthian, Barry, Public Affairs officer in the Embassy in Saigon through June 2, 1964; thereafter Counselor for Public Affairs

VietnamVietnam1

1 For documentation on U.S. relations with Vietnam during 1961–1963, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, volumes I-IV

Contents

I. The Khanh Coup, January 1–31I. The Khanh Coup, January 1–31

1. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, January 1, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Heads of State Correspondence, General Minh Corres. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent over CIA channels from Saigon. The source text bears neither a telegram number nor time of transmission. Relayed to the President at his ranch in Texas on receipt at the White House. McGeorge Bundy sent copies to Rusk and McNamara.

2. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to the President

Washington, January 6, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. 11, Memos and Misc. No classification marking. Attached to the source text is a note from McGeorge Bundy to Rusk and McNamara, January 6, which reads as follows: “The President received the enclosed papers this morning from Senator Mansfield, and asks if each of you would write a personal memorandum of refutation which he can review and then use with Senator Mansfield if he wishes, not later than Wednesday morning.”

3. Telegram From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, January 7, 1964—1:40 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. I, Pres./Rusk/Lodge Messages. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Sent to Saigon over CIA channels.

4. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, January 7, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security file, Memos to the President, Vol. I, McGeorge Bundy. Top Secret; Sensitive. A note on the source text in Bundy’s hand reads: “Read by the P[resident] Jan. 13.”

5. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) to the Secretary of State

Washington, January 7, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. A copy was sent to McGeorge Bundy. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text.

6. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, January 7, 1964—8:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. This message was sent by the White House to the Department of State for transmission. It was cleared by Ball and sent as telegram 1031 to Saigon, which is the source text.

7. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, January 8, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. II, Memos and Misc. Secret.

8. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, January 9, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. II, Memos and Misc. Confidential.

9. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, January 10, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Southeast Asia. Secret. Copies were also sent to Ball, Harriman, and U. Alexis Johnson. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 147C.

10. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, January 10, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23 VIET. Secret; Limdis. A note on another copy of this telegram reads as follows: “MAC: This is worth your looking at. Lodge may be a little fuzzy, but there is at least a sense of give and take. Mike Forrestal.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. II, Cables)

11. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, January 11, 1964—3:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Mendenhall; cleared by McGeorge Bundy, Hilsman, Poats (in draft and substance), William Bundy, and Krulak (both in draft); and approved by Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC.

12. Memorandum for the Record of the Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency, Washington, January 16, 1964, 2 p.m.

Washington, January 16, 1964, 2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Minutes of Meetings. Secret. Drafted by James W. Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

13. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, January 20, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent by the CIA to the Department of State Exclusive for Hilsman, to the Pentagon Exclusive for Krulak, and to the White House for McGeorge Bundy. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text. No time of transmission is on the source text.

14. Telegram From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State

Saigon, January 21, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, TIGER Basic File. Top Secret. Repeated to JCS and CINCPAC for POLAD. Sent over CIA channels.

15. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, January 21, 1964—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis.

16. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency to the Station in Saigon

Washington, January 22, 1964—3:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret. Also sent to the Department of State Eyes Only for Hilsman, to the Office of the Secretary of Defense Eyes Only for McNamara, to the JCS Eyes Only for Krulak, and to the White House Eyes Only for McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to Honolulu Eyes Only for Felt. Rusk initialed the source text.

17. Editorial Note

18. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, January 28, 1964.

Source: Department of State, HarVan Files, Vietnam Coup Two, January 30,1964 Secret. The source text, which bears no time of transmission from Saigon, is a copy sent by the CIA to the Department of State for Hilsman. Also sent to JCS for Krulak and to the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence for the Defense Intelligence Agency. A later White House copy is published in part in Declassified Documents, 1975, 58C.

19. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, January 29, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, HarVan Files, Vietnam Coup Two, January 30, 1964. Secret: Nodis. Received at 8:03 a.m.

20. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Acting Secretary of State

Washington, January 29, 1964—9:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. II, Memos and Misc. Secret; Noforn. Rusk was en route from Japan. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Book)

21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, January 29, 1964—7:47 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Limdis. Drafted by Marshall Green; cleared by Forrestal, Mendenhall, and Rusk, who resumed to the Department of State at 6:25 p.m.; and approved by Harriman.

22. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, January 30, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. III, Memos. Secret. A handwritten “L" on the source text indicates that the President saw this memorandum.

23. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to the Secretary of State

Washington, January 30, 1964.

Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Vietnam 1964. Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall. Copies were sent to Forrestal, Ball, and Harriman. Hilsman was in Australia.

24. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, January 31, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 2:07 p.m. and passed to the White House, Office of the Secretary of Defense, CIA, and JCS. The White House copy is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 214E.

25. Telegram From the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) and the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)

Washington, January 31, 1964—1:16 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Sent over CIA channels. The source text is a copy the CIA sent the Department of State Exclusive for Rusk. Also sent to the Office of the Secretary of Defense Exclusive for McNamara. In an undated memorandum which bears a handwritten note indicating that it was taken from the President’s bedroom on February 1, Moyers made the following recommendations to the President: “(1) After the last coup in Vietnam, the Communists waited about ten days before launching an aggressive attack which caught Vietnamese and Americans off-guard.” “(2) They will probably try it again now.” “(3) Therefore, Rusk and McNamara should be instructed to inform Lodge and Harkins to take the initiative now—to get the Vietnamese moving against the Viet Cong—to launch an offensive before the Communists launch one.” “(4) This could then be leaked, if desirable, in an effort to show that you are determined to push the war at a faster pace.” (Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, CO 312 Vietnam) At 9:59 a.m., January 31, McNamara telephoned Rusk concerning the need for such initiative in Saigon. The transcript of the call reads as follows: “M said re South Vietnam, President asked what to do. M said his only suggestion was to step up South Vietnamese operations; if that seemed good, he would have a cable developed on it and would get his people to work with Sec’s people. Sec said it was a very good idea. M will get the cable drafted and get it over for clearance.” (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

26. Telegram From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State

Saigon, January 31, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files; Lot 72 D 219, TIGER Basic File. Secret, Nodis. Sent over CIA channels. The source text, which bears no time of transmission from Saigon, is a copy sent by the CIA at 3:25 p.m. to the Department of State for Hilsman. Also sent to the JCS for Krulak and the White House for McGeorge Bundy.

27. Editorial Note

1. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 1. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President2

Saigon, January 1, 1964.

Ref CAP 63663.3 Many thanks for your public letter to General Minh which I presented personally this morning at an appointment which I have reported to the State Department.4

Thank you too for your best wishes and warm encouragement to me personally for the new year, which I heartily reciprocate. I also particularly appreciate your kind words about my agreeing to serve in Saigon.

I agree that there is much to be done here. It is true that a trend has been arrested which, had it continued a few months longer would have led inevitably to disaster. We are also now just beginning to see the full extent of the dry rot and lassitude in the Government of Viet-Nam and the extent to which we were given inaccurate information. It is also true that praise is due to President Kennedy for his decision to make changes in U.S. policy and personnel without which the trend of last summer and autumn would have rocketed on to certain catastrophe. I am free to say this because, although I agreed with them, I did not make the policies; I carried them out.

All of this merely underscores the fact that we have a difficult job ahead. But I do not think that we are being unduly optimistic when I say that we are getting on to the right track.

Let me assure you that I shall spare no effort to provide the kind of leadership which you describe. I also believe that I am in a good position to support and advise the Minh government.

I am happy to read your dismissal of the suggestions that because we belong to different parties, there may be some political tension between us. To me, knowing you, your intelligence, and your broad patriotic outlook so well, and also knowing myself, such a suggestion is fantastic. You are everlastingly right that we are involved in this problem together and I am glad to see it that way.

You can indeed rely on me: to leave no stone unturned; always to keep you thoroughly informed; to make all recommendations to you which I think will lead to victory; and to carry out all your instructions with complete energy and loyalty.

With my warmest and very respectful regards,

Faithfully yours,

Lodge5

2 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Heads of State Correspondence, General Minh Corres. Secret; Eyes Only. Sent over CIA channels from Saigon. The source text bears neither a telegram number nor time of transmission. Relayed to the President at his ranch in Texas on receipt at the White House. McGeorge Bundy sent copies to Rusk and McNamara.

3 Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, p. 744.

4 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 745–747.

5 The telegram bears this typed signature.

2. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to the President 2. Memorandum From Senator Mike Mansfield to the President1

Washington, January 6, 1964.

SUBJECT

Viet Namese Situation

This memo is responsive to your telephone request during Christmas week to Frank Valeo.2 I have discussed the request with him and would respectfully refer you to my memo of December 7th, a copy of which is enclosed.3

As you remarked to him on the telephone, we do not want another China in Viet Nam. I would respectfully add to this observation: Neither do we want another Korea. It would seem that a key (but often overlooked) factor in both situations was a tendency to bite off more than we were prepared in the end to chew. We tended to talk ourselves out on a limb with overstatements of our purpose and commitment only to discover in the end that there were not sufficient American interests to support with blood and treasure a desperate final plunge. Then, the questions followed invariably: “Who got us into this mess?” “Who lost China?” etc.

We are close to the point of no return in Viet Nam. A way to avoid another Korea and, perhaps, another China may be found in the general policy approach suggested in the memo of December 7th. If so, there ought to be less official talk of our responsibility in Viet Nam and more emphasis on the responsibilities of the Vietnamese themselves and a great deal of thought on the possibilities for a peaceful solution through the efforts of other nations as well as our own.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. 11, Memos and Misc. No classification marking. Attached to the source text is a note from McGeorge Bundy to Rusk and McNamara, January 6, which reads as follows:

“The President received the enclosed papers this morning from Senator Mansfield, and asks if each of you would write a personal memorandum of refutation which he can review and then use with Senator Mansfield if he wishes, not later than Wednesday morning.”

2 No record of this telephone conversation has been found.

3 Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 691–692.

3. Telegram From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 3. Telegram From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, January 7, 1964—1:40 p.m.

CAP 63633. Personal for Ambassador Lodge from the President. At my instruction, John McCone has searched the rolls of Agency officers to find the ablest senior executive in the whole outfit for assignment as the new chief of station. I told him that the operation in Vietnam is an absolutely number one priority. He has nominated, and I have approved the appointment of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. I shall see De Silva when he is back here, and I will say to him what I now say to you, that it is of the first importance that there be the most complete understanding and cooperation between you and him. He will understand that you are the head of the Country Team, and his reputation in a series of previous appointments of this sort is that of absolutely outstanding cooperation with the Ambassador. I am concerned not only to sustain effective cooperation, but to avoid any mutterings in the press. I look to you all to ensure the complete absence of any backbiting and the establishment and maintenance of a relationship of genuine trust and understanding at all levels. I cannot overemphasize the importance which I personally attach to correcting the situation which has existed in Saigon in the past, and which I saw myself when I was out there.2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. I, Pres./Rusk/Lodge Messages. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Sent to Saigon over CIA channels.

2 For documentation on Vice President Johnson’s trip to Vietnam, May 11–13, 1961, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. I, pp.135 ff.

4. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 4. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, January 7, 1964.

Defense and CIA have together prepared a plan for covert operations against North Vietnam2 which has been reviewed by Rusk, McNamara, McCone and myself, and we are united in recommending that you approve it. In essence, the proposed program would involve the following: 1. Expansion of intelligence collection by U–2 and by communications/electronics intelligence missions.

2. Expansion of psychological operations by leaflet drops and phantom covert operations and increased black and white radio broadcasts from South Vietnam.

3. Intensified sabotage operations in North Vietnam by Vietnamese personnel.

Sabotage and propaganda operations in North Vietnam in the last year and a half have been most disappointing. The operators now believe that substantial improvements can be achieved, and the policy officers are all in favor of trying.

Specific views are as follows: McNamara is highly enthusiastic. McCone thinks you should understand that no great results are likely from this kind of effort. Rusk is favorable; while he believes 98% of the problem is in South Vietnam and not in cross-border operations, he thinks that an increase in such operations will help to persuade Hanoi that we have no intention of quitting, and may help also to put muscle behind our argument that the trouble comes from the north and that when that trouble stops, our presence in South Vietnam can become unnecessary.

I myself recommend that you approve this general program for detailed development of operational plans in the field, these plans in turn to be reviewed as usual within the Government by the Special Group which monitors all covert programs. You may recall that this group consists of McCone, Gilpatric, Alexis Johnson and myself.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security file, Memos to the President, Vol. I, McGeorge Bundy. Top Secret; Sensitive. A note on the source text in Bundy’s hand reads: “Read by the P[resident] Jan. 13.”

2 The joint draft plan, the basis for Operations Plan (OPLAN) 34A–64, January 3, was outlined in a 3-page covering memorandum to the President to be signed by McCone, McNamara, and Rusk. The program of operations had as its premise that North Vietnam directed and supported the Viet Cong in South Vietnam through a radio network and through infiltration of cadres, weapons, and materiel from Laos and Cambodia. To demonstrate to North Vietnam the risk it ran in supporting the insurgency in the South, an interdepartmental committee under Krulak recommended a 4-month program of covert operations against North Vietnam beginning on February 1. The program was designed primarily to convince the North Vietnamese that it was in their economic self-interest to desist from aggression in South Vietnam. Attached to the covering memorandum were a 3-page annotated target list and a map. (Ibid.)

5. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) to the Secretary of State 5. Letter From the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, January 7, 1964.

Dear Dean: It was apparent when Secretary McNamara and I visited Saigon in December2 that information furnished to us from MACV and the Embassy concerning the current Viet Cong activities in a number of provinces and the relative position of the SVN Government vs. the Viet Cong Forces was incorrect, due to the fact that the field officers of the MAAG and USOM had been grossly misinformed by the province and district chiefs. It was reported to us, and I believe correctly, that the province and district chiefs felt obliged to “create statistics” which would meet the approbation of the Central Government.

I believe it is quite probable that the same practice might be repeated by the new province and district chiefs appointed by the MRC. Furthermore, it is obviously quite difficult for the United States civilian and military personnel to overtly audit the reporting in detail by on-site visits to all areas, villages and hamlets.

I therefore propose developing a new covert method of checking on information on the progress of the war and the counterinsurgency efforts. The details of this plan are outlined in the attached memorandum.3

I should like to discuss this plan at today’s meeting.4 Obviously its implementation and success is contingent upon the support of both State and Defense, and the issuance of appropriate orders to the Ambassador and MACV. I also believe the plan should be reviewed with higher authority in the interest of securing his endorsement.

Sincerely,

John

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. A copy was sent to McGeorge Bundy. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text.

2 McCone was in Vietnam, December 18–20, and McNamara December 19–20, 1963. For their reports to the President, see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 721–738.

3 [Footnote (7 lines of text) not declassified]

4 There was an NSC meeting on January 7, 4:10–5 p.m., which McCone and Rusk attended, but Vietnam was not on the agenda. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) The reference is more likely to an Executive branch oversight meeting on covert operations of which no record has been found.

6. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 6. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, January 7, 1964—8:09 p.m.

I have read with great interest your 1257,2 and I want you to know at once that any program which you recommend in this area will have my very strong support in principle. From all that I have heard, I could not be more in agreement that political energy is at the center of the government’s problem in South Vietnam. I cannot spare Larry O’Brien, but I can and will get you just about anyone else. I am asking all agencies here to prepare a coordinated and constructive response showing what we can do to help you in executing this idea, but I want you to know immediately of my personal support.

Lyndon B. Johnson3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. This message was sent by the White House to the Department of State for transmission. It was cleared by Ball and sent as telegram 1031 to Saigon, which is the source text.

2 In telegram 1257, January 6, Lodge stated: “The war cannot be won without there being the rough equivalent of a nation-wide precinct organization so that ultimately every family in Vietnam will be known to precinct worker and the government will become favorably known to every family.” Lodge suggested that this was something on which President Johnson’s own personal advice would be “precious,” and also asked if the services “of such a top flight political organizer as Lawrence O’Brien” could be made available. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1031 bears this typed signature.

7. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 7. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, January 8, 1964.

SUBJECT

Reporting on the Situation in South Vietnam

I looked at John McCone’s letter of January 7 to Dean Rusk.2 I see nothing wrong with attempting to improve the reporting system out of Saigon. As you are well aware, the great difficulties we had to live through last August and September resulted largely from a nearly complete breakdown of the Government’s ability to get accurate assessments of the situation in the Vietnamese country-side. The more we learn about the situation today, the more obvious it becomes that the excessively mechanical system of statistical reporting which had been devised in Washington and applied in Saigon was giving us a grotesquely inaccurate picture. Once again it is the old problem of having people who are responsible for operations also responsible for evaluating the results.

John McCone has made a great effort, aided and abetted by Lodge, to get his people out of all except a few operations in South Vietnam. He has been trying to put them back into the intelligence business, and I think we should encourage him to do so.

Bob McNamara is now equally aware of the reporting failure, and sincerely desires to do something about it. I have the impression, however, that the military system of reporting will not be responsive to the problem; and unless McNamara can create a separate reporting staff outside the chain of command, he won’t get very far. McNamara faces considerable difficulty in accepting the thought that CIA should take on a separate reporting function. His problem is that to do so is an implied criticism of the Saigon command and its uniformed counterpart in Washington. If John is discreet enough and if his efforts are very low key, McNamara’s problem will be reduced. One way of doing this is not to send large numbers of new CIA people into the field, but to utilize the civilians we already have there from whom the most accurate reporting has come in the past. The Agency’s function could be coordination and evaluation.3

I think John’s efforts should be encouraged along these lines, something which I will do at subterranean levels if you agree.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. II, Memos and Misc. Secret.

2 Document 5.

3 A revised plan for a covert spot-check on counterinsurgency reporting, reflecting in part these concerns, was sent by McCone to Rusk and Bundy on January 9. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23 VIET S)

8. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 8. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, January 9, 1964.

SUBJECT

Comments on Senator Mansfield’s memorandum on Vietnam2

On Monday3 you asked for short comments by Rusk, McNamara, and myself on Senator Mansfield’s memorandum on Vietnam. These comments are attached—Rusk at Tab A, McNamara at Tab B, and Bundy at Tab C. The Mansfield memorandum itself is at Tab D. I have two small additional comments, as an ex-historian:

The political damage to Truman and Acheson from the fall of China arose because most Americans came to believe that we could and should have done more than we did to prevent it. This is exactly what would happen now if we should seem to be the first to quit in Saigon.

Mansfield’s analogy with Korea neglects the fact that a very solid anti-Communist base existed in South Korea when the armistice was worked out in 1953. Moreover, the U.S. presence has continued. There is literally no comparison between this solution and proposals for “neutralization” and U.S. withdrawal in the present situation in South Vietnam. When we are stronger, then we can face negotiation.

Perhaps you can trade with Mike Mansfield: his support for the war effort against our support, which is real, for new and energetic political, social, and economic programs in South Vietnam.

McG. B.

Tab A

Washington, January 8, 1964.

Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President4

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam

I am attaching an unclassified statement on our policy toward Viet-Nam which bears upon Senator Mansfield’s two memoranda to you.5

In addition, the following points should be made: (a) It has been made repeatedly clear to Moscow by me personally that U.S. military activities in Southeast Asia would cease if Hanoi would leave its neighbors alone. Similar messages have been sent, through a variety of channels, to Hanoi. We have made it clear that we are not interested in U.S. military bases or a military position in Southeast Asia.6

(b) Peiping and Hanoi are defying the Geneva Accords on Southeast Asia, both those of 1954 and the more recent Geneva Accord on Laos.7 There is little reason to suppose, therefore, that a diplomatic effort to obtain still another Accord of that type would cause Peiping and Hanoi to leave their neighbors alone.

(c) The proposal for the “neutralization” of South Viet-Nam is a phony. I have proposed to Gromyko, and he has rejected, the idea that there be a neutralization of both parts of Viet-Nam, North and South. He said that North Viet-Nam is a part of the “socialist camp” and that that cannot be changed.8 What the communists mean by “neutralization” of South Viet-Nam is a regime which would have no support from the West and would be an easy prey to a communist takeover.

(d) I have discussed Viet-Nam with President DeGaulle and he has no interest in the kind of “neutralization” which the communists talk about. His attitude toward the eventual settlement of Viet-Nam is very close to our own.

(e) The argument is made that there could be no long-term settlement of Southeast Asia without the agreement of Peiping. But this depends upon what Peiping will agree to. There has been no evidence thus far that Peiping would agree to genuinely independent neighbors in Southeast Asia. If any such possibility opens up, we would move promptly; our own moves in that direction have been repeatedly rebuffed. We are now studying whether Mr. Khrushchev’s most recent message on “territorial disputes” can offer any fresh opening.9

Dean Rusk

Attachment to Tab A

U.S. POLICY ON VIET-NAM

When President Kennedy announced, in December 1961, that the United States would increase our assistance to help the Republic of Vietnam preserve its independence, he made clear that this assistance had a limited objective. As he told the Vietnamese at that time “If the Communist authorities in North Vietnam will stop their campaign to destroy the Republic of Vietnam, the measures we are taking to assist your defense efforts will no longer be necessary.”10

On many subsequent occasions, this government has reiterated its desire to see genuinely established in the former Indo Chinese states that truce which was negotiated in Geneva in 1954, but which the North Vietnamese have arrogantly abrogated ever since. We have stipulated that our intention in Southeast Asia is not to establish a position of Western strength, but to see there a community of independent states, with the confidence that they can develop free from the constant terror of subversive warfare. We believe this goal is very much the same as Senator Mansfield has described as “a Southeast Asia less dependent on our aid-resources and support, less under our control, not cut off from China but still not overwhelmed by China.”

Our basic objectives, therefore, coincide with those suggested by Senator Mansfield. But we differ sharply with him on the means by which these objectives can be achieved. We do not believe that North Vietnam’s terrorism can be called off by “an astute diplomatic offensive” at this time. While diplomacy may eventually play a role, we believe this will happen only after the North Vietnamese become convinced that they cannot succeed in destroying the Republic of Vietnam by guerrilla warfare. “Political and social acts of popular benefit” are an essential part in preserving the Republic against destruction. But these acts can only become possible if military successes against the marauders make feasible an unfettered exchange of confidence between the people in the villages and the government in Saigon. We believe the fight against the Viet Cong can be won without major and direct United States involvement provided the new South Vietnamese Government takes the proper political, economic and social actions to win the support of the rural people and uses its armed forces effectively.

We further believe that only such a victory will give the people of Vietnam and of all Southeast Asia the confidence they need to establish that community of states which both we and Senator Mansfield desire. As General Duong Van Minh, Chairman of the Military Revolutionary Council in South Vietnam recently stated, neutralism cannot be considered until South Vietnam is strong. And peace will not prevail in Southeast Asia until aggression is frustrated.

Any “truce” which might be “won now in Vietnam” would be bought at a price which I am convinced would eventually prove far more costly to us than the peace which we hope to see established there by the action of the new South Vietnamese Government. I am also convinced that the overwhelming majority of the American people agree with me.

Tab B

Washington, January 7, 1964.

Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President11

SUBJECT

Comment on Memoranda by Senator Mansfield

I recommend the following points in your conversation with Senator Mansfield.

1. We should certainly stress that the war is essentially a Vietnamese responsibility, and this we have repeatedly done, particularly in our announced policy on U.S. troop withdrawal.12 At the same time we cannot disengage U.S. prestige to any significant degree. U.S. news reports are bound to place a heavy U.S. cast on the action. Moreover, the whole history of our support of South Vietnam going back to 1954 makes it inevitable that the U.S. is deeply involved, and this would have been true even if we had not made the decision to intervene on a substantial scale in the fall of 1961.

2. The security situation is serious, but we can still win, even on present ground rules. The government has experienced extreme turmoil incident to the coup d’etat. Almost every key official from the head of State to the village mayor has been changed, as well as most of the military leaders. Order, cohesion and direction are only now beginning to appear. In the past few days there have been early evidences of strength and resolution. The military command structure has been further streamlined, more combat forces have been concentrated in the critical provinces and there is direct response to our urging to consolidate and strengthen strategic hamlets on a systematic basis. In any case, the current dry season in the Delta is the critical time, and the next four months will disclose whether the new government can establish its presence in terms of a cohesive base of popular confidence. During that period anything other than exhibitions of resolution and encouragement on our part could do serious hurt to the Vietnamese cause.

3. Senator Mansfield’s suggestion about dividing South Vietnam by present areas of control is impractical. The GVN exercises some degree of control throughout the country. The same is true with the Viet Cong. In much of the country the people are more committed to peace and security than to any political organization, and there could be no negotiated division which would be a meaningful reflection of political control. More basically, although the present government has popular support—probably more than any predecessor—it could not survive a partition. Any deal either to divide the present territory of South Vietnam or to “neutralize” South Vietnam would inevitably mean a new government in Saigon that would in short order become Communist-dominated. By hypothesis, any such “division” or “neutralization” would involve complete U.S. withdrawal, and the situation would then collapse.

4. The consequences of a Communist-dominated South Vietnam are extremely serious both for the rest of Southeast Asia and for the U.S. position in the rest of Asia and indeed in other key areas of the world. a. In Southeast Asia, Laos would almost certainly come under North Vietnamese domination, Cambodia might exhibit a facade of neutrality but would in fact accept Communist Chinese domination Thailand would become very shaky, and Malaysia, already beset by Indonesia, the same; even Burma would see the developments as a clear sign that the whole of the area now had to accommodate completely to Communism (with serious consequences for the security of India as well).

Basically, a truly “neutral” Southeast Asia is very unlikely to emerge from such a sequence of events, even if the U.S. itself tried to hold a firm position in Thailand, if Malaysia too tried to stand firm and even if such remote and uninvolved powers as France backed the concept of “neutrality.”

b. In the eyes of the rest of Asia and of key areas threatened by Communism in other areas as well, South Vietnam is both a test of U.S. firmness and specifically a test of U.S. capacity to deal with “wars of national liberation.” Within Asia, there is evidence—for example, from Japan—that U.S. disengagement and the acceptance of Communist domination would have a serious effect on confidence. More broadly, there can be little doubt that any country threatened in the future by Communist subversion would have reason to doubt whether we would really see the thing through. This would apply even in such theoretically remote areas as Latin America.

5. Thus, the stakes in preserving an anti-Communist South Vietnam are so high that, in our judgment, we must go on bending every effort to win. In the final analysis, Senator Mansfield is challenging what he regards as the gross imbalance between the extent of our involvement in Southeast Asia and our narrow self-interests in the area. My assessment of our important security interests is that they unquestionably call for holding the line against further Communist gains. And, I am confident that the American people are by and large in favor of a policy of firmness and strength in such situations.

Robert S. McNamara

Tab C

Washington, January 6, 1964.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President13

SUBJECT

Senator Mansfield’s Views on South Vietnam

1. To neutralize South Vietnam today, or even for the United States Government to seem to move in that direction, would mean the following: a. A rapid collapse of anti-Communist forces in South Vietnam, and a unification of the whole country on Communist terms.

b. Neutrality in Thailand, and increased influence for Hanoi and Peking.

c. Collapse of the anti-Communist position in Laos.

d. Heavy pressure on Malaya and Malaysia.

e. A shift toward neutrality in Japan and the Philippines.

f. Blows to U. S. prestige in South Korea and Taiwan which would require compensating increases in American commitment there—or else further retreat.

2. We may have to move in these painful directions, but we should do so only when there is a much stronger demonstration that our present course cannot work. If we neutralize, it should not be because we have quit but because others have. Today a move in this direction would be regarded as betrayal by the new regime in Saigon and by all anti-Communist Vietnamese. There are enough of them to lose us an election.

3. The right course is to continue to strengthen our struggle against the Communist terror (which is exactly what it is). For this we need new and stronger leadership in the U.S. effort. In particular, we need a wholly rejuvenated military command and a rapidly stepped-up political effort of the sort which Lodge has at last recommended.14

4. I take it from his memorandum that Senator Mansfield would agree with this recommendation but would add that we should engage in diplomatic feelers with the French and should show more sympathy to the Cambodians. I disagree about the French because such feelers would inevitably stir talk of neutralization at the wrong time. I agree about soothing the Cambodians and believe that we have been heavy-handed in this area in recent weeks.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. II, Memos and Misc. Confidential.

2 Document 2.

3 January 6; see footnote 1, Document 2.

4 Confidential. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1982, 002001.

5 See Document 2 and footnote 3 thereto.

6 Reference is to Rusk’s answers to questions asked at a news conference on November 8, 1963; see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, p. 880.

7 For text of the Agreement on the Cessation of Hostilities in Vietnam, July 20, 1954, see Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. XVI, pp. 1505–1520. For the Declaration and Protocol on the Neutrality of Laos, July 23 1962, see 14 UST 1104.

8 Apparent reference to a Rusk-Gromyko-Home discussion at the United Nations on September 28, 1963. When Rusk related this conversation to Couve de Murville on October 7,1963, he recalled that “on Vietnam, there was a complete impasse.” (Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)

9 Reference is to a letter, December 31, 1963, from Chairman Khrushchev to President Johnson on the subject of peaceful settlement of territorial disputes; see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1963, pp. 938–940.

10 Letter from President Kennedy to President Diem, December 14, 1961; American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1961, pp. 1056–1057.

11 Secret.

12 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 652–653.

13 Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 128B.

14 Apparent reference to Lodge’s presentation of 11 points to the Government of Vietnam on January 1; see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 745–747.

9. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 9. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, January 10, 1964.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia and China

Three forces are converging which might well produce the greatest setback to US interests on the world scene in many years.

1. The rise in South Vietnam of a popular mood, spreading into the bureaucracy and the armed forces, that neither the South Vietnam government nor the US has a viable concept for winning the war and that a neutralized South Vietnam is the only way out.

2. A spread of neutralist thought and feeling in Thailand as well as Cambodia; and the growing judgment in Indonesia that we shall fail in South Vietnam and that the National Liberation Front, supported by Hanoi, will win.

3. De Gaulle’s campaign both to encourage neutralist feeling in Southeast Asia and to bring about the Chinese Communist entrance into the UN.

Many of these despairing neutralist elements were also present in the wake of Dienbienphu and the outcome of the Geneva Conference of 1954. They were reversed by vigorous US diplomatic action, including the negotiation of the Manila Pact, the creation of SEATO and a strengthening of the position in South Vietnam itself.

It may be that actions now taken within South Vietnam itself, military and political, can retrieve the present situation or hold it short of a definitive crisis through the calendar year 1964; but from such evidence as is available to me, this appears doubtful. I return, therefore, to the concept of a direct political-military showdown with Hanoi over the question of its direct operation of the war in South Vietnam including infiltration of men and supplies.2

If we succeed in forcing Hanoi to respect the provisions of the Geneva Accords of 1962 this would have profound psychological and political effects throughout Asia; and we might then be able to deal with the gathering forces designed to put Communist China into the UN from a position of poise. But until it is demonstrated that the game of “Wars of National Liberation” is not viable and that the borders of China and North Vietnam are firm, the acceptance of Communist China within the world community and in the UN could be a major disaster. The present combination of circumstances, if not reversed, would signal to those on the spot that we have granted Chinese Communist hegemony in Southeast Asia.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Southeast Asia. Secret. Copies were also sent to Ball, Harriman, and U. Alexis Johnson. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 147C.

2 Rostow was referring to memoranda which he sent Rusk on November 28, 1962, and November 1, 1963. In these memoranda, both of which Rusk saw, Rostow argued that the United States should confront Hanoi with the choice of ceasing to direct and support the war in the South or accepting retaliatory military damage in the North. Neither is printed.

10. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 10. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, January 10, 1964—6 p.m.

1290. A two-hour meeting with Generals Minh, Don, Kim, PriMin Tho, Ministers Quang and Lam, parts of which are being reported in separate telegrams.2 I had prepared some questions in French so that we could all concentrate conversation on the same subject. I read these questions aloud as follows:3

“I. Aim:”

“Is this the aim? That: in the seven key provinces the government’s writ runs day and night; the ordinary person can sleep throughout the night without fear; government officials need only minimum police protection; and that the seven provinces become a ‘show case’ end as secure as Saigon is now.”

“II. How to achieve it?”

“What orders have been issued by the central government to reach above objective? For example, is the Long An Province Chief getting one set of orders? And is he getting enough people to help him? Is there a pacification directive? If a pacification directive is in existence, what are its provisions as regards:” A. Political

B. Military

“III. What is being done under A (Political)?”

“1. How is it that the VC guerrillas put up such a tough and relentless fight without helicopters? Obviously because they believe in something; the Communists have conveyed to these men clear picture of a program which they think will make life better. We have not. They are also well organized politically; we are not.”

“2. What, therefore, are we doing to enunciate a political program in terms people can understand, which will at a very minimum remove age-old inequities and the grievances which these have caused and which will also make honest promises of constructive improvement for the future—a doctrine which can be applied meticulously from the grassroots up, in which deeds will be matching words and which can be communicated effectively and repeatedly to the people?”

“3. Will there be an active national information program, using the extensive communications apparatus now available to contrast your program with that of Communism?”

“4. Such a program must go hand in hand with the military security measures considered under B because when the military achieve security, the people will then be in a position to make a choice. Now they are in no position to choose anything because they are terrified and can only think of survival. What then are we doing to see to it that when they are in a position to make a choice, they choose our side rather than the other? For it is when they choose our side that they will have destroyed the infrastructure of the VC—and we are much more interested in destroying the infrastructure, the very base of the VC, than we are in killing individual VC.”

“5. Should not such a program assure them:” of our interest in their security,

improve their facilities for education,

reform the system of land ownership (so as to at least be competitive with VC)

abolish favoritism,

eliminate exorbitant taxation and forced labor (where labor is not for manifest benefit of people performing it),

improve health,

protect people from extortionists?

“6. In your speech to the Council of Notables4 you spoke in general terms of a domestic program. Why not amplify this, with specific illustrations named in paragraph 5?”

“6. [7.] We are advised that the GVN has increased troop strength in Long An but that the VC have simply shifted from military to political tactics and are defeating us politically. This is the old Mao Tse-tung maxim “fight, fight, talk, talk”. We are, therefore, as yet essentially no better off in Long An than we were. We are at present overwhelmingly outclassed politically because there is literally no Vietnamese corps of junior governmental/political workers to carry out directives of the GVN. Province Chief, although excellent, cannot possibly cover all the strategic hamlets. At present of 219 strategic hamlets in the province the government controls 20, and 40 have been completely abandoned.”

“8. Can war be won without there being the rough equivalent of a nation-wide precinct organization so that ultimately every family in Vietnam will be known to a precinct worker? In the case of Long An this means eventually three teams of eight men each for each of six districts—a total of 144 men. I understand that this would cover the entire population of the province. These men must be competent, enthusiastic, and well trained. Eventually and ideally they should be local men, but this is not possible in Long An at present. The men that are sent in should look for promising local men and turn responsibility over to them.”

“9. Must not these men sleep in the hamlets? That is the first and most important commandment, for this makes clear as nothing else can that the government is truly interested in the security of the people. Then, in addition to [garble] for local talent, these men should systematically maintain contact with each hamlet, counter the Viet Cong propaganda, and explain the new MRC and its program for the country. This means MRC must have a program which is truly competitive with Communism. On such a program item no. 1 must be security which will never be believable unless MRC workers sleep in the hamlet.”

“10. Can you not recruit an elite group here in Saigon to work in Long An, said men to be withdrawn as soon as they have built a local corps, for the purpose of training others for other provinces? Should not an intensive program of schooling be started to build up a corps like this for all of the other 42 provinces in Vietnam?”

“11. Should not these men actively promote General Minh’s program for the nation? They certainly should not be sent into the provinces unless there is something for them to do. They could be kept busy initially, carrying out the local program which is now going on, involving cement, well drilling, insecticides, pesticides, roofing and building of schools.”

“12. The above is not the old civic action program. This old program was for propaganda, whereas what we here suggest is for performance. The old program aimed to keep a certain group in power whereas this program aims to give Vietnam a political organization which can compete with the political organization of the Viet Cong.” 1. When I finished reading, PriMin Tho said that there was much in the paper which was good, but that there were some things that could not be done now. On the matter of taxes and rents, they were planning to cancel all the repayments due from farmers to owners over the next 12 years, which would amount to 500 million piastres.

2. General Minh said that they had already reduced taxes from 40 per cent to 20 per cent on houses and on farms used for habitation.

3. When I commented that I was following events in Vietnam very closely, and had not heard of this, General Don replied “That is why we have changed the Information Minister”.

4. General Minh continued that they were suppressing the taxes paid by Vietnamese students abroad. This would entail a 75 million piastre loss.

5. They agreed on the importance of public support for the government and felt that public support for them was improving. General Kim said that during last Sunday’s5 clear and hold operations in Long An by the airborne battalion, information was given to them by peasants on the location of 50 fresh VC corpses. They had actual photographs of the corpses which they showed me and which evidently were not decomposed at all.

6. General Minh felt they were getting really well organized on the elimination of the key VC in each village. General Kim said this kind of thing was much better done locally, and not by bringing in people from Saigon.

7. General Minh felt that, referring to my number III, para 1, the Vietnamese people were really not actuated much by having a clear picture of a program. If, he said, I were to go into California and divide it all up into 3-acre lots and give it away, the people to whom I gave it would be pleased, but this was not a question of ideology so much as a question of banditry.

8. I agreed that there was a lot of banditry in it, but that ideology was also involved. He agreed and said that he had made a declaration of a domestic program in his speech of Jan 2.

9. When I applauded his speech, but pointed out that it was largely generalities, he said that he as the Chief of State had to deal in generalities and that it was up to Tho to give the details.

10. When I said that a Chief of State would make more of an impression if he dealt in things that were concrete, he finally agreed and said that on February 13, he was making a statement on amnesty and for giving land owners the purchase price for their 3 hectares which they had bought under the Diem regime.

11. On the question of building a sort of political machine, he pointed out that they were creating a “Council of Notables” in each village which, in all but 10 percent of the villages in Vietnam, would consist of local people. They would be the ones to expound the program, know the people, and to serve as a link between the people and the government.

12. General Kim, with obvious agreement from the rest, spoke of the great helpfulness of USIS, notably in the tracts which they made available to province officials. But he did hope that all USIS activities would be done “hand in hand” with the province people, and General Kim volunteered to give advice to USIS personnel himself. He commented that the Long An Province Chief had decided not to use the atrocity photographs which USIS had provided during the Diem regime.

13. I then raised the question of intensifying the Chieu Hoi program.6 General Kim said that it had some definite value but that too much could never be expected from it. The people who “fight against us” are, broadly speaking, in 3 categories—(1) the hard-core Communists whom no Chieu Hoi program can reach; (2) the nationalists who are against French, Japanese, and American “imperialism”, many of whom are already under Communist influence; (3) those who joined the VC because they were pursued by the Diem police because of the Buddhist troubles, or something similar.

Note: The VC Chief who kept the American, Krause, a prisoner for 5–1/2 months, had become a VC because the Diem police had killed his father, beaten his mother to death, and had made it clear he had no future whatever if he stayed in Saigon. End of note.

14. General Kim said it was obvious that only limited results could be obtained from the Chieu Hoi program and nothing whatever with regard to categories 1 and 2. The important thing, he said, with evident agreement by all present, was to “keep what we have” and make it impossible for the VC to recruit any more.

15. On the matter of night operations, he said these were going on and that the Long An Province Chief had reported that in November there were 30 night operations and in December more than 200.

16. Many were not used to fighting at night and Kim was looking for new tactics and planned to consult General Harkins and General York. For example, carbines were not much use at night, and perhaps shotguns would be better.

17. On the matter of rewards to encourage night fighting, it was largely a question of money with which to buy information. In Long An there was 20,000 piastres a month allotted for this purpose, which was not very much. He would like to see money taken away from “useless projects” so that they could do more of this.

18. I said I hoped he would give me a list of “useless projects”, because no one would like to suppress them more than I would.

19. In response to another question of mine, he said that firm and constant pressure was being exercised by the government, that now they had a real wartime general staff, a real command situation and not a peacetime style of organization such as they had before. They are prepared to “cut off a man’s head” for unsatisfactory performance and had already done so. In fact, he cited a case of a Colonel Dao who had had two SDC executed for looting.

20. He gave me the new list of the 7 provinces in which they were concentrating their efforts and asked whether this was satisfactory to us: Long An, Binh Duong, Hau Nghia, Dinh Tuong, Hien Hoa, Tay Ninh and Kien Tuong.

Comment: In their own way, these men are obviously trying to put out a program and create a sort of political organization to serve as a link between them and the people. They are obviously not as concerned with ideology as I am. Their Council of Notables in each village is obviously not what I had in mind. I still think my emphasis is about right, but I also recognize that they know this country much better than I do. These men are obviously intelligent, very hard working, and are giving this whole effort everything they’ve got. Believe we should work with these Councils of Notables as the best thing available.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23 VIET. Secret; Limdis. A note on another copy of this telegram reads as follows: “MAC: This is worth your looking at. Lodge may be a little fuzzy, but there is at least a sense of give and take. Mike Forrestal.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. II, Cables)

2 Reference is to telegrams 1287 and 1288 from Saigon, both January 10, 5 p.m. In telegram 1287, Lodge reported that after the 2-hour meeting with the Generals, General Kim told him that the 11 points which Lodge had made to Minh on January I (see footnote 14, Document 8) were already being implemented by the government with the exception of point 8, early revitalization of the amnesty program, which was still under study. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) In telegram 1288, Lodge reported that Generals Kim and Minh spoke of “the extreme undesirability” of U.S. advisers going into the districts and villages because they would seem “more imperialistic than the French” and their presence would substantiate Viet Cong charges that the government was a U.S. “lackey.” Minh was also unimpressed with Vietnamese who worked directly for the United States, since they were viewed by the people in the same way “as the Vietnamese who worked for the Japanese during the war.” Generals Minh and Don complained of special U.S. support for the Cao Dai and Hoa Hao who they believed were trying to play the United States off against South Vietnam. Finally the Generals asked the United States to stop supporting financially a Vietnamese student group which they maintained was involved in anti-French demonstrations. (Ibid., POL 23 VIET S)

3 The paper from which Lodge read is in the Massachusetts Historical Society, Lodge II Papers, Box 123, Vietnam.

4 A summary of and extract from the speech, which the Embassy characterized as commendable “for its anti-Communist and anti-neutralist tone and for its sincere tribute to democratic values,” is in telegram 1246 from Saigon, January 2. (Department of State, Central Files. POL 15 VIET S)

5 January 5.

6 The Vietnamese Government’s amnesty program which aimed at resuming Viet Cong to government control. See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. III, p. 229.

11. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 11. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, January 11, 1964—3:59 p.m.

1055. CINCPAC for POLAD. Saigon pass COMUSMACV for Harkins. Joint State/Defense/Aid Message. In elaboration of brain trust concept suggested by General Minh and accepted by President Johnson (our 1000),2 it is our view here that high-level advisors may be essential key to instilling ingredient most sorely lacking in GVN: efficiency and urgency of action. Minh’s invitation to establish brain trust and readiness to accept US advice and cooperation which it connotes should be seized upon as avenue to increase guidance of new government along proper lines in effective conduct of war. What we have in mind is advisors working directly with Vietnamese officials on day-to-day implementation of agreed policy lines. They would, of course, be completely responsible to you for policy guidance and would in no sense supplant your policy role with top GVN officials nor would they infringe direct and comprehensive military advisory role of COMUSMACV. On contrary they would be continuously implementing policy Country Team urges on GVN and would in effect be extension your arm into key sectors GVN by maintaining closest possible liaison between Country Team and key GVN officials. We believe that this new link should reinforce, not compete with, influence of Country Team members. We recognize such advisors must operate behind the scenes and that their persistent prodding must be done with great tact. We believe this can be done and it is essential to do it to reverse war trend.

Specifically, we think it would be useful to begin by assigning three senior experienced full-time advisors (plus necessary assistants) to work with top levels of GVN. One would be senior FSO working with General Minh and Premier Tho on broad program implementation; second would be ranking AID official working with GVN counterinsurgency and economic officials, especially those dealing with rural programs; and third would be high ranking military officer provided by COMUSMACV to represent him in working with Minister of Defense and Joint General Staff particularly on coordination military policy with other related programs. (In economic area this would not supplant joint committee work in which Kaysen and Silver involved.) Other advisors might be added later depending on experience we gain in these operations.

We envisage these advisors as team subordinate individually to their respective Country Team principal but working closely with each other and advisors who are already assigned within, for example, Joint General Staff, as well as with high-level Vietnamese officials whom they are advising. Primary task this team will be to advise and assist GVN in coordinating policies and programs related to war effort, in issuance implementing instructions and funding for policies and programs to lower echelons, and in following up to help insure action is taken at lower echelons. They would necessarily require full support of Embassy, USOM, and MACV. We would not expect them to prepare policy or technical proposals; we would expect them to contribute to proposals developed by the Country Team elements and to help gain effective Vietnamese implementation. Examples include coordination of plans for military clear-and-hold operations with follow-up program for protection villagers, assistance in preparation of directives for this follow-up program (whether it be strategic hamlet program or some modification of that program), amnesty program and Minh’s domestic Peace Corps proposal. These advisors will, in other words, assist top-level GVN officials and Country Team members by helping to serve as coordinators and expediters of actions to implement policies decided upon by GVN officials.

We contemplate that American assistants to these officers be Vietnamese language officers (like Helble and Rosenthal) to maximum extent possible to achieve optimum efficiency. Both advisors and assistants should have office space in GVN buildings close to officials they advise.

We know that extent of direct US involvement envisaged in concept set forth here may be somewhat greater than General Minh had in mind in suggesting the brain trust idea. If we can put forth right people, however, we think it likely that he and other generals will welcome this further evidence of our determination to do everything possible to help them. We think advantages from our point of view quite clear. Unless you or Harkins find difficulties with concept, you are authorized to discuss it with General Minh at early opportunity.3

You should ask General Minh whether he likes this suggestion or whether he has different ideas. Also what individuals GVN would like to have for these advisory portions. We believe it desirable that American advisory personnel working in close contact with Vietnamese officials as set forth above should be known to and held in high regard by GVN. If this not possible, they must at very least have strongest endorsement of Washington.

With regard to senior political, military and economic advisors, we would expect them to be at level of FSO or FSR 1 or 2 and Brigadier General and assigned permanently.

Re your 1257 further message will be forthcoming.4

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority. Drafted by Mendenhall; cleared by McGeorge Bundy, Hilsman, Poats (in draft and substance), William Bundy, and Krulak (both in draft); and approved by Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 745–747.

3 In telegram 1304 from Saigon, January 14, Lodge commented in response that the Vietnamese Government was loath to follow up on the brain trust idea and refused to treat it as a businesslike proposal. Lodge doubted whether the government “would like the idea of high-powered Americans on an “opposite number” basis in adjacent offices to them all through the government” Lodge thought such a scheme had a “colonial” touch. Instead, he recommended advice in a purely advisory, friendly basis through existing channels. Lodge maintained that American advisers would sap the determination of the Vietnamese to act responsibly on their own. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 In telegram 1052 to Saigon, January 10, the Department “heartily endorsed” the Embassy proposal in telegram 1257 from Saigon of setting up a domestic Vietnamese peace corps organization drawn from the youth and students of Saigon (see footnote 2, Document 6). This organization could aid in getting the government’s message across to the hamlets and villages of South Vietnam. Equally important, the Department contended, was the creation of trained resident village and hamlet leaders to carry on the work between visits of the Vietnamese peace corps. The Department also considered that Long An would make an excellent “showcase” for such a program and suggested consideration of a radio contact/airborne troop carrier system to defend Long An’s villages and hamlets from Viet Cong attack. (Ibid., POL 23 VIET S)

12. Memorandum for the Record of the Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency, Washington, January 16, 1964, 2 p.m. 12. Memorandum for the Record of the Meeting of the Special Group for Counterinsurgency, Washington, January 16, 1964, 2 p.m.1

Washington, January 16, 1964, 2 p.m.

PRESENT

Governor Harriman, General Taylor, Mr. Coffin vice Mr. Bell, Mr. Wilson vice Mr. Murrow, Mr. Solbert vice Mr. Gilpatric, Mr. Karamessines vice Mr. McCone, Mr. Brubeck vice Mr. Forrestal

Ambassador Trimble, Mr. Fredericks and Mr. Coote were present for Item No. 1.

Mr. Poats was present for Items 1 and 3.

Mr. Koren and Mr. Mendenhall were present for Items 2 and 3.

Mr. Margolies and Mr. Engle were present for Item No. 4.

Mr. Maechling was present for the meeting.

1. Counterinsurgency Intelligence Summary

Mr. Karamessines, in commenting on the major items in the intelligence memorandum, stated that in Viet-Nam, the Viet Cong appear to be shifting to terrorism and harassment while they continue to prepare for renewed offensive actions. A recent report indicates that the Communists plan to bring reinforcements into the central section of Viet-Nam.

[Here follows discussion of matters unrelated to Vietnam.]

2. Status Report on Counterinsurgency Projects in Viet-Nam

Mr. Koren stated that the Vietnamese Generals are aware of the need for programs to solve socio-economic problems, but they lack the sense of urgency that we attach to these problems. Recent favorable developments are: the reorganization of the military command structure; the recognition of the need for concentrated efforts in the southern provinces, particularly in Long An; the development of a new pacification plan; and continued efforts to rally the religious sects to support the Government. In their foreign relations, the Vietnamese have made significant bilateral efforts to resolve their differences with Cambodia; however, due to the nature of these issues, no quick resolution is anticipated.

On the negative side: The Government has not yet made a clear statement of policy on the strategic hamlet program, and the continued delay in establishing specific authorities, responsibilities, and command channels has caused a backlog of supporting US funds and commodities. It is understood that General Minh plans to announce the Government’s policy on the strategic hamlet and Amnesty Programs on Tet (Vietnamese New Year—February 13).

Mr. Koren said that the Vietnamese plan to use “Council of Notables” at the district and village level to encourage support for the Government, does not seem adequate to achieve desired results. He believes that some sort of domestic peace corps is required to get young people out to work in the country to foster closer identification and allegiance to the Government. In addition, this type of program might serve to quell restlessness existing in student groups.

General Taylor commented that no problem exists in placing US military advisors down to the necessary levels in the Vietnamese military establishment and that no US military advisors have been in contact with religious sect forces. He recommended, and the Chairman agreed, that General Harkins should be invited to be present when military matters are being discussed between the Ambassador and the Generals.

Mr. Mendenhall commented that two problems related to the strategic hamlet program have not been resolved: whether the people will be forcibly resettled into the hamlets, and what subsequent controls will be placed on them.

General Taylor stated that the strategic hamlet concept is sound and what is needed now is better execution of this program. He believes that there should be specific individuals, both in the Vietnamese Government and the Country Team, responsible for this program. Mr. Mendenhall agreed to check into this matter.

The Group, in noting the status report, agreed that the responsibilities of the Group for execution of programs in Viet-Nam would be discussed at a subsequent meeting.2

[Here follows discussion of matters unrelated to Vietnam.]

James W. Dingeman
Executive Secretary

1 Source: Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Minutes of Meetings. Secret. Drafted by James W. Dingeman who is not listed among the participants.

2 At the Counterinsurgency Group meeting, February 20, Harriman stated that the Sullivan Coordinating Committee on Vietnam, established by authority of NSAM 280, February 14 (Document 46) had assumed primary responsibility for South Vietnam. Thereafter, the CI group would keep Vietnam within its cognizance and would assist the Sullivan Committee when required. (Department of State, Special Group Counterinsurgency Files: Lot 68 D 451, Minutes of Meetings)

13. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 13. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, January 20, 1964.

CAS Saigon 3902. Ref [document number not declassified].2 Following are Ambassador Lodge’s comments on ref.

1. Your [document number not declassified]. Herewith my comments as requested your paragraph 4.

2. I welcome exerting increased pressure on North Vietnam with the double aims of bringing about a cease-fire by VC and Pathet Lao and the neutralizing of North Vietnam, turning it into an oriental Yugoslavia. I do not think it profitable to try to overthrow Ho Chi Minh, as his successor would undoubtedly be tougher than he is.

3. We should have it clearly understood that GVN intensifies its efforts as our operations start in accordance with a definite commitment approved by MACV.

4. Reur paragraph 7,3 I propose to bring GVN into planning process by personally explaining to General Minh the purpose and general types planned operations. In this connection General Minh likely to ask U.S. estimate of actions North Vietnam (NVN) might take in retaliation. I intend to ask General Minh for GVN estimate of possible NVN retaliatory actions in any event, but would appreciate estimate of interdepartmental committee having in mind possible actions against American employees and dependents.

5. Assume that actual operations will be accompanied by supporting political actions designed to leave no doubt in minds of NVN leaders (and their Chinese mentors and Soviet associates if any) that these operations are merely first phase and examples of type of treatment NVN can expect if they persist in their support of indirect aggression in SEA. In this regard, we hope that our pressure program could be carried out in a manner which would: (a) permit Ho Chi Minh to give ground without losing face; and (b) not give appearance of a direct challenge to the entire Communist bloc. Our strong preference therefore is to maintain the maximum possible deniability on part of ourselves and GVN (paragraph 3 reftel).4

6. In general we believe the sooner the NVN leaders realize they are dealing with the U.S. (albeit from discreet sources) the better. Further, NVN would tend to lose less face in giving ground to U.S. rather than to SVN.

7. As a related subject, we wonder whether it is not possible to inject a carrot along with the stick at some later stage in the pressure program. The carrots might be withdrawal of some U.S. military personnel (assuming we are going to do it in any case) and some SVN rice to assuage NVN’s obvious agricultural difficulties. Depending on progress of events, we may be able to gain some advantage from anticipated U.S. action (i.e., withdrawal of some U.S. military personnel), which otherwise would not be matched by any corresponding actions on part of NVN.

[Numbered paragraph 8 (2–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

9. General Harkins concurs.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Sent by the CIA to the Department of State Exclusive for Hilsman, to the Pentagon Exclusive for Krulak, and to the White House for McGeorge Bundy. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text. No time of transmission is on the source text.

2 This joint State/Defense/CIA telegram, January 16, personal for Lodge, Harkins and the CIA Station Chief, outlined the manner in which the President created an interdepartmental committee representing the Departments of Defense and State and the CIA to select from the comprehensive 12-month plan for increased pressure against North Vietnam “those operations which are most feasible, and which promise the greatest return for the least risk.” In this telegram, the three agencies stated that the President had approved execution of the plan commencing February 1, and they asked for comments from Lodge, Harkins, and the Station Chief. (Ibid.)

3 Paragraph 7 of the telegram suggested that the covert use of Vietnam’s best military forces and their military resources required that the Vietnamese Government be brought into the planning on a “secure” and “most discreet basis.”

4 Paragraph 3 of the telegram noted that the actions contemplated could be plausibly denied by the United States and that deniability by the Vietnamese Government, while more difficult, should be attempted. In some cases Vietnamese acknowledgment of complicity might be appropriate and the message requested the recipients’ views.

14. Telegram From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State 14. Telegram From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State1

Saigon, January 21, 1964.

[document number not declassified]. 1. Accompanied by DCM, Gen Harkins [less than 1 1ine of source text not declassified] I spent two hours with Generals Minh and Kim, Prime Minister Tho and For Min Lam late yesterday on plan for expanding operations against North Vietnam [document number not declassified].2 Discussion of recent French actions and of Laotian matters in separate telegrams.3

2. I opened discussion with following statement: “The United States Government has drafted a plan, which has been approved at the highest levels, for expanded operations against North Viet Nam. The first phase would begin February 1. We desire your agreement and that you should carry it out. The execution of the whole plan would take 12 months.”

“As an example of what is contemplated, there would be clandestine, aggressive and daring attacks, principally in the nature of sabotage, against the port of Haiphong; and destruction of petroleum reserves and of naval installations.”

“The goal is to convince the rulers of North Vietnam that if they continue their war-like actions in South Vietnam, there will be reactions from our side which will be more and more expensive and destructive for them. After operations at an accelerated rate, the word would be gotten to the chiefs of North Vietnam that they ought to cease fire and that this could be done without loss of face. They should know that South Vietnam, with the tacit approval of the United States, intends to increase the rate and the extent of operations against North Vietnam, thus causing immense destruction on the economic and military installations of North Vietnam, if that becomes necessary.”

“The operations are in three phases of increasing intensity. President Johnson, assuming the agreement of the Government of Vietnam, has approved the commencement of the first phase on February 1 for four months, under the direction of MAC/V.”4

“Suggest it be made clear in subsequent conversations our view that phase 2 and 3 operations not intended to be launched until after we begin make headway in Delta and it becomes increasingly clear to all concerned that Vietcong are losing any chance of gaining loyalty of SVN population. In the first place, phase 2 and 3 operations prior to beginnings of headway in Delta would likely be interpreted by North Vietnamese as act of desperation and therefore would not be effective in bringing change in their policies. In the second place, phase 2 and 3 actions launched prematurely would greatly increase pressure from Western allies and certain segments of U.S. opinion for international conference since U.S. involvement with North is principal fear of neutralist sentiment. Purpose of phase 1 operations is to maintain threat in interim period until we begin to make progress in Delta and to lay groundwork for launching phase 2 and 3 operations at a time when they most likely to result in Viet-Nam backdown.” (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files, TIGER Basic File)

“We consider that you have great assets here and that the personnel of the Vietnamese special branch which has been so well trained can serve as a foundation on which a more extensive organization can be built. Perhaps you will want MAC/V to make a contact with the special branch of your Special Forces High Command. It goes without saying that we are at your disposal.”

3. Reaction Gen Minh and others was thoughtful and constructive and consisted exhaustive canvass various eventualities and problems which could result implementation first phase. Most important questions raised and our responses were: a. As past experience with intelligence and propaganda operations in North had been largely failure, did this plan offer anything new which promised greater chance success? We said risk to personnel remained high but possible achievements particularly in sabotage operations far greater. Lessons had been learned from past, and targets this plan now quite different and more far reaching.

b. What was our real motive? In seeking “cease fire” was there not possibility this in reality only disguised step toward neutrality conference? Gen Kim here raised AFP story-handling of which subject separate telegram through State channels.5 I countered this extreme sensitivity any idea “cease fire” by assuring Minh that what we all wanted here was unilateral “cease fire” by Viet Cong on orders from Hanoi resulting from our increasing pressure against North Vietnam. Once VC had stopped fighting GVN and U.S. would decide what to do next.

c. What would be UN and world reaction? I pointed out operations envisaged would be clandestine and implication GVN and U.S. would be publicly denied, though of course Ho Chi Minh would be left in no doubt as to what was happening and why. Should GVN and/or U.S. eventually become publicly involved our actions would be portrayed as self-defense against North Vietnamese aggression. I believed this could be effectively done.

d. Reactions of North Vietnam and ChiComs. Here Gen Minh and others cited following as possible eventualities for which provision should be made in course detailed prior planning each operation contemplated. 1. Greatly intensified Viet Cong activity, particularly in sabotage of installations in South. We agreed RVNAF could meet this threat. I said our reaction could also be stepped up operations in North.

2. If economy, especially agriculture, in North as fragile as reported Hanoi might resort to directed mass flight South hungry refugees including many subversives and combatants. Minh said trained division could easily be hidden in million refugees. How could GVN hope to cope with this? They could not prevent such a march; they could not put people into camps; they would be overwhelmed. We agreed contingency plan meet this possibility should be developed.

3. Two North Vietnamese divisions presently in north Laos might be moved south to “protect refugees”. Gen Harkins pointed to impossible logistical problems involved and expressed view RVNAF could adequately meet any overt invasion this quarter.

4. How could RVNAF effectively meet air attacks launched from North Vietnam or China and what would U.S. be prepared do in this eventuality? Minh suggested hostile aircraft could be jets flown by Chinese and carrying either North Vietnamese markings or no markings. I said entirely new war would result.

5. Gen Minh asked whether U.S. public prepared support USAF retaliation against North Vietnam and possible Chinese targets. Would U.S. retaliate at all?

e. Would actions contemplated involve men and materials which could more effectively be employed against Viet Cong or against Cambodia? Very fast boats were badly needed in war in South Vietnam. We replied that only 200–400 men would be involved and equipment contemplated not of type needed against Viet Cong.

f. Tho said they would prefer act against Cambodia than North Vietnam. Minh agreed this preferable from military but not psychological standpoint. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] explained equipment designed for operations against North Vietnam not equally appropriate for use against Viet Cong.

g. On own initiative Minh suggested any activities against North should be paralleled by some form of intensified effort against Viet Cong. We agreed.

h. In conclusion Gen Minh stressed he was not trying to pick plan to pieces but merely wished canvass all possible eventualities so as to be ready to meet them. He felt plan fully deserved penetrating and constructive study and would assign Gens Don, Kim, and Chieu to proceed forthwith. Finally he emphasized fact we presenting such plan at this time demonstrated continued U.S. determination vigorously pursue war in Vietnam.

4. Gen Don has just contacted Gen Harkins and suggested that he [less than 1 1ine of source text not declassified] meet with Gen Kim on 23 January to discuss military details this plan.

5. Would appreciate joint State-DOD-CAS comments all points raised and in particular on 4. d and e.6

6. Gen Harkins has read and concurs in this message.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, TIGER Basic File. Top Secret. Repeated to JCS and CINCPAC for POLAD. Sent over CIA channels.

2 Reference is to the telegram described in footnotes 2-4, Document 13.

3 See Document 15; the message on Laotian matters has not been found.

4 On January 22, Hilsman, who was en route to Australia and New Zealand, sent the following message from Honolulu over other-agency channels:

5 Reference is to telegram 1337 from Saigon, January 19, in which Lodge informed Harriman of a call he received from Foreign Minister Lam, who complained about an Agence France Presse article of January 18 entitled “The Asian Policy of France.” The article suggested France planned to use its recognition of China to bring about a settlement in Indochina, equated U.S. actions in South Vietnam with those of North Vietnam and the Viet Cong, and called for a cease-fire in South Vietnam. Lam thought the article was “obviously inspired by the Elysee or Quai d’Orsay” and expressed grave concern over it. (Ibid.. Central Files. POL 27 VIET S)

6 In telegram [document number not declassified] to the Station in Saigon, January 22, the CIA made the following observations on these concerns as expressed by the Vietnamese: “1. The tenor of thoughtful MRC questions, particularly in paragraph 4d of reference, suggests that their first reaction to your presentation was one of apprehension that the U.S. might be headed for a major enlargement of the war, both geographically and physically, and that the GVN might somehow be left holding the bag. This may have derived from their focusing on the statements quoted in paragraph 2 of reference regarding accelerated rate of operations, three phases of increasing intensity and the prospects of immense destruction.”

“2. In any case, it is suggested that through the medium of the working meeting noted in paragraph 4, which will get down to the actual details, you will be able to put the matter in perspective. It will then be plain that we have approval at this time for only a modest program, and not one which, in itself, will result in immense destruction or which should entail the broad questions raised by the Generals. While planning for broader actions should proceed, we have no approvals beyond the specific actions listed in [document number not declassified].”

“3. A summary of the Board of National Estimates evaluation of the approved program is being transmitted to you separately. It addresses the general matter of DRV and international reaction. While it does not discuss, in detail, the specific contingencies raised in paragraph 4d, it estimates that there will not be a strong reaction to the approved actions.” (Ibid.)

For the Board of National Estimates summary, see Document 16. The document referred to at the end of paragraph 2 is the one described in footnotes 2-4, Document 13.

15. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 15. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, January 21, 1964—1 p.m.

1352. Deptels 1083 and 1092.2 This relates to meeting with Minh, Kim, Tho and Lam attended by DCM, Gen. Harkins, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] and myself on Monday, Jan. 20,3 insofar as it pertains to recent French actions.

1. I had sensed at lunch on USS Providence that Tho and Kim were disturbed. On returning to office, was told that Info Min, Gen Do Mau, was going to be at the afternoon meeting, which made it evident that they thought I had asked for the meeting in order to discuss the AFP article.4 I felt this would put us in the position of building up the French. I therefore telephoned Tho and stated topic of our meeting was military and secret and had nothing to do with anything in Do Mau’s department. I also decided not even to mention De Gaulle or France at the meeting but to leave it to the Vietnamese to do so if they wanted to.

2. I believe Harriman and Rusk decision, as revealed in Deptels, to make it crystal clear in private that we are totally opposed to the French line and totally uninfluenced by it, and in public to “play it cool”, is absolutely right. If we here in Vietnam do not in any way enlarge the importance of the French action (which we could easily do), it will fizzle out very fast.

3. During the discussion, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Gen Kim brought up AFP story (of which he had an elaborately annotated copy) and solemnly spoke of the dangers inherent in the seeking of a “cease fire”. I brushed it aside by saying that De Gaulle had no real chips to play in SEA—neither men, nor arms, nor money of any significance, and that if one wanted to play in this poker game, one had to buy a seat at the table. Quoting our English proverb that “sticks and stones can break my bones, but words will hurt me never”, I characterized De Gaulle’s pronouncements on SEA and AFP expose of French policy as “baragouinage”, which could neither affect US policy nor the fundamentals of the SEA situation. They grinned with pleasure when I said that the French were indulging in a favorite national pastime of “garglingwords” and that, of course, US policy was unchanged.

4. Generals Minh and Kim appeared greatly reassured and relieved that we did not take the French maneuvers too seriously. They stressed that regardless of the points of detail [document number not declassified],5 the big fact of the day which emerged [document number not declassified] was the US determination to win the war. In fact, as we were leaving, Minh said he hoped I understood that GVN had “not been overly impressed with AFP story.”6

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis.

2 In telegram 1083 to Saigon, January 18, Harriman informed Lodge that intelligence reports, which Lodge would have seen, suggested that “one element French negotiations with ChiComs was latter’s agreement accept neutralization Southeast Asia.” Harriman informed Lodge that he had spoken bluntly to the French Ambassador in Washington about the French acceptance of a connection between recognition of the People’s Republic of China and the promotion of neutralism in Southeast Asia. Harriman stated that in spite of his private language, “public expression will be to play a restrained key.” He instructed Lodge to inform the MRC that the United States still supported the Republic of China, and to state explicitly that the French diplomatic moves would not alter U.S. commitments in Vietnam. (Ibid., UN 6 CHICOM) In telegram 1092 to Saigon, January 19, Harriman told Lodge that the contents of telegram 1083 to Saigon should give him “necessary ammunition to talk with General Minh et al.” (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

3 See Document 14.

4 See footnote 5, Document 14.

5 Reference is to the telegram described in footnotes 2-4, Document 13.

6 In telegram 1105 to Saigon, January 21, the Department informed the Embassy that the “line” which Lodge took was “just right.” The United States was “180 degrees opposed” to the recommendations in the Agence France Presse article. It believed that the war could be won and considered the “French approach as avenue of disaster which could lead to Communist control of all Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia.” The Department instructed the Embassy to try to dissuade the Vietnamese from breaking diplomatic relations with France over recognition of the People’s Republic of China, should they be so inclined, because it “would blow up French action beyond its real significance” and would complicate U.S. efforts to convince the Republic of China to “also play matter cooly.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

16. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency to the Station in Saigon 16. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency to the Station in Saigon1

Washington, January 22, 1964—3:56 p.m.

[document number not declassified]. Ref CAS Washington [document number not declassified].2 Summary of Board of National Estimates study on probable reactions to various courses of action with respect to North Vietnam:3

A. Communist reactions to most of these operations would be slight.

B. Communist reactions would be sharper in cases of operations against Haiphong and railroads near borders of China. Reactions would be felt primarily in South Vietnam and Laos, but would not be so extreme as to change character of hostilities in those countries.

C. Operations would not be likely to lead to appreciably increased Chinese Communist involvement in area. Neither would operations lead Soviets to believe that United States had made significant change in its policies.

D. Proposed sabotage operations, taken by themselves, even if all were successful, would not convince the DRV leadership that their continued direction and support of insurgent activities in South Vietnam and Laos should cease.

E. It is possible, however, that North Vietnamese Government might see these operations as representing significant increase in vigor of U.S. policy, potentially dangerous to them. If so, they would probably wish to halt new developments at early date and would therefore try to arouse international pressures for conference to settle problem of Vietnam before it expanded into more general conflict in Far East. In such case U.S. could probably expect little political support from its major allies.

F. Principal determinant of DRV prosecution of war will not be damage suffered from such small scale operations, but course of war in South and degree of risk Hanoi believes will be involved in its prosecution.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret. Also sent to the Department of State Eyes Only for Hilsman, to the Office of the Secretary of Defense Eyes Only for McNamara, to the JCS Eyes Only for Krulak, and to the White House Eyes Only for McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to Honolulu Eyes Only for Felt. Rusk initialed the source text.

2 See footnote 2-4, Document 13.

3 Reference is to a memorandum from the Office of National Estimates to McCone, January 2. (Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Vietnam 1964)

17. Editorial Note 17. Editorial Note

On January 22, 1964, the Joint Chiefs of Staff sent Secretary of Defense McNamara a memorandum recommending that the United States put aside many of the “self-imposed restrictions” in South Vietnam and undertake bolder action. The Joint Chiefs stated that success or failure in Vietnam was crucial to the U.S. position in all Southeast Asia. They recommended the following specific actions: “a. Assign to the US military commander responsibilities for the total US program in Vietnam.”

“b. Induce the Government of Vietnam to turn over to the United States military commander, temporarily, the actual tactical direction of the war.”

“c. Charge the United States military commander with complete responsibility for conduct of the program against North Vietnam.”

“d. Overfly Laos and Cambodia to whatever extent is necessary for acquisition of operational intelligence.”

“e. Induce the Government of Vietnam to conduct overt ground operations in Laos of sufficient scope to impede the flow of personnel and material southward.”

“f. Arm, equip, advise, and support the Government of Vietnam in its conduct of aerial bombing of critical targets in North Vietnam and in mining the sea approaches to that country.”

“g. Advise and support the Government of Vietnam in its conduct of large-scale commando raids against critical targets in North Vietnam”

“h. Conduct aerial bombing of key North Vietnam targets, [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified].”

“i. Commit additional US forces, as necessary, in support of the combat action within South Vietnam.”

“j. Commit US forces as necessary in direct actions against North Vietnam.” (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926,092 Vietnam)

McNamara sent a copy of this memorandum to Rusk on January 28. The full text of the memorandum is printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, volume III, pages 496–499.

18. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 18. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, January 28, 1964.

[document number not declassified]. 1. Maj Gen Nguyen Khanh on 28 Jan told Col Jasper Wilson, senior MAAG advisor for I Corps, that he had info indicating that another coup would be attempted possibly as early as Friday 31 Jan. Coup, which would be of Palace variety involving little or no bloodshed, would be mounted by pro-French, pro-neutralist Generals with Mai Huu Xuan playing leading role. Once coup successfully carried out, perpetrators would immediately call for neutralization of SVN. Plotters in touch with Gen Nguyen Van Hinh.2

2. Khanh appeared deeply concerned, stating that if plot not immediately crushed, it stood fair chance of success. Although officers at field grade level generally opposed to neutralism, Khanh fears neutralist platform might strike responsive chord among junior officers, who might help sustain Palace coup. Khanh personally coming Saigon today or tomorrow.

3. In conversation with Wilson, Khanh did not indicate sources of his information or reasons for his obvious concern. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] a. [4 lines of source text not declassified] Interesting to note that during conversations Xuan told Ly that he intended to report meeting to Big Minh. Ly subsequently informed by intermediary that Minh anxious to talk to him.3

b. Lt Col Tran Dinh Lam, most recent returnee from Paris, is alleged by col who met him at airport to have been empowered, presumably by the French, to spend substantial sum (two billion piastres) to achieve neutralization of SVN. Lam reported by this source to have been brought back to SVN at request Gens Tran Van Don and Le Van Kim.4

c. Earlier this month American observer noted number of military trucks bringing ammunition and weapons into Xuan’s police HQS at Camp Du Mare.

d. Maj Gen Le Van Nghiem has stated both to American observers and Vietnamese sources on number of occasions. that Gens Kim, Don, Nguyen Van Vy, and Duong Van Duc are pro-French and privately in favor of neutralization.

4. Worth noting in connection with assessment of Xuan’s capability to pull [off] coup is recently instituted policy of MRC to thin out military units in Saigon area. However, there still significant ARVN security forces Saigon area.

5. Difficult to evaluate these various reports and indications, including Khanh’s claims. They may merely reflect, in cases of Nghiem5 and Khanh6 in particular, disgruntlement over failure to achieve more prominent positions in MRC. Nevertheless, noticeable rise in uneasiness, rumor-mongering and political maneuvering detectable in past few days. Restiveness finding its focus in continued dissatisfaction with Premier Tho, concern and confusion over question of neutralism and De Gaulle’s China initiative, and expectation of further changes in composition military high command and provisional govt. Will continue to watch situation closely and report developments. In the recent past Khanh has also identified Big Minh, Don and Kim as pro-French and pro-neutralist. It is possible that he feels this alleged tendency on their part is becoming so pronounced that he and his like-minded military associates must act to prevent a neutral solution.

6. Amb Lodge and General Harkins advised.

1 Source: Department of State, HarVan Files, Vietnam Coup Two, January 30,1964 Secret. The source text, which bears no time of transmission from Saigon, is a copy sent by the CIA to the Department of State for Hilsman. Also sent to JCS for Krulak and to the Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence for the Defense Intelligence Agency. A later White House copy is published in part in Declassified Documents, 1975, 58C.

2 Chief of Staff of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam, 1953–1954.

3 At this point, Mendenhall wrote the following note in the margin of the source text: “Yes, but see,” and then drew an arrow to paragraph 4 below.

4 Mendenhall at this point wrote in the margin the following comment: “Cf. [?] attitude expressed by Generals to Lodge of adamant opposition to neutralism. JM”

5 At this point in the margin of the source text, Mendenhall wrote the following comment: “Nghiem is central Vietnamese and this is obviously gov’t in which southern Vietnamese predominate. Thus Nghiem’s comments to be taken with several grains of sand. JM”

6 Mendenhall wrote the following comment in the margin at this point: “Personally very ambitious. Thus has his own axe to grind in this situation. JM”

19. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 19. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, January 29, 1964—8 p.m.

1431. For the Secretary of State from Lodge.

1. Believe that it would be healthy to tell General De Gaulle that we have many reports from particularly responsible sources about French neutralist plot, French money, and French agents, and request him to cease these activities.2 Even though he would undoubtedly not comply with our request, it is well for him to know that we know what is going on, and that we suspect a secret agreement between him and the ChiComs. We should give him a sense of pressure. It is good tactics to start making a list of the things which he is doing which are against our vital interests. We can decide what use to make of the list later on. In a situation of this kind, we simply must start somewhere and then watch for the breaks. What is being rumored is too responsibly vouched for to be ignored.

2. As to General Khanh he is profoundly disturbed by his expectation of a strong move towards neutralism by the Government of Vietnam which he thinks will take place either tomorrow or Friday. He thinks if it is not vigorously crushed, it might succeed because of war weariness among the Vietnamese, including the Junior ARVN Officers. His other views are: a. French inspiration in all of this he believes to be very strong. When pressed at my suggestion by Colonel Jasper Wilson, I Corps MAAG Adviser, he identified Generals Don, Kim and Xuan as talking publicly against neutralism, but as actually dealing with the French. He said that Kim and Don are former French OSS Officers, that they are still French Nationals, that they are “rabidly pro-French”, and added that General Dinh would go along for the money.

b. Khanh considers General Dinh [Minh?] to be an “honest patriot”, but he is “isolated”. But even he has sent money to France at Christmas time and has bought a home in France.

c. General Khanh, therefore, says “we want to be in a position of strength”. When he says “We”, he says he means himself, General Khiem of the III Corps, General Tri of the II Corps, 90 percent of the Army and 70 percent of the existing Civil Government.

d. He wants U.S. assurance that we are opposed to neutralism. In reply to this, Colonel Wilson pointed to my statement in the press which General Khanh said was totally satisfactory to him.

e. Then he wants U.S. assurance that we will get his family, who are now in Da Nang, out of the country, if required. I said that I could not give asylum anywhere but in the Embassy in Saigon, but that I would provide a plane in Da Nang provided General Khanh’s family could get to the plane.

f. He wants to use Colonel Wilson as his exclusive contact with us and has asked Wilson to stay in Saigon and, if possible, to obtain two [garble—radios?] so that he and Witson might maintain radio contact because of the insecurity of the telephone system. [3 lines of source text not declassified]

3. I believe all the above should be closely held on a “need to know” basis, and am limiting knowledge of this to Harkins and De Silva. My assessment is that General Khanh is considered to be the most capable general in Vietnam, that he controls the I and II Corps, which is the most orderly part of Vietnam, and that in addition to being a capable soldier, he has the reputation of being politically perspicacious.

While I have no great faith in Xuan, I continue to believe that Generals Don and Kim are patriotic Vietnamese. Therefore, what General Khanh says about them goes against my own deepest instincts. But, General Khanh’s reputation for perspicacity gives me pause, even though I hardly know General Khanh at all.

4. The allegations which he makes against General Don, specifically, are contrary to what I have understood to be the case. For example, I was told that General Don was the first Vietnamese in the French Army who publicly gave up the French Army and burned up his insignia. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

5. Khanh is contacting Wilson again later today, so there may be more to report.

6. I am not reporting anything to the GVN as yet.

7. General Harkins has seen this message and agrees.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, HarVan Files, Vietnam Coup Two, January 30, 1964. Secret: Nodis. Received at 8:03 a.m.

2 In telegram 1413 from Saigon, January 28, Lodge made a similar suggestion as follows:

“Department might consider telling Gen. De Gaulle that U.S. has secret information indicating that there are persons purporting to be under the strong influence of the French Government who are working directly against U.S. vital interests in Viet-Nam, and requesting him to call off his dogs.” (Ibid., POL 27 VIET 5)

The Department responded in telegram 1138 to Saigon, January 28, 7:22 p.m., as follows: “1. Our relations with De Gaulle at this time are such that approach to him would be fruitless.”

“2. We believe it would be worthwhile to sound out General Khanh on sources and reliability his information and also whether he had informed General Minh”.

“3. Would appreciate Country Team assessment significance these reports and what action you are taking in Saigon.” (Ibid.)

20. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Acting Secretary of State 20. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Acting Secretary of State1

Washington, January 29, 1964—9:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

The Coup in Saigon

According to our latest information the situation in Saigon is as follows:

A coup has taken place under the leadership of General Khanh, Commander of I Corps, which has the support of the generals in command of the other three corps areas (Generals Tri, II Corps; Khiem, III Corps; and Co, IV Corps) as well as other important officers. The coup is clearly directed at removing Premier Tho.2 It appears that changes are also intended in the Military Revolutionary Council, the chairman and leading members of which, Generals Minh, Kim, and Dinh, are in custody. Minh will reportedly be offered a figurehead position if he agrees to align himself with Khanh’s group.

We have no reports of bloodshed or armed resistance.3 Such troop movements as have been reported appear to be in support of the coup.

General Khanh has expressed a desire to see the Ambassador later today (it is now Thursday, Saigon time).4 Khanh was reportedly to go on the air to announce the new government at 7 a.m. Saigon time but we have no indication that he actually did so.5 A late bulletin from Saigon states that Khanh and his group tentatively plan to institute military government with Khanh as Prime Minister and Khiem as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces.6

We have had some recent indications of coup plotting in Saigon, but none of the available material gives us a clear picture of the motives and intentions of Khanh’s group. One or more of the following considerations were probably involved in the decision to stage a coup.

1. Growing concern with Minh-Tho leadership. There has been growing concern that Minh and his collaborators have moved too slowly in restoring the momentum of the counterinsurgency effort. Tho has been a particular target of criticism, many Vietnamese feeling that he is too identified with the former Diem regime, that he has appointed personal followers to key posts, and that generally he is incapable of providing dynamic and efficient civilian leadership. Minh, however, has resisted pressure to remove him.

2. Personal ambitions. A number of generals, particularly Khanh and Khiem, feel that they were not assigned sufficiently important positions since the ouster of the Diem regime. Khanh, for example, was in effect head of the armed forces under the Diem regime, and Khiem was Chief of Staff of the Joint General Staff for several months last year.

3. Concern over possible pro-neutralist or pro-French tendencies. Although General Minh and the other leading members of the MRC have shown no evidence of neutralist sentiments, during the past several weeks their French background has been commented upon with concern by Generals Khiem and Khanh, as well as by other military officers. Two arrests made during the coup, those of General Xuan and Colonel Lam, indicate a possible effort to counter neutralist activities. General Xuan, head of the National Police, was earlier reported to be planning a pro-neutralist, pro-French coup;7 Colonel Lam has just returned from France and is suspected by some Vietnamese of being a French agent.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. II, Memos and Misc. Secret; Noforn. Rusk was en route from Japan. (Ibid., Rusk Appointment Book)

2 Lodge reported to the Department in telegram 1432 from Saigon, January 30, 3:15 a.m. Saigon time, that Khanh had informed him through Wilson that a coup would take place at 4 a.m. and that “Tho must go.” The telegram was received at the Department at 2:32 p.m. on June 29 and relayed to the White House at 2:40 p.m. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

3 At 6:25 a.m., when the coup was in progress and General Minh’s and Kim’s houses surrounded by rebel troops, Lodge instructed Wilson to tell Khanh and Khiem that he strongly advised that all possible efforts be made to avoid bloodshed. (Telegram 1437 from Saigon, January 30; ibid.; published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 213C)

4 January 30; reported in telegram 1437 from Saigon.

5 At 4:45 p.m. on January 30, Radio Saigon broadcast a resolution in the name of the Military Revolutionary Council dissolving the Executive Committee set up after the November 1, 1963, coup and naming General Khanh as the Council’s new chairman. (Telegram 1446 from Saigon, January 30; Department of State, HarVan Files, Vietnam Coup Two, January 30, 1964)

6 Reported in telegram 1442 from Saigon, January 30, 9:14 a.m. Also reported in this telegram, which was received at the Department at 8:56 a.m., January 29, was a conversation between Khanh and Wilson in which Khanh stated that he began planning for the coup 5 days earlier because he feared the corps commanders were to be arrested by pro-French neutralist elements. Because of his political inexperience, Khanh promised to rely heavily for political assistance” on Lodge.

7 See Document 18.

21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 21. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, January 29, 1964—7:47 p.m.

1149. For Ambassador. We have so little info on motivations and other factors involved in current crisis that we leave to your judgment how to handle. Meantime we trust you will make very clear through your actions that we had nothing to do with coup. If you consider it advisable and possible there would seem to us to be merit in preserving Minh as head of Government since he appears to have best potentialities for rallying support of people.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Limdis. Drafted by Marshall Green; cleared by Forrestal, Mendenhall, and Rusk, who resumed to the Department of State at 6:25 p.m.; and approved by Harriman.

22. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 22. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, January 30, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

As of 11 a.m. the situation is as follows:

1. General Nguyen Khanh is in control. He has taken the leaders of the Military Committee, Generals Minh, Don, Kim and some of their associates into custody. There has been no bloodshed.

2. Both Lodge and Harkins report that the reason for the coup was Khanh’s fear that the old government was dickering with the French in an effort to bring about the neutralization of South Vietnam.2 We have no hard evidence that this was so.

3. Both Lodge and Harkins think that Khanh is a tough, able military leader. Harkins says that with proper help and support, he may prove to be stronger than the present set-up of Committee government.3 Khanh apparently does not intend to make wholesale changes in the lower echelons of government. This is good, if true.

4. The Viet Cong appear to have been caught by surprise and have as yet not been willing or able to take advantage of the situation.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. III, Memos. Secret. A handwritten “L" on the source text indicates that the President saw this memorandum.

2 Lodge made this observation in telegram 1443 from Saigon, January 30, 8:30 p.m., received at 7:34 a.m. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) The White House copy of this telegram is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 214A. Harkins reported Khanh’s motivation as such in telegrams MAC 321 and 325, both January 30, 12:30 and 2:05 p.m., respectively, received at the Department of State at 2:07 a.m. and 9:16 a.m., January 30. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. 111 Cables, and Department of State, HarVan Files, Vietnam Coup Two, January 30, 1964. both of Harkins messages are in Declassified Documents, 1975, 156C and 156D.)

3 Harkins made this prediction in MAC 321. He also characterized Khanh as “the strongest character in the military" and expressed surprise that given his outsider position and open disagreement with the MRC he had survived to stage a coup.

23. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to the Secretary of State 23. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, January 30, 1964.

SUBJECT

The New Vietnamese Coup

Situation. Major General Nguyen Khanh has seized complete control in a bloodless coup. In a public statement carried over Saigon Radio Khanh stated that the coup is directed against the inefficiency of the “administrative organ” of the displaced government and against a “number of people” who are neutralists paving the way for a Communist victory. Khanh has made no public charges against the French but his denunciation of “colonialists” obviously refers to the French.2

Khanh told Ambassador Lodge (7 hours after coup) that he has tried to persuade General Minh to remain as chief of state, but will not accede to Minh’s conditions that all generals arrested be released. He expressed determination to get on with the war, and promised a prompt public announcement to province chiefs and the army to carry on. He raised questions with Lodge about U.S. recognition (we preparing reply).3

A subsequent Saigon Radio broadcast names Gen. Khanh as Chairman of the Military Revolutionary Council, and drops Minh, Don, Kim, Xuan, and Dinh from Council membership.4

Lodge comments that Gen. Khanh is cool, clear-headed, realistic planner; has good record; is tough, ruthless, farsighted.5

Assessment. Khanh’s main reason for seizure of power is undoubtedly his personal ambition. His allegations about efficiency and neutralism on the part of elements of the displaced government are a cloak for his own desire for power.

He is unquestionably pro-U.S and may carry on the war more efficiently and energetically than the preceding government. But there will probably be a new period of confusion during Khanh’s settling-in. Part of the aura of mistrust which surrounded the Diem regime may return because Khanh will probably feel the necessity of protecting his rear with security forces in Saigon. This means fewer troops available for use against the Viet Cong.

Khanh does not have the qualities of popular appeal which “Big” Minh has, and was beginning to use. Conceivably, as a young, attractive figure, he might develop a style of his own for winning the people. In the domestic political picture he seems to have two options: either to restore many of the Can Lao like Thuan, Tuyen, etc., to positions in the government, or to push for “total revolution” against ex-Diem elements as many students, Buddhists, and others in Saigon have been demanding. We suspect he will choose the latter path.

Public Posture. Our public position is going to be difficult because this is a second coup within three months in war-torn Viet-Nam. We believe we should use publicly the two elements which Khanh has used in his public statement: improved efficiency and anti-neutralism. These two points should evoke a somewhat favorable response in the U.S. in view of recent press stories on how badly the war has been going, and in the light of the recent French actions in the Far East.

1 Source: Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Vietnam 1964. Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall. Copies were sent to Forrestal, Ball, and Harriman. Hilsman was in Australia.

2 Reported in telegram 1446 from Saigon, January 30. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–8 VIET S)

3 The Khanh-Lodge conversation of 11 a.m., January 30, is reported in telegram 1443 from Saigon, January 30, 8:30 p.m. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S) Specifically, Khanh asked what would be established diplomatic practice concerning recognition if Vietnam changed presidents and also whether the United States would recognize the new government. In telegram 1154 to Saigon, January 30, the Department informed Lodge that from a legal standpoint the United States had the option of extending formal recognition or handling the matter as a continuation of normal relations. In a number of recent cases, the United States had continued relations after coupe, which was the preferred course in Vietnam. If Lodge agreed, the Department suggested telling Khanh to inform the United States officially that there had been a change in the chairmanship and composition of the MRC and to make no reference to the matter of recognition. (Ibid., POL 16 VIET S)

4 No record of this broadcast has been found.

5 This assessment is taken from telegram 1443 from Saigon.

24. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 24. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, January 31, 1964—7 p.m.

1451. CINCPAC for POLAD.

1. Called on Gen Khanh and gave him gist of the pertinent parts of your 1154.2 He is instructing FonMin Lam to work out a text of the note with DCM along lines your last part.3 At 4 pm press conference will announce there has been a change in the chairmanship and composition of the Military Revolutionary Council, and that the Council continues to respect Vietnam’s international obligations.4 He also plans to invite all the diplomats to a reception tomorrow, Saturday afternoon.

2. With this out of the way, I told him that the purpose of my call was to make him understand clearly that he would rise or fall, as far as American opinion was concerned, on the results which he obtained in the effort against Viet Cong. Nothing could be more fatal as far as US confidence was concerned than another 6 weeks interregnum, or a period of any length devoted to fumbling around and to so-called “reorganization”. It was utterly vital that the commanders and the province chiefs in the field understand that all existing orders are still in force and are confirmed, and that he actually gave vigorous impetus, including a few kicks in the rear end where necessary, to see that the whole effort against the Viet Cong went ahead in all phases—military, political, psychological, economic and social; that what I hoped for was not rhetoric, but concrete results in Long An, Dinh Tuong, Kien Tuang and other provinces where the situation is so critical. I wanted news of specific hamlets which had been cleared, I hoped for reports showing that corrupt district officials who had been extorting and oppressing the people were being removed.

3. Gen Khanh agreed emphatically with all of this and repeated what he said to me yesterday—that competent people were to be kept on the job.

4. I said I was glad to hear this because unless he conveyed a strong, hard focused picture of a thoroughly aggressive and capable leader, there was going to be tremendous disappointment not only in the US, but throughout free world.

5. He said that he would announce in his press conference that he was determined to get on with the war effort in the above way.

6. He then said he wanted to ask my advice. He was thinking of forming a “govt of national union” of all responsible parties, 5 or 6 in number, and what did I think? I said I did not know the details of Vietnam well enough to give him specific advice, but that certainly one good rule of politics in any country was to include rather than to exclude, and to give all elements in the community a sense of participation. I asked him whether, in addition to the 5 or 6 major political parties, he was planning to include persons who adhered to the Catholic religion and whether he had considered the Buddhists, the Hoa Haos, and the Cao Dais. He said that he would.

7. He then said he would like to ask my advice on whom he should name as PriMin—who did I think was the best man? PriMin Tho was leaving and he had to find someone else. I said I did not feel I knew the personalities in Vietnam well enough to give him a worthwhile answer, as I had not yet been here seven months, but that I would consult people who knew this country much better than I did, and that if I had a valuable suggestion, I would let him know.

8. He then said that “within 7 to 10 days” he would be obliged to take some very “clear positions” regarding France and wanted to know whether we would help if this action were to lead to blockage of funds, elimination of French financial aid, or other retaliatory measures.

9. I asked him just what he meant by “clear positions”. If he meant total rupture, that was one thing. If he meant merely rupture of diplomatic relations, with consuls still present, that was something else. I asked him whether he was seriously contemplating expelling all of the 450 French schoolteachers and all of the French doctors? Did he seriously contemplate closing down the Grall Hospital which had given a million cholera shots free in the last 10 days—because if he did, he was taking on a very big proposition indeed, and one which would cause a great deal of suffering. It was not realistic to think that all these services which had been built up over a long period of time could suddenly be replaced. The US certainly had no ambition to substitute English for French in this country, and perhaps it would be possible to recruit French-speaking teachers in Quebec, Belgium and Switzerland, but that this would be a long process and it seemed to me a very imprudent thing to do without careful study.

10. He seemed impressed. He obviously feels strongly the need of some very vigorous gesture against France, in order to justify his seizure of power and in order to prevent it from looking like a naked power grab. Perhaps the outcome will be breaking diplomatic relations, but leaving consuls.

11. Question: Is there anything I can tell him in reply to his question on helping Vietnam against possible French retaliation to a breach of relations? (see Embtel 1416)5

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 2:07 p.m. and passed to the White House, Office of the Secretary of Defense, CIA, and JCS. The White House copy is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 214E.

2 See footnote 3, Document 23.

3 Text of the Vietnamese note, January 31, and the Embassy’s reply, January 31, acknowledging it, are in telegram 1460 from Saigon. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 16 VIET S) The U.S. note is printed in Department of State Bulletin, February 17, 1964, p. 239.

4 A summary of the press conference, held at 5:31 p.m., January 31, is in telegram 1452 from Saigon, January 31. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S)

5 In telegram 1416, January 29, the Embassy warned that deterioration of French-Vietnamese relations could result in the withdrawal or departure of the French technical and managerial community in Vietnam as well as the withdrawal of French aid. The Embassy concluded that while a break in relations between France and Vietnam would not eliminate much of the French private investment in Vietnam, the United States would find it costly to replace even a portion of the official French commitment. (Ibid., POL FR–VIET S)

25. Telegram From the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) and the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins) 25. Telegram From the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) and the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harkins)1

Washington, January 31, 1964—1:16 p.m.

[document number not declassified]. Joint State/Defense message. For Amb Lodge and Gen Harkins. After the coup in November, South Vietnamese military operations were neglected. A period of uncertainty ensued and the Viet Cong took advantage of the confusion in government and the weakness in administration of both political and military affairs. Serious setbacks to the counterinsurgency program resulted, particularly in the Delta. We fear similar results from yesterday’s coup. Therefore, you and General Harkins are instructed to state to Khanh that there must be no opportunity for the Viet Cong to benefit from the events of the past few days—it is essential that he and his government demonstrate to the people of South Vietnam, the people of the United States and the people of the world their unity and strength. To do so, the tempo of South Vietnamese military operations must be stepped up immediately and visibly so. The President would like to be able to announce tomorrow (Saturday am) that he has been informed by General Khanh that General Khanh has instructed the corps commanders to step up the pace of military operations immediately and has directed certain specific operations.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Sent over CIA channels. The source text is a copy the CIA sent the Department of State Exclusive for Rusk. Also sent to the Office of the Secretary of Defense Exclusive for McNamara. In an undated memorandum which bears a handwritten note indicating that it was taken from the President’s bedroom on February 1, Moyers made the following recommendations to the President:

“(1) After the last coup in Vietnam, the Communists waited about ten days before launching an aggressive attack which caught Vietnamese and Americans off-guard.”

“(2) They will probably try it again now.”

“(3) Therefore, Rusk and McNamara should be instructed to inform Lodge and Harkins to take the initiative now—to get the Vietnamese moving against the Viet Cong—to launch an offensive before the Communists launch one.”

“(4) This could then be leaked, if desirable, in an effort to show that you are determined to push the war at a faster pace.” (Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, CO 312 Vietnam)

At 9:59 a.m., January 31, McNamara telephoned Rusk concerning the need for such initiative in Saigon. The transcript of the call reads as follows:

“M said re South Vietnam, President asked what to do. M said his only suggestion was to step up South Vietnamese operations; if that seemed good, he would have a cable developed on it and would get his people to work with Sec’s people. Sec said it was a very good idea. M will get the cable drafted and get it over for clearance.” (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

2 On the afternoon of February 1, President Johnson read the text of a personal letter to General Khanh at a press conference. The letter reads:

“I am glad to know that we see eye to eye on the necessity of stepping up the pace of military operations against the VietCong. I particularly appreciate your warm and immediate response to my message as conveyed by Ambassador Lodge and General Harkins. We shall continue to be available to help you carry the war to the enemy and to increase the confidence of the Vietnamese people in their Government.” (Telegram 1168 to Saigon, February 1, 4:41 p.m.; ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

According to telegram 1464 from Saigon, February 1, 10 a.m., Lodge had received assurances from Khanh the previous day that he would get on with the struggle against the Viet Cong. This apparently constitutes Khanh’s “warm and immediate response” to the President’s message. (Ibid.)

26. Telegram From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State 26. Telegram From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State1

Saigon, January 31, 1964.

[document number not declassified]. 1. At meeting with General Khanh today I told him that he would soon be briefed on a program of intensified activity in North Vietnam, which I said should be accompanied by intensified activity against the Viet Cong in South Vietnam.

2. He already knew of this in a general way and said that he was disturbed at the thought that General Don still had the briefing papers on the subject. He feared that these papers would get into hands of neutralists and then into the hands of Communists, and he was trying to recover the documents.

3. It seems to me that if General Don is as General Khanh thinks he is, we must assume that copies have already been made and are already in the hands of those who ought not to have them.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files; Lot 72 D 219, TIGER Basic File. Secret, Nodis. Sent over CIA channels. The source text, which bears no time of transmission from Saigon, is a copy sent by the CIA at 3:25 p.m. to the Department of State for Hilsman. Also sent to the JCS for Krulak and the White House for McGeorge Bundy.

27. Editorial Note 27. Editorial Note

Replying to a question at a press conference on the French decision to recognize the People’s Republic of China, French President Charles de Gaulle reviewed the reasons for France’s action. De Gaulle then raised the relationship between China and Southeast Asia as follows: “In fact, there is in Asia no political reality, notably with regard to Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, or to India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Burma, or to Korea or Soviet Russia or Japan, etc., which does not concern or affect China. There is, in particular, neither a war nor a peace imaginable on this continent without China’s being implicated in it. Thus it would be absolutely impossible to envision, without China, a possible neutrality agreement relating to the Southeast Asian States, in which States for so many reasons, we French feel a very particular and cordial interest—a neutrality which, by definition, must be accepted by all, guaranteed on the international level, and which would exclude both armed agitations supported by any one among them in one or another of the States, and the various forms of external intervention; a neutrality that, indeed, seems, at the present time, to be the only situation compatible with the peaceful existence and progress of the peoples concerned.”

For a larger extract of De Gaulle’s answer, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pages 873–875.

II. U.S. Assessment of the Khanh Government, February 1–March 4II. U.S. Assessment of the Khanh Government, February 1–March 4

28. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 1,1964—1:53 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Drafted on January 31 by Mendenhall; cleared by Koren, Green, and in draft with Poats and Blouin; and approved by Harriman.

29. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 1, 1964—1:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Drafted on January 31 by Mendenhall; cleared by Koren, Green, the substance of paragraph 1 by Blouin, and the substance of paragraph 2 by Stoneman; and approved by Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC. The White House copy is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 215D.

30. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 1, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Passed to the White House, JCS, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and CIA.

31. Editorial Note

32. Memoranda of Telephone Conversations Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Manning) and the Secretary of State

Washington, February 1, 1964

Source: Department of State, Rusk Papers: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Mildred Asbjornson.

33. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, February 4, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. 11, Memos and Misc. Secret and Personal. Published in part in Declassified Documents, 1975, 175B.

34. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, February 4, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Luncheons with the President, Vol. 1 [Part 2]. Secret. Bundy wrote the following note on the source text: “P[resident] used all this in lunch with results not yet clear. McGB”

35. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 4, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall. A note on the source text indicates Rusk saw this memorandum.

36. Letter From the Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, February 5, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 Vietnam. Top Secret; Exdis. According to the Department of State copy of this letter, Mendenhall was the drafter. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

37. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, February 7, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. III, Memos and Misc. Top Secret.

38. Report From the Executive Director-Comptroller of Central Intelligence (Kirkpatrick) and the Station Chief in Saigon (de Silva) to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)

Saigon, February 10, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 330–75. Alternate Proposals. Secret. The source text is a copy of the report that the CIA sent McNamara on February 10 under cover of a memorandum explaining that this analysis was not being formally disseminated because it was a reply to a personal request from McCone.

39. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assist3nt for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, February 10, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Vol. 1. Confidential.

40. Editorial Note

41. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House

Washington, February 12, 1964, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, President’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149, Jan-March, 1964. Secret. Drafted by Willis C. Armstrong. Approved by the Executive Secretary on February 27 and by the White House on February 24. The source text is labeled Part II of a six-topic meeting. British Prime Minister Sir Alec Douglas Home was in Washington for an official visit, February 12–14.

42. Paper Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency

Washington, February 12, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 306, 350.05 Southeast Asia. Secret. Attached to a memorandum of transmittal, February 12, from Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency Carroll to Secretary of Defense McNamara. SNIE 50–64, “The Situation in Southeast Asia,” is not printed. Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimate File, 14.3 NVN)

43. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 13, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Southeast Asia. Top Secret; For the Secretary Only. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text.

44. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 14, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam. Secret. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text.

45. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, February 14, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Luncheons with the President, Vol. 1, [Part 2]. Secret and Personal. Published in part in Declassified Documents, 1977, 109B.

46. National Security Action Memorandum No. 280

Washington, February 14, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 280. Secret.

47. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 15, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam. Secret. Copies were sent to Harriman, Sullivan, U. Alexis Johnson, and Hilsman. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text.

48. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 15, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 71 D 273, Vietnam. Secret.

49. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, February 18, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. The source text bears no time of transmission. Received at 10:01 a.m. A note on the White House copy of this telegram indicates that the President read it. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV) Also published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 216A.

50. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Helms), to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 18, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV, Memos and Misc. Secret. Signed by Colby for Helms. Also sent to McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Taylor, Hilsman, Forrestal, Anthis, Sullivan, Carroll, and others. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1974, 246D. Bundy wrote the following note on the source text: “President read Feb. 18 and so called meeting of Feb. 20 on SVN. McGB.” For the results of the meeting, see Document 54. According to a covering note, this was the third report of a group of CIA officers who went to Vietnam to cross-check covertly intelligence information provided by the Vietnamese. The first report, February 14, concluded that while the Vietnamese had been reporting honestly to their American counterparts since November 1, 1963, failings in quantity, quality, and training of Vietnamese personnel and lack of professionalism among Vietnamese sources made their intelligence product difficult to evaluate. A general impression gained by the CIA group was that the momentum of the strategic hamlet program had slowed practically to a halt. Commenting specifically on Binh Long and Phuoc Thanh Provinces, the report concluded that security had badly deteriorated there. The second report, February 14, concentrated on I Corps and concluded that optimism regarding the security of the area was mistaken and based on superficial developments. (Both in Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV, Memos and Misc.) The accord report is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 246C.

51. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, February 18, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive.

52. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam (Nes) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)

Saigon, February 19, 1964.

Source: Department of State, William Bundy Files, WPB Special Papers. Secret; Official-Informal. Hilsman sent a copy of this letter to Forrestal for his information with the following handwritten note: “Another old Burma hand you have to deal with!! R.H.” On March 5, Green sent this copy to the newly-designated Assistant Secretary of State for Ear Eastern Affairs, William Bundy, stating that the letter with its enclosure “presents views you will be interested in.”

53. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, February 19, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1583 from Saigon to the Department of State, where it was received at 7:21 a.m. and passed to the White House at 8:30 a.m. Telegram 1583 is the source text.

54. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, White House

Washington, February 20, 1964, 12:17 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV, Memos and Misc. Secret. Drafted by Forrestal. Copies of this memorandum were sent to Rusk, McNamara, Taylor, McCone, Bell, and Sullivan. Prepared for this meeting, which lasted 1 hour, was an agenda, annotated by McGeorge Bundy, which reads as follows: “1. Situation Briefing (5 minutes); 2. Intelligence and Reporting, (A) Cooper Activities, (B) French Activities; 3. Operations, (A) Response to Lodge Message, (B) Policy on Dependents [Bundy wrote at this point “P[resident] prefers”], (C) Other Matters; 4. Diplomatic Problems, (A) Cambodia, (B) Laos, (C) Others; 5. North Viet-Nam, (A) Intelligence [Bundy wrote “increase efforts”], (B) Propaganda [Bundy wrote “increase”], (C) Operations; 6. Planning, (A) Johnson Subcommittee [Bundy wrote “Speed up”], (B) Question of Time Phase.” (Ibid.)

55. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, February 20, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1594 from Saigon which is the source text. A note on the White House copy of this telegram indicates that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV, Cables)

56. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, February 22, 1964—5:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1281 to Saigon, which is the source text. McGeorge Bundy sent a draft of this telegram and the text of Lodge’s message, supra, to Palm Springs, California, where the President was vacationing. The text of Bundy’s covering cable to the President reads as follows: “Next two following messages are an incoming from Lodge on enlarging our effort in North Vietnam and a draft response for the President. I send these now because of the President’s desire to be very quick and effective in responses to Lodge’s messages. The draft answer is being cleared with Rusk and McNamara, and we can get it out as soon as we have the President’s own comments.” “The memorandum to Harriman which Lodge refers to [see footnote 3, supra] is sensible but tentative in form, and does not show strong advocacy of anything different from what we have been doing. My own notes on the President’s November meeting with Lodge show nothing significant on North Vietnam. We therefore believe that the draft answer is fully responsive, and we assess the incoming message as sincere and reasonable, as far as it goes.” (Telegram CAP 64050, February 21; Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV)

57. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Washington, February 21, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, Vietnam 092. Top Secret. Attached to the source text was a covering memorandum from William Bundy to McNamara, February 21, which reads as follows: “The attached memorandum, prepared in response to your request, will obtain JCS views on a number of critical questions affecting our actions in Vietnam. The answers will also be helpful to the work of the Sullivan Committee. We have coordinated this request with the Joint Staff.”

58. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harking) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Saigon, February 21, 1964—4:15 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, South Vietnam. Top Secret; Eyes Only. The JCS sent copies of this cable to McNamara, Gilpatric, Anthis, and William Bundy.

59. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, February 22, 1964—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1606 from Saigon, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt at the Department of State.

60. Telegram From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Smith) to the President, at Palm Springs, California

Washington, February 22, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Also sent to Rusk in Palm Springs. The source text is the copy Smith sent to the Department of State as White House telegram CAP 64056, February 22. No time of transmission appears on the original message, but CAP 64056 was received in the Department of State at 1:49 p.m.

61. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Secretary of State

Washington, February 25, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET N. Secret; Sensitive. Copies were sent to U. Alexis Johnson and Rostow.

62. Editorial Note

63. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, February 29, 1964—8:43 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy and Rusk and cleared and initialed by Rusk. Attached to a copy of this telegram at the Johnson Library is a note from Read to Bundy indicating that this telegram “is the substance of what the Secretary and the President agreed to at lunch today.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV)

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, March 1, 1964—6:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared with Tyler, Green, and Sullivan.

65. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, March 2, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive.

66. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, March 2, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Military Plans Against NVN, March 1964. Top Secret; Sensitive.

67. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of Defense

Washington, March 2, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. No classification marking. In a covering memorandum, McNamara informed the President that this was the 2-page South Vietnam summary which he had requested.

68. Memorandum Prepared by the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)

Washington, March 3, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, WPB Special Papers. Secret. There was no designated recipient of this memorandum indicated on the source text, but a handwritten note by William Bundy reads: “McCone Draft. Bundy Working.”

69. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, March 4, 1964.

Source: Department of State, President’s Reading File: Lot 74 D 164. Secret; No Distribution.

28. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 28. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 1,1964—1:53 p.m.

1165. CINCPAC for POLAD. Saigon pass COMUSMACV for Harkins. Priority Actions Vis-a-vis New GVN.

We are sure you agree it important to move in rapidly to furnish advice to General Khanh in order to reduce to minimum loss of momentum resulting from change in government and prevent Viet Cong from capitalizing on change. In addition message on military operations sent other channel,2 we consider following as high priority matters to urge on Khanh which we know you consider encompassed in general approach to Khanh outlined Para 2, your 1451:3

1. He should retain all those civilian ministers whom he and Country Team consider capable. This plus your earlier urging of retention of provincial and district chiefs should provide maximum continuity.

2. He should make prompt announcement of government’s intention to maintain and continue Strategic Hamlet program. Announcement should make it clear to both local officials and populace importance government attaches to this program as central element in counterinsurgency concept and should be designed prevent Viet Cong from again making kind of inroads against Strategic Hamlets which they achieved after November coup.

Also important for Khanh to designate single vigorous, energetic administrator for this program and see that this administrator gets out directives soonest on all important aspects of this program-security, economic and social, political, population and resources control, etc.-to provincial and district officials.

3. Khanh should see to it that immediate steps are taken to assure that farmer will get as good price for rice during current harvest as last year. Separate cable being forwarded on this.4

4. He should also be urged carry on and expand previous government’s efforts to use land reform in manner attract peasant support. Septel on this also will be sent.5

5. He should revitalize amnesty program. Imminent approach of lunar new year holiday should provide good occasion for such announcement.

6. He should pay particular attention to desirability attracting support all religious groups including continuation previous government’s special efforts directed at Hoa Hao and Cao Dai.

7. He should treat deposed members of preceding government humanely in order preserve his international image.

You may have additional thoughts on high priority items to press on Khanh. Would welcome your views.6

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Drafted on January 31 by Mendenhall; cleared by Koren, Green, and in draft with Poats and Blouin; and approved by Harriman.

2 Document 25.

3 Document 24.

4 In telegram 1167 to Saigon, February 1, the Department suggested that the Embassy encourage the Khanh government to maintain the guaranteed price of rice. While this would mean a rise in the price of rice to consumers in the cities, it would help the new government win support of the peasants in the countryside. (Department of State, Central Files, INCO–RICE 14 VIET S)

5 Telegram 1171 to Saigon, February 3, in which the Department noted that the present land tenure system, in which many tenants not having paid rent or taxes for 20 years and squatters taking over land, created “major disincentives” to peasant support of the government. Return of government control might bring return of demands on the peasants for rent, taxes, or displacement by owners. The Embassy was instructed to encourage the government to promote land reform which would negate these “disincentives.” (Ibid., E 12 VIET S)

6 In telegram 1473 from Saigon, February 3, Lodge responded that he “had already made the points which needed to be made immediately,” and at the first opportunity, he would work on paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

29. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 29. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 1, 1964—1:54 p.m.

1166. CINCPAC for POLAD. Saigon pass COMUSMACV for Harkins. Your 1451.2

1. New Prime Minister. We inclined toward view that it better unite Chairmanship MRC and Premiership in Khanh as single individual to promote maximum efficiency in conduct of government.

If this done, Khanh should appoint separate personalities as Minister Defense and Chief Joint General Staff to insure that each of these important positions is receiving full-time attention by capable individuals.

If you or Khanh believes Khanh should not hold Premiership, you might suggest possibility of Tran Quoc Buu, President CVTC, as personality with political savvy and ability to attract popular support to government.

2. French Presence in Viet-Nam. Should be made absolutely clear to Khanh that we are not in position replace French economic, financial, medical, or cultural role in Viet-Nam. Suggest you give Khanh summary your 14163 to drive home full impact of what involved. In view current attitudes on aid in U.S. we are hard-pressed to furnish assistance now required for support of counterinsurgency program in all its aspects.

Khanh should therefore be strongly counseled to avoid any actions which would jeopardize French presence in fields indicated.4 While we realize he has political problem, he should meet it by means which will not lead to strong French retaliation. This might consist of continued refusal agree to French Ambassador or reduction in size French diplomatic establishment.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Drafted on January 31 by Mendenhall; cleared by Koren, Green, the substance of paragraph 1 by Blouin, and the substance of paragraph 2 by Stoneman; and approved by Harriman. Repeated to CINCPAC. The White House copy is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 215D.

2 Document 24.

3 See footnote 5, Document 24.

4 In telegram 1473 from Saigon, February 3, Lodge “entirely agreed that we are in no position to replace French economic, financial, medical or cultural role in Vietnam and have made this very clear.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

30. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 30. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 1, 1964—3 p.m.

1467. CINCPAC for POLAD. Herewith my preliminary assessment of the new government in Viet Nam. It is very much subject to change as we move along.

1. General Khanh’s coup was obviously extremely disconcerting at first blush. We felt we were beginning to make real progress here with the Minh government-in the conduct of the effort against the Viet Cong; and in making General Minh into a popular figure. To overthrow a government which was progressing fairly satisfactorily seemed like a violent and disorderly procedure. In a country in which there are so few able men, it seemed a waste no longer to have the services of Minh, Don, and Kim. One wondered whether the coup was anything more than a crude, if skillful, power grab.

2. On second thought, however, one realized that Generals Don and Kim had never at any time foresworn the possibility of a neutral solution at what might seem to them to be the proper time. They had clearly been working, and working effectively, to strengthen the effort against the Viet Cong. But none of us had ever discussed what the next step would be after the Government of Viet Nam had reached a position of strength. Perhaps they did favor the French neutrality solution at that time. We had all concentrated exclusively on winning. Then I remembered an evening at which I had tended to belittle the effect in Viet Nam of what the French were doing and had said that it took more than mere words to stop a program on which the USA and GVN agreed. On looking back on it, I remember a stony look on General Don’s face and total silence when he should have said something. Finally, Ambassador D’Orlandi of Italy, who is one of the shrewdest men here, has thought ever since November that the Minh government was actively in support of General De Gaulle’s ideas and would turn overtly neutralist at proper time. He had said this to me several times and had made much of the fact that both Don and Kim were still French citizens, had been aides to Marshal de Lattre when he was here, and had actively worked in the French Secret Service in the past. Therefore Khanh’s opinion of the French intentions for neutralization coup might be correct.

3. Also the forward steps of history are often not made by one man or group of men. In U.S., for instance, the men who manage a successful campaign for the party nominations are often not the same as those who manage the election campaigns and they, in turn, are not the same as those who occupy the big posts after the election is won. Similarly, the group that ended the Diem regime and cleaned out much of its dry rot has rendered a service and now a new man has the job of winning the war.

4. Finally, in this country it rarely occurs to anyone that an election is an efficient or appropriate way to get anything important accomplished. The traditional way of doing important things here is by well planned, well thought out use of force. What General Khanh has done does not appear to have shocked the Vietnamese. From the Vietnamese who I see every day, that is, my cook, no. 1 boy, and driver, I hear expressions of admiration for the smoothness of the technique. However, numerous Vietnamese have expressed the opinion to members of my staff that it was a pity that General Minh was removed because he is a “good man”.

5. The real question is, therefore: Is Khanh able? Will he really supply some drive in connection with the effort against the Viet Cong? The evidence to date is that he is able, that he has got a lot of drive, and that he is not tolerating any delay. General Westmoreland was in Can Tho yesterday morning and reports that none of the officers there feels any lack of a definite policy or definite directive from on top.

1. [6.] If Khanh is able, his advent to power may give this country one-man command in place of a junta. This may be good. We have everything we need in Viet Nam. The US has provided military advice, training, equipment; economic and social help; and political advice. The Government of Viet Nam has put relatively large number of good men into important positions and has evolved civil and military procedures which appear to be workable. Therefore, our side knows how to do it; we have the means with which to do it; we simply need to do it. This requires a tough and ruthless commander. Perhaps Khanh is it.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Passed to the White House, JCS, Office of the Secretary of Defense, and CIA.

31. Editorial Note 31. Editorial Note

At a press conference on February 1, 1966, beginning at 3 p.m., President Johnson read to the news correspondents the text of his message to General Khanh expressing satisfaction on their agreement for the need to increase military activity against the Viet Cong (see footnote 2, Document 25). President Johnson then answered questions, two of which were related to Vietnam. Asked if he ruled out the possibility of neutralization of Vietnam as President De Gaulle had suggested (see Document 27), Johnson replied: “If we could have neutralization of both North Viet-Nam and South Viet-Nam, I am sure that would be considered sympathetically. But I see no indication of that at the moment. I think that if we could expect the Viet Cong to let their neighbors live in peace, we could take a much different attitude. But as long as these raids are continuing and people are attempting to envelop South Viet-Nam, I think that the present course we are conducting is the only answer to that course, and I think that the operations should be stepped up there. I see no sentiment favoring neutralization of South Viet-Nam alone, and I think the course that we are following is the most advisable one for freedom at this point.”

Asked later if President De Gaulle’s proposal for neutralizing Southeast Asia interfered with or made U.S. efforts in Vietnam more difficult, Johnson replied affirmatively, and continued: “We think the course of action that we are following in Southeast Asia is the only course for us to follow, and the most advisable at this time. We plan to pursue it diligently and, we hope, successfully on a stepped-up basis.”

Toward the end of the press conference, President Johnson was asked to elaborate on his statement that he would sympathize with neutralization of both North and South Vietnam and how this idea differed from President De Gaulle’s plan for neutralization of Indochina. Johnson responded: “You will have to ask General De Gaulle about the details of his proposal. But as I understand it, the neutralization talk has applied only to South Viet-Nam and not to the whole of that area of the world. I think that the only thing we need to do to have complete peace in that area of the world now is to stop the invasion of South Viet-Nam by some of its neighbors and supporters.” (Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book I, pages 257–260)

32. Memoranda of Telephone Conversations Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Manning) and the Secretary of State 32. Memoranda of Telephone Conversations Between the Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs (Manning) and the Secretary of State1

Washington, February 1, 1964

TELEPHONE CALL FROM MR. MANNING, 3:45 p.m.

Mr. Manning called from the White House and said he was under a handicap since he did not yet have a copy of the Pres’s press conference transcript but the Pres had said on the neutralization of Vietnam, we were sympathetic to neutralization of both North and South. Manning said this didn’t pose too much of a problem. Pres had said we were opposed to De Gaulle’s idea of neutralization. The Sec said the two didn’t quite fit. Manning said the French press were dictating stories and tearing this apart. The Sec suggested Manning call Harriman. Manning said he would call Sec back when he got hold of a transcript.

TELEPHONE CALL TO MR. MANNING (at the WH), 4:25 p.m.

The Sec said he had been watching TV on the Pres’s press conference on the question of neutralization of Vietnam and also on what De Gaulle had said. Mr. Moyers got on the phone and asked the Sec if he would dictate to him a clarification of what the Pres had said on these two things.

Sec said: “It was obvious from what he said that the President was concerned about the interpretation put on President De Gaulle’s discussion of neutralization in Southeast Asia itself. Out there it was taken to mean some sort of neutralization of South Vietnam which will simply expose that country to continued penetration from the north. Since President De Gaulle has not made any detailed proposals, it is easy to see how this interpretation could cause such deep concern in South Vietnam.”

The Sec said he would not put this clarification in the Pres’s mouth but as background clarification from Salinger’s office. Moyers asked if they couldn’t say that the Pres and the Sec had discussed this matter of interpretation only today. The Sec said they could add to above-“The President had discussed just today with the SecState the depth of concern of the anxiety in South Vietnam.”

TELEPHONE CALL FROM MR. MANNING (from WH), 4:55 p.m.

Mr. Manning said we were not completely finished with the clarification. He said in the middle of the two questions in the Pres’s press conference a newsman had asked if De Gaulle’s proposal interfered with our objectives and the Pres had said: yes. The Pres said that De Gaulle was entitled to his opinion and we had expressed ours. We thought our course was the only wise one and we planned to pursue it on a stepped up basis. Manning said that De Gaulle, in talking about Southeast Asia, was referring to what was formerly Indochina. The Sec said that, just [as] in the classroom, the Pres did not completely [and] accurately understand just what De Gaulle was talking about. We ought to deflect the whole business to what the people in Southeast Asia think De Gaulle is talking about. Manning said we should make ourselves clear that what the Pres was rejecting was the neutralization of South Vietnam. That was what South Vietnam was concerned about.2 As far as De Gaulle was concerned, let him come up with details.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Papers: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Mildred Asbjornson.

2 In telegram 1170 to Saigon, February 1, 7:15 p.m., the Department sent to the Embassy the following information on the President’s statements on neutralization:

“There may be attempts to distort the meaning of what the President said at press conference this afternoon regarding the De Gaulle neutralization proposal. In order head off conflicting interpretations, you should make absolutely clear in response to any inquiries, or direct statement by you if need be, that President firmly opposed to De Gaulle proposal for neutralization, that this has been and continues to be the position consistently taken by the US Government. It would be incorrect to read any change in policy into the President’s remarks. This borne out by letter which Present sent General Khanh this afternoon.” (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

33. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 33. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, February 4, 1964.

SUBJECT

South Vietnam

Herewith my overnight thoughts for your lunch today:2

1. If Lodge must remain, the military commander must be changed. The President might publicly load Lodge with full responsibility for the whole U.S. effort in South Vietnam, giving him as deputy the ablest, most modern-minded 3-star general we can find. General Westmoreland might fill the bill. He doesn’t have to have an extra star, if he is acting as Lodge’s deputy.

2. Here in Washington we should get a Manager for South Vietnam. He should be in the Department of Defense at a level which would permit him to deal with the Under Secretaries and the Assistant Secretaries of State and the Aid Agency Administrator. He should be McNamara’s man. He should concern himself with operations in South Vietnam and on policy matters he should report to McNamara, Rusk and Harriman. I have in mind someone like Vance, your brother Bill, or possibly Solbert.

3. We should set up immediately a group of about 10 people who would meet together for approximately two weeks, completely free from all other responsibilities, preferably not in Washington but possibly in Honolulu or some reasonably secluded place, to think of specific things which we should do to improve our effort inside South Vietnam. Since we really do not have all of the best people for this job in Washington, we should draw from the following sources: one or two of the best people from MACV; one or two from USOM in Saigon; one or two from the Embassy in Saigon and/or State; one from the CIA; one each from Krulak’s shop and ISA; and possibly one from the academic world like Fishel or Lucian Pye.3 Solbert could be the Chairman of such a group; and we should be ruthless in providing him the time and resources of the best people, regardless of their duties or rank.

4. There should be another group assembled entirely from Washington which should be working at the same time on diplomatic and military plans for U.S. initiatives in the SEA area as a whole, principally outside South Vietnam. Believe it or not, I would not be averse to having Walt Rostow handling this one, provided he had tough representation from all the schools of thought.

Michael V. Forrestal4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. 11, Memos and Misc. Secret and Personal. Published in part in Declassified Documents, 1975, 175B.

2 Reference is to a luncheon meeting at the White House at 1:04 p.m. among the President, Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy. The meeting ended at 2:45 p.m. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record of the meeting has been found, but see Document 34 and Document 35.

3 Wesley R. Fishel, Professor of Political Science at Michigan State University, and Lucian W. Pye, Professor of Political Science at Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

34. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 34. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, February 4, 1964.

SUBJECT

Your luncheon with Secretaries Rusk and McNamara

You said yesterday that you wanted to talk about South Vietnam and about Africa at this lunch.

1. On South Vietnam

There are two kinds of questions here: a. What stronger courses of action can we take?

The gut question here is whether and how we can bring pressure on North Vietnam. The working levels of the government are now inclined to argue that we can, but we do not yet have a plan.

Such a plan would need a closely interlocked military and diplomatic program so as to lay the widest possible basis of support for an action which will make almost all our allies nervous except perhaps Nationalist China, the Philippines, South Vietnam, and Thailand.

b. To get any plan and to give it a better chance of success we need improvement in our organization here and in the field.

In the field

If Lodge must stay then the transfer from Harkins to Westmoreland should be speeded up, and we need to have an intense back-and-forth communication from Washington to Lodge himself.

At home

We must end the deep-seated lack of confidence which exists between senior people at Defense and the Hilsman office.

My own judgment is that government needs a senior officer, accepted as first-rate by all concerned, who will make South Vietnam and related problems his only business. My nominee would be Mike Forrestal, but I would be glad to have him wear a Defense hat or State hat if that would help. I emphasize the role of Defense because that is where the resources are, and McNamara is the man with the heaviest personal commitment.

[Here follow recommendations on item 2, Africa.]

McG. B.2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Luncheons with the President, Vol. 1 [Part 2]. Secret. Bundy wrote the following note on the source text: “P[resident] used all this in lunch with results not yet clear. McGB”

2 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

35. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to the Secretary of State 35. Memorandum From the Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, February 4, 1964.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam

In addition to Deptels 1165 and 1166 to Saigon (attached),2 we believe you should be aware of the following in connection with the lunch which you are having with the President and Secretary McNamara on Viet-Nam:

1. Khanh’s reaction to the President’s letter—Khanh has expressed pleasure at receiving the letter President Johnson sent on Saturday. He has issued a press release with the text of the letter and the comment that the U.S. and Vietnamese Governments have an absolute identical point of view on intensifying the war against the Communists (Saigon’s telegram 1481, February 4).3

2. Diemist Revival?—We have a few inconclusive signs that Khanh’s coup signifies a Diemist revival. This would lead to political instability because of the strong opposition of the students, Buddhists and intellectuals to a return of the Diemists. There has already been a student demonstration in support of “complete revolution” (and at least partly in support of General Minh-Saigon’s telegram 1482, February 4).4

3. Low-level American Advisers—The displaced junta did not give us a final answer on our proposal of assigning American advisers at District level and in other lower level capacities than they now function. We believe this proposal should be taken up with Khanh and at least pushed on an experimental basis. We are inclined to think that the increase in efficiency would outweigh the risk of successful Viet Cong capitalization on American presence at a low level. An experimental approach should prove the validity of our belief. We propose to move a cable to Saigon along these lines.

4. North Viet-Nam—In the present context resulting from France’s recognition of Communist China we believe that it is desirable for the U.S. to search for some means of action for recovering the psychological initiative. We are therefore cooperating with Defense and CIA in a new review of possible actions against North Viet-Nam.

5. Laos—We believe that it would be useful and important to supply Prince Souvanna Phouma with existing evidence of Viet Cong use of the Laos corridor for infiltration into Viet-Nam, and taking steps to see that this is done. Such information should be politically useful to Souvanna in dealing with the DRV and also build political support for intelligence collection operations in southern Laos.

6. Reporting—Secretary McNamara may raise the question of reporting from the U.S. agencies in Saigon. This question is now being actively worked on by the Interdepartmental Working Group on VietNam and we expect to send instructions to Saigon shortly. We are reviewing the substance, mode of presentation and frequency of assessment reporting-both overall and by province—as well as the personnel and sources of material for reporting. Defense has urged the dispatch of a State-DOD-CIA team to Saigon to improve reporting, but we have resisted this suggestion on the ground that the first task is for Washington to define what it considers the weaknesses in the reporting. If this can be done it ought to be possible to get a satisfactory response from Saigon without sending still another team out there.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret. Drafted by Mendenhall. A note on the source text indicates Rusk saw this memorandum.

2 Documents 28 and 29.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 US/Johnson)

4 Not printed. (Ibid., POL 23–8 VIET S)

36. Letter From the Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 36. Letter From the Secretary of State to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, February 5, 1964.

Dear Bob: I have read with a great deal of interest the Joint Chiefs of Staff Memorandum of January 22, 1964, on Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia, which you forwarded with your letter of January 28, 1964.2

I share the view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that in Viet-Nam we must demonstrate to both the Communist and the non-Communist worlds that the “wars of national liberation” formula now being pushed so actively by the Communists will not succeed. The Joint Chiefs have, in my view, correctly remarked that the focus of the counterinsurgency battle lies in South Viet-Nam itself, and the war must be fought and won primarily in the minds of the Vietnamese people. This means that this war, like other guerrilla wars, is essentially political—an important fact to bear in mind in determining command and control arrangements in Viet-Nam.

I also agree with the Joint Chiefs that we must follow an integrated U. S. approach in Southeast Asia to achieve our policy objectives. We must determine what the effects will be on the other countries in the area of any major action we take in or with respect to a given country. We must also determine with respect to any proposed action what we can realistically expect to achieve with that action, and balance that against the political and military risks attendant upon that action before reaching a decision.

I have noted the list of possible actions which the Joint Chiefs may wish to consider recommending from a military standpoint as the situation develops. The Department of State will, of course, always be prepared to consider promptly, in the light of the factors mentioned above, any courses of action which the Joint Chiefs and the Department of Defense propose.

With warm regards,

Sincerely,

Dean

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 Vietnam. Top Secret; Exdis. According to the Department of State copy of this letter, Mendenhall was the drafter. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

2 See Document 17.

37. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 37. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, February 7, 1964.

South Vietnam

General Khanh has discussed with Lodge the composition of his Government (Saigon’s 1510).2 It looks pretty good. General Minh as Chief of State will be a big help both in South Vietnam and internationally. As the cable points out, it will leave General Khanh somewhat more free to attend to the substantive problems of winning the war.

The Vice Prime Minister in charge of Pacification, Mr. Hoan is a Dai Viet leader. Carl and I met him here once in Washington, and we were not particularly impressed. I gather he will be in charge of the civilian side of the struggle. He has, however, I believe, a fairly large Nationalist following.

Other hopeful signs are Oanh (Carl’s friend) as Minister of Finance, Mau (Diem’s old Foreign Minister) back in the same job,3 and National Defense under Khiem. The Government as a whole seems to include almost every geographic and non-Communist political faction. I am asking State and the Agency to do a more thorough evaluation.

[Here follows a summary of developments in Laos.]

On top of this,4 we have intelligence strongly suggesting that a high level meeting between the North Vietnamese and the Chinese is taking place in a town called Mengtzu near the North Vietnamese border. There has also been a significant movement of Chinese interceptor and bomber aircraft into this area.

These indications plus the situation in South Vietnam suggest to me that any organizational changes that we make here in Washington should occur quickly, so that we have a strong team to deal with the trouble which I sense will be developing in the months of March and April.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. III, Memos and Misc. Top Secret.

2 Dated February 7. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S) The White House copy is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 215C. Lodge had an earlier discussion with Khanh on February 5 during which he expressed concern for Khanh’s safety and asked what precautions Khanh was taking against possible coupe. Khanh dismissed the threat, and assured Lodge that he planned to move quickly and vigorously in prosecuting the war. (Telegram 1493 from Saigon, February 5; Department of State, Central Files, POL 23 VIET S. The White House copy of telegram 1493 is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 215A.)

3 Tran Ngoc Oanh was Minister of Public Works and Vu Van Mau did not have a Cabinet post in the Diem government.

4 Reference is to the worsening situation in Laos and the possibility of a Pathet Lao military offensive.

38. Report From the Executive Director-Comptroller of Central Intelligence (Kirkpatrick) and the Station Chief in Saigon (de Silva) to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) 38. Report From the Executive Director-Comptroller of Central Intelligence (Kirkpatrick) and the Station Chief in Saigon (de Silva) to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)1

Saigon, February 10, 1964.

1. With regard to the conduct of the war, we must judge that the situation at this moment must be characterized as one in which the population at large appears apathetic, without enthusiasm either for the GVN or the VC sides but responsive to the latter because it fears the VC. The most important single factor continues to be whether or not the rural population will be willing to defend itself against the VC and to support GVN actions against the VC. In this sector, there now seems to be less conviction and resolution, and a more widespread inclination to avoid the problems of opposing the VC, and to play both sides in hopes somehow of getting along peacefully and without personal commitment.

2. Obviously this gradual abrading of the popular will to resistance, if such is indeed taking place as it appears to be to us here in Saigon, is of the most fundamental importance, and constitutes a trend which must be altered and reversed. What is needed in this regard and very soon are a series of GVN successes in the military sphere which would go [far] toward implanting and nourishing a popular attitude that the GVN has the means of bringing security and a sense of ease to the rural population, and is clearly determined to do so on an everbroadening front throughout the countryside. Only within some such atmosphere of hopefulness can the will and the resolve to oppose the VC be strengthened, and it must be if this war is to be won.

3. The new regime will enjoy stability in direct proportion to the degree it galvanizes and energizes the government apparatus and in particular the Vietnamese military establishment in terms of an aggressive and successful prosecution of the fight. If the present regime should give an impression of uncertainty, apathy, or irresoluteness, it would appear logical to assume that its days as a government would inevitably be numbered, and it would also seem logical that its successor would be a regime destined to lend itself to solutions to end the fighting on conditions which we would find highly undesirable. In short, the present regime can be a stable one if it takes the initiative and forces it on a government structure and a population waiting to be led and hopefully still willing to be led in an anti-VC cause. If the regime falters and appears to be failing in this regard, there are undoubtedly elements in Vietnam who will be willing to make their move and seek other solutions.

4. Mr. Kirkpatrick’s personal comment is as follows: I agree with the above but must note that even armed with your pessimistic comments following your last visit I have been shocked by the number of our (CIA) people and of the military, even those whose job is always to say we are winning, who feel that the tide is against us. Admittedly this is based on a limited number of discussions here and in Danang in three days. There are ominous indications that the VC are able to mount larger operations than in the past using bigger arms, including anti-aircraft. Vietnamese Government reactions are still slow, defensive and reminiscent of French tactics here a decade ago. There are still really no fundamental internal security measures of any effectiveness such as identity cards, block wardens, travel controls, etc. Extensive use by the VC of the waterways leaves the GVN handcuffed. It is evident that a major factor in VC victories is their superior intelligence based on nationwide penetrations and intimidation at all levels. This also is a factor in their military victories where internal agents turn guns on defenders. Finally, with the Laos and Cambodia borders open, this entire pacification effort is like trying to mop the floor before turning off the faucet.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD Files: FRC 330–75. Alternate Proposals. Secret. The source text is a copy of the report that the CIA sent McNamara on February 10 under cover of a memorandum explaining that this analysis was not being formally disseminated because it was a reply to a personal request from McCone.

39. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assist3nt for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 39. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assist3nt for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, February 10, 1964.

SUBJECT

Notes for your meeting with Senator Mansfield today at 6:002

1. Vietnam

On Vietnam he continues to believe in the De Gaulle approach, and we don’t, though public finger-pointing at De Gaulle is not your line. I suggest you should say to him that for the present any weakening of our support of anti-Communist forces in South Vietnam would give the signal for a wholesale collapse of anti-Communism all over Southeast Asia. Khanh’s government may be our last best chance, and we simply cannot afford to be the ones who seem to pull the plug on him. For this reason you might wish to urge Mansfield himself not to express his own doubts in public, at least for a while. His Vietnamese memoranda are at Tab A.3

You are acting promptly to reorganize the Washington end of our South Vietnamese operations and depending on the success of your conversation with Sullivan, you may wish to tell Mansfield in confidence of your plans. The draft NSAM is attached at Tab B.4

[Here follow items 2–4 which are unrelated to Vietnam.]

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Vol. 1. Confidential.

2 The meeting took place from 6:35 p.m. to 7:15 p.m., February 10. (Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record of the meeting has been found.

3 Document 2 and Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 691–692.

4 Not attached; for the approved NSAM, see Document 46.

40. Editorial Note 40. Editorial Note

On February 11, 1966, McGeorge Bundy issued National Security Action Memorandum No. 284, “Official Visits to South Vietnam,” which directed that official visits by high-ranking military and civilian personnel to South Vietnam be coordinated with the Department of State through the Chairman of the Committee on Policy and Operations in Vietnam. NSAM 284 superseded NSAM 217, January 25, 1963, printed in Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, volume III, page 63.

On January 10, 1964, Roger Hilsman had recommended to the Executive Secretary of the Department of State, Benjamin Read, that NSAM 217 be reissued. Hilsman’s memorandum to Read reads in part as follows: “As you know, there has been a constant flow of high-level visitors to South Viet-Nam during the past couple months. I feel quite strongly that we must be careful not to overload this circuit. After all our purpose in Viet-Nam is to get on with the war. To the extent we divert the Generals as well as our own people from this task, we are not helping matters. It is clear that the Generals themselves feel we have been too importunate in the matter of visitors, and I am sure that Ambassador Lodge shares this view.”

Hilsman asked that the Assistant Secretary of State be given responsibility for coordinating visits to South Vietnam. Read complied, because the draft of NSAM 284 which he sent Bundy indicated Hilsman as the coordinator. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–10 VIET S) The NSAM as issued, however, gave the responsibility to William Sullivan, the newly-designated Chairman of the Vietnam Committee. For Sullivan’s responsibilities, see Document 46.

41. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House 41. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House1

Washington, February 12, 1964, 4:30 p.m.

subject

Southeast Asia

PARTICIPANTS

British Side Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom

R.A. Butler, Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

Sir Harold Caccia, Permanent Under Secretary, the Foreign Office

Sir David Ormsby Gore, British Ambassador

Sir Timothy Thigh, Principal Private Secretary to the Prime Minister

Sir Burke Trend, Secretary to the Cabinet

U.S. Side The President

The Secretary of State

Governor Harriman, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs

David K.E. Bruce, Ambassador to Great Britain

McGeorge Bundy, Special Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs

William R. Tyler, Assistant Secretary, EUR

Richard I. Philips, Director, P/ON

Willis C. Armstrong, Director, BNA

The President suggested that the Secretary of State comment on the situation in Southeast Asia, and the Secretary remarked that good progress had already been made by representatives of the two governments in a common approach to Southeast Asian problems. He explained the talks of February 10 and 11,2 and went on to say that agreement had been reached to have some language in the communique to cover our understanding on Southeast Asia, particularly on Viet Nam and Malaysia.3 Mr. Butler made the point that Britain supported US efforts in Viet Nam and was quite prepared to say so in the communique, whereas Britain was anxious to have a comparable reference to Malaysia in the same paragraph.4

The Secretary reported further that there had been agreement to have a good thorough NATO discussion next week, with the US talking about South Viet Nam and Laos and with the UK speaking of Malaysia and Cambodia. He also noted the intention of the British to consider with the French what they mean by neutrality in Southeast Asia. Mr. Butler referred to the message from Couve de Murville explaining that neutrality for Cambodia was separable and separate from any efforts with respect to Viet Nam. The Secretary emphasized further that a review with Mr. Butler in an earlier conversation had indicated that in general the US and UK were approaching Southeast Asian problems very much in the same way, should keep in close touch with each other, and should move forward along various lines to be mutually helpful.5

The Prime Minister said to the President that he thought that the visit of Attorney General Kennedy had been extremely helpful in the harmonization of views on Indonesia and Malaysia.6 He again referred to British support for US efforts in South Vietnam. The President said this was helpful, because there were always questions in the US as to the extent to which our allies were also committed to support such efforts. The Secretary commented that the object of the NATO discussion on Southeast Asia was to alert all the allies to the problems caused there by Communist forces and to identify their interests. The Prime Minister added that the message from Couve de Murville had indicated a willingness to make a public statement on Cambodia’s neutrality, separating it from any question of South Viet Nam.

The Prime Minister wondered whether the situation in South Viet Nam was worse, or whether it was holding. The Secretary of State said the situation was worse, since there had been a real increase in the capability of the Vietcong. He noted that the resources, human and material, exist, but pointed out that the local Vietnamese have not been sufficiently vigorous. He said we must see what more can be done to help the Vietnamese to do the job, and that the next several weeks of the dry season are critical.

[4 lines of source text not declassified] The President remarked that it was very hard to get a clear picture of the facts in the Vietnamese situation.

Mr. Bundy said that this meeting of our two countries and others with other allies could help a good deal. De Gaulle expresses himself, but does not make any contribution otherwise. The change of government in Viet Nam and the press release of General De Gaulle7 had both tended to damage confidence, and meetings such as the present one could help restore it. The Secretary remarked that the UK and US were both using the olive branch and arrows in Southeast Asia, but that De Gaulle was using only the olive branch, and his efforts did not improve the situation. The Prime Minister remarked that “none of these fellows” in Southeast Asia fight very well. The Secretary of State said that the South Vietnamese had really done quite well, all things considered. The Prime Minister said he was not happy about the Malays as fighters, or the Thais. He said that Britain was fortunate to still have some Gurkhas in the area.

1 Source: Department of State, President’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149, Jan-March, 1964. Secret. Drafted by Willis C. Armstrong. Approved by the Executive Secretary on February 27 and by the White House on February 24. The source text is labeled Part II of a six-topic meeting.

British Prime Minister Sir Alec Douglas Home was in Washington for an official visit, February 12–14.

2 These meetings concerned planning for the Indonesia-Malaysia crisis.

3 This understanding was reached at a discussion between U.S. and U.K. of officials headed by Butler and Rusk, February 12, dealing with Southeast Asian problems in general. (Memorandum of a meeting at the White House, February 12, 3 p.m.; Department of State, Conference Files: Lot 66 D 110, CF 2369)

4 The joint communique, February 13, is printed in Department of State Bulletin, pp. 336–337. It did contain references to British support for U.S. policy in Vietnam and U.S. support for British policy in Malaysia.

5 In a private conversation, February 12, from 11 a.m. to approximately noon, Home gave Johnson similar assurances although he stated that Great Britain “must help quietly because of its peacekeeping role under the agreements of 1954.” (Memorandum for the record by Bundy, February 13; Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Vol. 1)

6 Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy undertook a 13-day mission to the Far East, January 15–27, in which he represented President Johnson in talks with the leaders of Indonesia, the Philippines, and Malaysia concerning the dispute over Malaysia. Kennedy also conferred with officials in Japan, Korea, Thailand, and the United Kingdom. For an account of the mission, see Department of State Bulletin, February 17, 1964, pp. 239–243.

7 See Document 27.

42. Paper Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency 42. Paper Prepared in the Defense Intelligence Agency1

Washington, February 12, 1964.

BRIEF

SNIE 50–64, Short-Term Prospects in Southeast Asia

This Special National Intelligence Estimate was approved by the United States Intelligence Board on 12 February 1964. Significant judgments of this estimate are as follows: Certain signs of new North Vietnamese and Chinese Communist military activities, together with an upsurge of Viet Cong activity in South Vietnam, recent Viet Cong successes there, and recent Communist advances in Laos, raise the question whether the situations in South Vietnam and Laos may be on the verge of collapse. After carefully reviewing the evidence, we believe:

That the situation in South Vietnam is very serious, and prospects uncertain. Even with US assistance approximately as it now is, we believe, unless there is a marked improvement in the effectiveness of the South Vietnamese government and armed forces, that the South Vietnamese have at best an even chance of withstanding the insurgency threat during the next few weeks or months.

That if present trends in Laos are not checked, there will be continued erosion of non-Communist military and political positions there. The Laos situation may deteriorate rapidly, and it could take a turn which would further improve the Viet Cong position in South Vietnam.

That dramatic new Chinese Communist intervention in Vietnam or Laos is unlikely. North Vietnam, however, is stepping up its support of the Pathet Lao, and may do so for the Viet Cong-perhaps with some increase of Chinese Communist material assistance. The Communist hope in South Vietnam would be to gain sufficient quick victories before General Khanh’s new government could bring its full military potential to bear, to undermine the South Vietnamese will to resist, and to induce the US to consider a negotiated settlement its only feasible option.

That developments elsewhere in Southeast Asia, save in Cambodia, have thus far had little impact on those in Vietnam and Laos. However, the outcome of the present war in South Vietnam will have a serious effect on the future willingness of governments in Southeast Asia to adopt anti-Communist, rather than neutralist, stances.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 306, 350.05 Southeast Asia. Secret. Attached to a memorandum of transmittal, February 12, from Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency Carroll to Secretary of Defense McNamara. SNIE 50–64, “The Situation in Southeast Asia,” is not printed. Johnson Library, National Security File, National Intelligence Estimate File, 14.3 NVN)

43. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 43. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, February 13, 1964.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia

The essential points to be made by the President to a conference of Congressional leaders, in asking for a Resolution, are these. They would require coordinated elaboration (as at President Truman’s famous conference on Greece and Turkey in 1947)2 among yourself, Secretary McNamara, and General Taylor.

1. Southeast Asia is a critical area to the United States and to our world position. The loss of Viet Nam would endanger Southeast Asia. Thailand would no longer rely on U.S. backing. Laos, Cambodia, and probably Burma would go to the Communists. Taiwan’s morale would crumble. The Philippines, Korea, and Japan would be insecure. Sukamo would be confirmed in his semi-pro-Communist stance. Malaya would be endangered. The Indian subcontinent would be outflanked. The Middle East and East Africa would be substantially opened up. The credibility of our European stance under the Johnson Administration would be put in question; for our commitments to South Viet Nam are no less explicit than our commitments to Berlin.

2. South Viet Nam is in danger. The internal position in South Viet Nam created by the systematic operations conducted from North Viet Nam is precarious. From outside: the 1962 Geneva Accord and the 1954 Accord are not being respected. North Vietnamese troops are still in Laos; North Vietnamese arms and men are being introduced into South Viet Nam; the war is run by a general staff in the north via a complex communications network; the morale in South Viet Nam (and Southeast Asia) has been weakened by the failure of the West to stop this violation of the 1962 Agreement.

3. Although difficult tasks would still be faced in South Viet Nam and Laos if North Vietnamese compliance with the 1962 Agreement was enforced, we see no possibility of achieving short-run or long-run stability in the area until it is enforced. This is not a new judgment. General Taylor reported to President Kennedy on November 3, 1961: “While we feel that the program recommended represents those measures which should be taken in our present knowledge of the situation in Southeast Asia, I would not suggest that it is the final word. Future needs beyond this program will depend upon the kind of settlement we obtain in Laos and the manner in which Hanoi decides to adjust its conduct to that settlement. If the Hanoi decision is to continue the irregular war declared on South Vietnam in 1959 with continued infiltration and covert support of guerrilla bands in the territory of our ally, we will then have to decide whether to accept as legitimate the continued guidance, training, and support of a guerrilla war across an international boundary, while the attacked react only inside their borders. Can we admit the establishment of the common law that the party attacked and his friends are denied the right to strike the source of aggression, after the fact of external aggression is clearly established? It is our view that our government should undertake with the Vietnamese the measures outlined herein, but should then consider the broader question beyond.”3

4. We have given the 1962 Agreement a chance to work. The time has now come for the United States to use every means at its command, diplomatic and military, to enforce compliance.

5. We believe there is a fair chance that compliance can be enforced without substantial military engagement if there is a united expression of determination by the Executive and Congressional branches of the Government, backed by our people, for these reasons: a. Ho has an industrial complex to protect: he is no longer a guerrilla fighter with nothing to lose.

b. Ho does not wish the Chinese in Hanoi.

c. The Chinese Communists are militarily and economically weak but committed to split from Moscow and anxious to come out in the world.

d. Mao’s doctrine has always been: “When the enemy advances, withdraw; when the enemy falters, attack.”

e. Moscow has ample reasons not to engage its forces in Southeast Asia or elsewhere if U.S. is determined and united. In short, if our objective is compliance with the 1954 and 1962 Agreements—and not the invasion of North Viet Nam or China—we may be able to achieve it without major military operations, but only if we are united, determined, and prepared for any level of escalation.

6. If we do not take this action now, we not only endanger Southeast Asia, but we encourage the Communists everywhere (including the Caribbean) to believe that it is accepted by the West as legal to conduct wars of “National Liberation” across borders, with resistance possible only from within; and that if guerrilla war successfully takes hold, the West surrenders. Obviously, at some stage, we would react; but then we will have to do so with greater violence from a profoundly weakened Western position.

7. Therefore, we are asking Congressional and national support to draw the line in the dust at the borders of South Viet Nam. The essentials of a Congressional Resolution are: a. To call attention to the continued violation of the 1954 and 1962 Accords;

b. To reaffirm the United States commitment to Southeast Asia under the Manila Pact;

c. To reaffirm the United States commitment, made by three Presidents, to the continued independence of the people of South Viet Nam;

d. To call on the President to use all the means at our command to enforce compliance with the 1954 and 1962 Accords.

8. At the time of presentation to the Congress of the case for a Congressional Resolution, we shall be publishing evidence of the violation of the Geneva Accords.

9. In the wake of a Congressional Resolution, we shall: —Move additional forces into the area;

—Take a series of diplomatic moves to inform both our Allies and the various Communist regimes of our intention to impose measured, limited sanctions on North Viet Nam, if necessary, to enforce compliance.

10. There will be considerable confusion in the Free World, which will fear a confrontation; and this will be heightened by the Communists, De Gaulle, Lippmann, etc. The chances of not having to drop bombs in the North will depend substantially on whether the Executive Branch and the Congress remain united and resolute. Let us put all other considerations aside and stay together.

11. If we can make this proposition stick in Southeast Asia, our job with Castro will be greatly eased and the long-run prospects for a peaceful world under law enhanced.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Southeast Asia. Top Secret; For the Secretary Only. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text.

2 Apparent reference to a meeting with congressional leaders, February 27, 1947, described in Harry S. Truman, Memoirs, vol. II (Garden City, NY, 1956), p. 103.

3 Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. I, p. 477.

44. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 44. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, February 14, 1964.

SUBJECT

Contingency Planning for Southeast Asia

Governor Harriman, Alexis Johnson, Roger Hilsman, Bill Sullivan and I will be meeting with you at 4:30 p.m. today.2

The purpose of our meeting will be to report to you the results of our individual review of the attached report on Southeast Asia prepared by the Policy Planning Council. A summary of the concept and key issues examined in this report are at Tab A. I recommend you thumb through the table of contents (Tab B)3 which will give you an idea of the scope of the paper.

I recommend that you give your approval to the following proposals: 1. That the Tuesday Planning Group at its next meeting take on the job of serving as a steering group to provide general guidance and direction to the preparation of a contingency plan for the imposition of measured sanctions against North Viet-Nam. As you know, Governor Harriman and Alex Johnson are regular members of that group. For these purposes we would add others as required, including immediately senior representatives of FE and USIA.

2. That the Planning Group establish a working group under State Department chairmanship to prepare the necessary studies and plans.

The objective of the next planning stage is not to produce a recommended policy. It is to produce a complete politico-military scenario which we can lay before senior officers of the Government so that they may judge whether and under what circumstances a forward policy of the kind examined here might prove wise and viable.

[Here follows discussion unrelated to Vietnam.]

Tab A

SUMMARY OF CONCEPT AND KEY ISSUES

I. The Concept

The paper is not a plan, but an exposition of issues that would need to be examined in preparing a plan. It examines a concept designed to cause North Vietnam (the DRV) (a) to cease its illegal infiltration of men and arms into South Vietnam, its direction of the war in South Vietnam and its supporting activities in Laos; and (b) to withdraw its troops or cadres from both countries and to comply fully with the 1954 and 1962 Geneva Accords.

The concept is based upon the assumption that the imposition of graduated political, military and, possibly, economic sanctions on the DRV could cause it to call off the war principally because of its fear that it would otherwise risk loss of its politically important industrial development; because of its fear of being driven into the arms of Communist China; and because of Moscow’s, Peiping’s and Hanoi’s concern about escalation.

II. Key Issues

1. The question of how to define operational objectives that will command wide support at home and abroad; provide a reasonably clear-cut basis for measuring Communist performance and not provide undue opportunities for Communist delaying tactics and political warfare; and therefore provide the basis for determining when U.S. pressures should be continued, when halted. As a related matter, how important and how feasible are inspection arrangements or other means of insuring continued DRV compliance?

2. The question of the degree of the U.S. commitment. We must be prepared to withstand, if necessary, possibly great international political pressures which might force us to desist before we have achieved our objective. We must consider how far we are prepared to go in meeting Communist military responses. We must consider the actions that we would take in the event of either success or failure.

3. Against the background of the past, how do we develop a convincing case against the DRV that will command, at a minimum, broad domestic U.S. support and some international support and at the maximum, broad international support?

4. How might the crisis be terminated? Are there acceptable turning off points? Under what circumstances would we be prepared to go to an international conference and for what purpose?

5. We must consider how far we are prepared to go in providing additional commitments of support to South Vietnam, Thailand and, perhaps, the Philippines, and whether, even with such commitments, they will give us their initial and their continued support.

6. We face broad tactical choices: whether we should move quickly or slowly in posing and carrying out our threat to the DRV; whether we should begin on the covert or the overt level and how and when we should move from one level of action to the other.

7. We need to reexamine organization for making and implementing policy in the context of an intense and possibly protracted politico-military crisis to insure responsiveness to top-level control without neglect of expert advice and local problems.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam. Secret. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text.

2 The meeting began at 4:40 p.m. and lasted until almost 5:30. Robert Johnson also attended. Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) No record of the meeting has been found.

3 Not attached to the source text. A copy of the table of contents and the draft report is in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam.

45. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 45. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, February 14, 1964.

SUBJECT

South Vietnam

I wanted to give you some thoughts for your forthcoming trip to Saigon.2 I agree that the next four or five months will be critical in the sense that if a favorable political and military trend does not develop in that period, we will slowly lose our position in Vietnam and the rest of Southeast Asia. Thus we have a very short time within which to make the changes in our own organization in the field to produce a coherent effort from the American side.

I have the impression that since last November 1st our own efforts in support of what we used to call the Strategic Hamlet Program have deteriorated badly. I refer to that collection of activities which included the Montagnard program, hamlet militia training, CIDG training, police training, pig and fertilizer programs, etc.; in short, all of the mixed civil and military counterinsurgency programs which about a year ago seemed to be working well.

The two coups obviously have affected the GVN’s efforts, but I am also worried lest our own organization has deteriorated. We have lost [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] a rather large and extraordinarily successful effort with the Montagnards on the Central Plateau. Recent reports suggest to me that what we once thought was a solid program is beginning to fall apart in that region. A [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] memorandum3 I have recently read implies that most of the young Vietnamese and tribal dialect speaking Americans who worked in the hill country have been pulled off.

I don’t know what has happened to Trueheart’s rural rehabilitation committee, which coordinated the AID efforts with the military, especially in the Delta. I assume it must be functioning under Nes; but we haven’t had any word about it.

I suspect that Army Special forces, [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] have tended to pull their resources away from the populated regions of the High Plateau in an effort to increase their activities along the Laotian border. This may have left the VC behind to attack what we once thought were strong Montagnard hamlets in their rear.

These are only impressions that I have gathered from reading the current reporting, which, as you know too well, is voluminous but uninformative. I have four specific suggestions for you to consider while you are in Saigon: 1. Minister for Rural Operations. We should have one manager in Saigon with the responsibility and authority to run that part of the war which lies between Lodge’s diplomatic discourses with the highest level of the GVN on the one hand, and Harkins’ military responsibility to advise and direct ARVN and conventional U.S. military efforts on the other. He should have the rank of Minister and be responsible to Lodge and Harkins. Nes should become Lodge’s Minister for Political Affairs and should perform the traditional functions of DCM in an ordinary Embassy. The Minister for Operations should be a civilian preferably with some military background, someone like Hank Byroade. Such a person would have direct authority over the following parts of the existing U.S. agencies in Saigon: (a) The USOM rural rehabilitation organization (i.e., including the USOM representatives in the various provinces).

(b) All USIS psywar-type operations (leaflet printing, films, etc.).

(c) Those Army Special Forces units who are engaged in training Vietnamese irregulars who do not leave their home regions (hamlet militia, SDC, and other local paramilitary organizations as distinguished from regular ARVN units).

(d) Any vestiges remaining of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] paramilitary functions. He should have a call upon MACV, USOM, the Embassy and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] for support where necessary.

2. You might inquire whether the organization of the ARVN itself is well suited to the territorial war. Is the division a useful unit on which to base U.S. and GVN planning and support? Would more decentralization of tactical command, say to the province or district level, tend to tailor military operations more closely to local intelligence and other conditions? I have no expertise at all in such matters; but I should imagine that General Stilwell and Bob Thompson may have some useful thoughts. If you are impressed with Thompson, would it make any sense to associate him more closely with our own efforts-i.e., as an informal member of our country team?

3. Wouldn’t it be worthwhile discussing with Khanh the possibility of his instructing ARVN subordinate commanders to take their military advisors more seriously? Could this be done on a “burden of proof” basis? If an ARVN unit commander refused to follow U.S. advice and then failed, he would have the burden of showing affirmatively that his decision was the correct one. Conversely, if he followed the advice and failed, he would be given the benefit of any doubt.

4. The necessity for U.S. liaison with Khanh and his government is greater than ever before. We had no knowledge of this coup; and unless we pull up our socks, we will not ever have the opportunity of dissuading others from starting a new one. The French can be counted upon to stir up trouble. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Lodge has to be persuaded that such people do not represent a threat to his authority, if he chooses to give them guidance.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Luncheons with the President, Vol. 1, [Part 2]. Secret and Personal. Published in part in Declassified Documents, 1977, 109B.

2 The McNamara mission visited South Vietnam March 8–12.

3 Not found.

46. National Security Action Memorandum No. 280 46. National Security Action Memorandum No. 2801

Washington, February 14, 1964.

MEMORANDUM TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Administrator. AID

I have today determined that it is essential to establish in Washington a small committee for the management of U.S. policy and operations in South Vietnam. After consultation with the Secretary of State, I have designated Mr. William Sullivan of the Department of State to serve as Chairman of this committee, under the direct supervision of the Secretary of State.

I now request that the Secretary of Defense, the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development nominate to me individuals from their departments and agencies to serve as members of Mr. Sullivan’s committee. The officers so nominated will be expected to give an absolute priority to their obligations as members of this committee and as agents for the execution of approved decisions. On this basis, I have already designated Mr. Michael Forrestal to serve as the White House representative on this committee.

Major questions of policy and operations will be subject to my approval in consultation with heads of departments and agencies as appropriate. In the execution of approved policy, it is my desire that Mr. Sullivan’s committee shall move energetically, and that department appeal from Mr. Sullivan’s decisions shall be kept to a minimum. He is being appointed because he commands the confidence not only of myself and of the Secretary of State, but also of senior officials of all agencies concerned.

It is my hope and expectation that the establishment of this committee will permit an energetic, unified and skillful prosecution of the only war we face at present.2

“Re the Viet-Nam task force, Sec. said he put a burr under their tail; told them that their mission is as broad as the problem, top priority, that we have got to win this war. B. thought it important to have the other track explored; Sec. said we were moving full speed on this as an adjunct to the task force.” (Ibid., Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 280. Secret.

2 On February 15, at 11:33 a.m., Rusk called McGeorge Bundy. The transcript of their conversation relating to the establishment of the Vietnam Committee reads as follows:

47. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 47. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, February 15, 1964.

SUBJECT

Ho and Mao

The question of Hanoi-Peking relations was raised briefly yesterday.2 I should like to add a word.

I have assumed for some time that, in terms of Bloc relations and policy towards South Viet-Nam, Ho and Mao were coming closer together, although not without some debate in the Communist Party in Hanoi of which there is considerable evidence.

I assume further that Ho and Mao are now operating very closely and, indeed, engaged in a plan to warn us of escalation should we move north. Some additional aircraft have been moved to Hainan and into South China, I believe.

Moreover, in my view, no plan to inflict even limited damage on the North should proceed without our taking the fullest possible preparations to face any degree of escalation within enemy capabilities. The likelihood of escalation will be inversely proportional to their judgment of our determination and available and relevant military strength.

But this is a quite different matter from the important point made in the paper.3 For centuries all Vietnamese have had as an objective of policy to keep an arms-length relation to China. The Vietnamese Communist Party has maintained control over its own army, secret police, and party apparatus. It maintains that critical degree of independence now.

I do not for one moment believe—nor is there any evidence—that the North Vietnamese are prepared to forego that kind of independence, whatever their present relations with Peking.

A substantial war in North Viet-Nam would require the Chinese Communists to introduce into Hanoi aircraft and, perhaps, troops. No Vietnamese would view this event without a certain apprehension that the consequence might be the permanent reduction in their status from junior partner to Chinese province.

I continue to believe, therefore, that this deep reservation in Hanoi about relations with China will be one among other constraints on their conduct in the face of the policy we have been discussing; although, to repeat, we should not count on anything but a determination and a capacity to make their present course of action, in violation of solemn Accords, unprofitable as opposed to any other course of action they might adopt.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam. Secret. Copies were sent to Harriman, Sullivan, U. Alexis Johnson, and Hilsman. Rusk’s initials appear on the source text.

2 Apparently at the 4:40 p.m. meeting on February 14; see footnote 2, Document 44.

3 See footnote 3, Document 44.

48. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Secretary of State 48. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Denney) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, February 15, 1964.

RFE-11

SUBJECT

Hanoi Foresees Victory in South Vietnam—But Only After Long Guerrilla War

In view of increasing speculation concerning the designs of North Vietnam in the South, we have analyzed a spate of recent statements from Hanoi which provide an unusually revealing picture of Hanoi’s calculations.

Abstract

A series of authoritative North Vietnamese articles, released on February 10 and 11, reaffirm Hanoi’s belief that protracted political and military struggle without open North Vietnamese intervention will be ultimately successful against a militarily superior army. Nevertheless, Hanoi again evinces concern about how Viet Cong morale will hold up in the long run and even reveals the existence of considerable Northern disenchantment about the war in the South. The fullest exposition of these views is an article in the January issue of the elite journal Hoc Tap, by Lt. General Nguyen Van Vinh who, as head of the “reunification” committees of both the party’s central committee and the National Assembly, probably has a major role in the formulation of Viet Cong policy.

Vinh argues at length against the contention that the conflict carries serious risk of escalation, a view apparently advanced by Moscow and perhaps echoed by some North Vietnamese leaders. In so doing, he warns the United States for the first time that an attack on North Vietnam would involve conflict with Communist China, but he is notably less explicit about the Soviet response. Hanoi appears genuinely concerned that the United States may be considering action against the North. This in part may explain not only these articles but also the recent flurry of related political and even military activity.

General Vinh predicts that the United States will remain involved in South Vietnam “for some years” until forced to withdraw in the face of heavier and heavier defeats. He is less precise about the consequences should the United States vastly increase its role, hinting this might necessitate increased North Vietnamese participation (as in Laos). The article implicitly rules out an international political settlement as a feasible course of action, at least under prevailing conditions. Another statement released the same day categorically rejects French President de Gaulle’s suggestion (although it was attributed to President Johnson) that North Vietnam might be neutralized.

[Here follows the text of the 6-page paper.]

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 71 D 273, Vietnam. Secret.

49. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 49. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, February 18, 1964.

1574. For Harriman and Hilsman. I have just seen JCS 4893 to MACV2 calling for a plan for “an immediate concentrated counterinsurgency offensive in Long An Province to restore effective GVN control.” This is the most discouraging instruction I have seen since joining our Vietnamese effort two months ago. It reveals an almost total lack of comprehension of the character of the Vietnamese problem and of the present situation here.

It assumes that:

1. An indigenous Communist insurgency enjoying full external Communist support can be defeated by such an “offensive” in a measurable period of time.

2. The GVN has adequate political cohesion and leadership, centralized control, and local administrative talent and organization to launch a “concentrated counter-insurgency offensive in Long An” or anywhere else.

3. The U.S. Mission here has sufficient influence and control over the GVN to persuade it to do so.

None of these assumptions are true in Viet-Nam today.

I have suggested to MACV that its reply which will to extent possible receive Country Team coordination include frank statement re utter impossibility of launching “an immediate concentrated counter-insurgency offensive” or of achieving quick success even were such action possible. It is my hope that our reply can convey a more realistic appreciation of our task than instruction which engendered it.

Doubtless Ambassador Lodge will have more to say on “quick victory” approach upon his return. In my opinion we face a long hard pull with final success probably dependent more on developments external to Viet Nam than on our counter-insurgency efforts here. On these U.S. Mission is and will continue to exert maximum effort.

Nes

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. The source text bears no time of transmission. Received at 10:01 a.m. A note on the White House copy of this telegram indicates that the President read it. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV) Also published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 216A.

2 Dated February 14, this cable transmitted the JCS belief that a counterinsurgency offensive in Long An Province would be a symbol of “revitalized war effort.” The JCS requested development of a comprehensive plan in coordination with the Country Team for “earliest possible accomplishment this purpose.” Johnson Library, National Security File. Vietnam Country File. Vol. IV. Memos and Misc.)

50. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Helms), to the Secretary of State 50. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Plans, Central Intelligence Agency (Helms), to the Secretary of State1

Washington, February 18, 1964.

A. Tide of insurgency in all four corps areas appears to be going against GVN. In many provinces team finds VC-controlled areas to comprise better than 50 or 60 per cent of total area. Some provinces (Phaoc Thanh, Binh Duong and An Xuyen) report VC-controlled areas as high as 80 per cent. In Tay Ninh Province American and Vietnamese officials agree VC can attack and enter any village of their choosing, including provincial capital.

B. National level direction of all programs appears to be weak to non-existent. This includes ARVN operations, strategic hamlet program. Chieu Hoi program, civic action program, national police program, hamlet militia program, etc. What ARVN operations are being conducted appear to be corps-controlled and corps concepts of action appear to vary even to the point that different divisions with the same corps have a different approach to problems.

C. Until 1 Nov coup, strategic hamlet program, while full of faults weaknesses, etc., had certain momentum and full national direction. Since coup, program has been viewed more realistically and many of illusions held jointly by US and Vietnamese have been shattered. Program at present at virtual standstill, as provincial officials, lacking direction at national level, grope for local and varying new approaches to pacification problem. Illustrative of results of current re-evaluation of strategic hamlet program is case of Hau Nghia, where province chief states that of 52 hamlets previously reported as completed, only eight are now considered viable. Province chief estimates that 75 per cent of Hau Nghia VC-controlled.

D. There is no evidence of any particular GVN appeal to youth or students and as matter of fact GVN propaganda mechanism in toto is largely moribund. Dissemination and production of propaganda appear to be centered entirely in Saigon and is so poorly operative in many provincial areas that VC were first to inform populace of 30 January coup. There are no newspapers produced outside of Saigon although VC by contrast do produce some regular periodicals which appear to be well read by local populace. (CAS working with GVN in this entire field.)

E. Several province chiefs encountered proved to be of high caliber. However, due to frequent personnel changes, present incumbents apprehensive over their tenure and reluctant to exercise initiative. Particularly in newly created provinces, there is lack of qualified subordinate personnel.

F. Hamlet militia appear effective mainly in non-critical areas. In critical areas as a rule hamlet militia have been disarmed by province chiefs, overrun by VC, or members have on their own initiative fumed in their arms and resigned. Therefore, in these areas hamlet militia not significant factor in war, brunt of which being increasingly borne by self-defense corps.

G. Quality and quantity of VC arms appear to be rapidly increasing. Presence of Russian-designed carbines, Czech sub machine guns, Chinese SKZ recoilless weapons and 7.92 heavy machine guns and increased use of heavy mortars by VC elements have been noted in all corps areas. These better weapons being distributed down to VC guerrilla units and presence of homemade and French weapons in hands of VC decreasing. In one recent case VC left behind in an overrun district headquarters in Quang Tri French weapons which they had brought with them. Progress in rearming VC units probably uneven, but in IV Corps it believed process virtually complete. In number of areas in IV Corps both American and Vietnamese sources assert that friendly forces now both outgunned and outmanned by enemy. (This info has been scattered in various MAC/V statistical reports, but to our knowledge has never been brought home in a clear, explicit, qualitative statement.)

H. Presence of improved weapons in hands of VC suggests significant degree of infiltration of new equipment into South Vietnam.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV, Memos and Misc. Secret. Signed by Colby for Helms. Also sent to McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Taylor, Hilsman, Forrestal, Anthis, Sullivan, Carroll, and others. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1974, 246D. Bundy wrote the following note on the source text: “President read Feb. 18 and so called meeting of Feb. 20 on SVN. McGB.” For the results of the meeting, see Document 54.

According to a covering note, this was the third report of a group of CIA officers who went to Vietnam to cross-check covertly intelligence information provided by the Vietnamese. The first report, February 14, concluded that while the Vietnamese had been reporting honestly to their American counterparts since November 1, 1963, failings in quantity, quality, and training of Vietnamese personnel and lack of professionalism among Vietnamese sources made their intelligence product difficult to evaluate. A general impression gained by the CIA group was that the momentum of the strategic hamlet program had slowed practically to a halt. Commenting specifically on Binh Long and Phuoc Thanh Provinces, the report concluded that security had badly deteriorated there. The second report, February 14, concentrated on I Corps and concluded that optimism regarding the security of the area was mistaken and based on superficial developments. (Both in Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV, Memos and Misc.) The accord report is published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 246C.

51. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 51. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, February 18, 1964.

JCSM–136–64

SUBJECT

Vietnam and Southeast Asia

1. Reference is made to the memorandum by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, dated 22 January 1964,2 subject as above, which expressed the view that a loss of South Vietnam to the communists would presage a loss of the remainder of the United States position in Southeast Asia. It sets forth a number of actions which the United States should be prepared to take in order to ensure victory. Since submission of that memorandum, mindful of the need to revitalize the counterinsurgency campaign in South Vietnam, which has been interrupted and slowed by the confusion resulting from recent changes in government, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the situation in South Vietnam with the view of determining additional actions which can be recommended for implementation immediately.

2. The Government of Vietnam has developed, with the close collaboration of the US Military Assistance Command, a new National Pacification Plan3 which provides for the orderly pacification of the insurgency in accordance with a realistic phasing schedule. From a military planning viewpoint, this program should correct many of the past deficiencies of the effort, and it provides for consolidation of secure areas and expansion of them (the “spreading oil drop”). US military assets in Vietnam will fully support this plan. What is now required is implementation of additional actions which will insure an integrated political, socio-economic, and psychological offensive to support more fully the military effort. Accordingly, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that the Country Team be directed to implement the following actions at the earliest practicable time: a. Induce the GVN (General Khanh) military to accept US advisors at all levels considered necessary by COMUSMACV. (This is particularly applicable in the critical provinces where the advisory effort should be expanded and should reach down to the subsector level.)

b. Intensify the use of herbicides for crop destruction against identified Viet Cong areas as recommended by the GVN.

c. Improve border control measures: (1) Direct border surveillance elements to establish intelligence nets without regard to the existing geographic borders.

(2) Exploit smugglers and the Cao Dai, Hoa Hao, and other border minority groups.

(3) Establish denied areas where a “shoot on sight” policy will be followed.

d. Direct the US civilian agencies involved in Vietnam to assist the GVN in producing a civilian counterpart package plan to the GVN National Pacification Plan. (Any area in Vietnam can be temporarily cleared of Viet Cong, but it is the GVN civil administration which must win the people and stabilize the area in concert with the military. This plan should support and revitalize the Vietnamese “New Life Hamlet Program.”)

e. Provide US civilian advisors to all necessary echelons and GVN agencies to provide civil administration “know-how” until a GVN corps of administrators can be trained.

f. Encourage early and effective action to implement a realistic land reform program.

g. Support the GVN in a policy of tax forgiveness for low income population in areas where the GVN determines that a critical state of insurgency exists. (In some areas the Viet Cong and GVN both levy taxes on the peasant population. Relief of the GVN tax would provide a small monetary relief but, more important, would have psychological value.)

h. Assist the GVN in developing a National Psychological Operations Plan and conducting psychological operations to insure an intensive nationwide coordinated propaganda campaign to establish the GVN and Khanh’s “images,” create a “cause” which can serve as a rallying point for the youth/students of Vietnam, and develop the long term national objectives of a free Vietnam.

i. Intensify efforts to gain the support of US news media representatives in Vietnam by exploring with them measures that can be taken to improve this situation.

j. Arrange US sponsored trips to Vietnam by groups of prominent journalists and editors.

k. Inform all GVN military and civilian officials through various means, to include their US advisors and counterparts, that the United States (a) considers it imperative that the present government be stabilized, (b) would oppose another coup, and (c) that the United States is prepared to offer all possible assistance in forming a stable government which will eliminate the necessity for another coup. In this instance, all US intelligence agencies and advisors must be alert to and report cases of dissension and plotting in order to prevent such actions.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that the implementation of the foregoing measures will not be sufficient to exercise a decisive effect on the campaign against the Viet Cong. They are continuing study of the actions suggested in the memorandum of 22 January 1964, as well as other proposals which require further study, and will recommend to you progressively the execution of such actions considered militarily required. Among the subjects to be studied as a matter of urgency are the following: a. Intensified operations against North Vietnam to include air bombings of selected targets.

b. Removal of restrictions for air and ground cross-border operations.

c. Intelligence and reporting.

d. US organizational changes.

e. Increased US Navy participation in shore and river patrol activities.

f. Introduction of jet aircraft into the Vietnamese Air Force and the US Air Commando unit.

g. DOD-CIA relationship changes.

h. Reduction of test and evaluation activities.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor4
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive.

2 See Document 17.

3 On February 18, the Khanh government approved the National Pacification Plan which set forth a combined military, political, and economic offensive against the Viet Cong in two stages. Phase I envisioned a coordinated military and civilian effort to clear territory of the Viet Cong, moving successively from secure and highly populated areas into insecure and less densely populated ones. The concept became known as “spreading the oil drop.” In Phase II, Vietnamese military forces would destroy the Viet Cong in their secret military bases and end the insurgency. The first priority of Phase I was the provinces surrounding Saigon and extending south into the Delta with an estimated completion date of July 1, 1965. The next priority was the remainder of the Delta and certain critical provinces north of Saigon, with a completion date of January 1, 1966. All of Corps I and II, with the exception of VC strongholds reserved for Phase II, were to be pacified by January 1, 1965. JCS Historical Division, The History of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The War in Vietnam. 1960–1968, Part 1, chapter 8, pp. 23–24)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

52. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam (Nes) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) 52. Letter From the Deputy Chief of Mission in Vietnam (Nes) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman)1

Saigon, February 19, 1964.

Dear Roger: I am sending along to you for what it is worth my personal views on Where We Stand in Viet-Nam conveyed to Ambassador Lodge in the enclosed Memorandum. They vary in several important respects from those held by many high ranking American officials far more experienced with the Vietnamese scene than I. In defense of the judgments I have reached, I can only say that I approached VietNam with little previous knowledge but with an open mind and no vested interest in past counterinsurgency policies or operations.

My most disillusioning experience has been with the MACV-MAAG operation which seems to be tailored largely toward providing the U.S. military establishment, within the framework of World War II Conventional Doctrine, organization and weapons, a fertile field for the utilization and promotion of its senior officers rather than as an instrument to deal with guerrilla war. I have an idea that were you and I, with our Burma experience, to take over from the nineteen General officers we have out here, we might put some realism into the military side of our operations against the VC.

I will have a great deal more to say about our Vietnamese adventure as time goes on but you may rest assured that I will say it only through channels, i.e., to you and to Ambassador Lodge.

Sincerely yours,

David

[Enclosure]

Saigon, February 17, 1964.

Memorandum From the Deputy Chief of Mission of the Embassy (Nes) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)2

SUBJECT

Where We Stand in Viet-Nam

The following are my personal views and with particular reference to the French assessment of the SEA situation as conveyed in Deptel 1232, Paris Embtel 3907 to Dept., and as seen by the British, Paris Embtel 3873 to Dept.3

1. Although I have only been directly associated with this area for some two months, my reading of developments over the past year and recent experiences here lead me to fear that General De Gaulle may be right in his belief that we are faced with the choice between accepting the possible collapse of our counter-insurgency efforts here or the escalation of the conflict toward a direct military confrontation of the DRV and China by the U.S.

2. Nothing that I have seen or heard thus far in Saigon leads me to believe that against the background of recent Vietnamese history our counter-insurgency efforts can win through so long as the Viet Cong is backed politically and psychologically and to a lesser extent militarily by Hanoi and Peking.

3. The peasants who form the mass of the South Vietnamese population are exhausted and sick of 20 years of civil conflict. During this entire period they have never and are not now receiving either political leadership or orderly and just administration from the central authorities of the GVN. They have enjoyed little if any social or economic betterment.

4. On the other hand, the Viet Cong represents a grass roots movement which is disciplined, ideologically dedicated, easily identifiable with the desires of the peasantry and of course ruthless. The fact that the VC has the full backing of China is perhaps its most powerful asset in presenting itself as the inevitable winner.

5. I do not see in the present military regime or any conceivable successor much hope in providing the real political and social leadership or the just and effective country-wide administration so essential to the success of our counter-insurgency program.

I think we would be naive in the extreme to believe that any number or quality of American advisors can succeed in changing within a reasonable period of time the attitudes and patterns of thinking of senior Vietnamese military and political officialdom.

6. In developing a large conventional World War II Vietnamese military establishment organized into four Corps and 9–10 divisions with other equally sizable supporting units, we may, in fact, have a Frankenstein on our hands which on the one hand serves little purpose in dealing effectively with the Viet Cong and on the other provides a perfect framework for spawning successive coups and so perpetuating the current political malaise.

7. Against this pessimistic appraisal, I do believe that were the VC to be totally deprived of all outside support, both material and psychological, we would be graced with the most important factor of all in a counter-insurgency effort-namely time. I would estimate very roughly that so deprived, and assuring continued and massive U.S. support for any and all anti-communist regimes which might emerge in Saigon, we might see the VC movement wither away in 5–10 years time.

8. At the same time, if General De Gaulle could be persuaded to change his view re our willingness to escalate our conflict with the Communists throughout SEA, I think his sponsorship of neutralization of South Viet-Nam might also be modified.

9. Finally, should our readiness and willingness to escalate toward a direct confrontation of Hanoi and Peking become obvious by our overt actions throughout the area, I think the tendencies toward neutralism here would rapidly disappear also.

10. In brief, it seems to me that De Gaulle has correctly analyzed the SEA situation if his assumption is correct that we will do no more than continue our present counter-insurgency efforts in South VietNam—these being concentrated on a large team of American military and civilian advisers working through whatever anti-communist regime exists in Saigon and in massive economic and military aid programs extended through such a regime. After two years of the most strenuous efforts by the U.S. along these lines, De Gaulle quite correctly feels that we have achieved little more than a precarious stalemate which in the next weeks, should further coups occur, could disintegrate very rapidly. This is also the conclusion of SNIE 50–64.4

11. Should this in fact happen, we will be faced either with turning the SEA ball game over to De Gaulle in the hope that his policy can salvage something from the wreckage or of rapidly escalating our efforts toward a final military showdown with China.

Recommendations: 1. That we seize every opportunity to warn Washington that escalation may be the only alternative to inevitable neutralization, i.e., the loss of the U.S. political and military position in SEA.

2. That we recommend that De Gaulle be informed in the frankest terms that we will not leave SEA and that we are ready to face a conflict with China to preserve our position here.

3. That we urge the acceleration and expansion of OPS Plan 34A–64.5

1 Source: Department of State, William Bundy Files, WPB Special Papers. Secret; Official-Informal. Hilsman sent a copy of this letter to Forrestal for his information with the following handwritten note: “Another old Burma hand you have to deal with!! R.H.” On March 5, Green sent this copy to the newly-designated Assistant Secretary of State for Ear Eastern Affairs, William Bundy, stating that the letter with its enclosure “presents views you will be interested in.”

2 Secret.

3 These telegrams, February 13, 13, and 14, respectively, described the rationale of the French for their campaign for neutralism of Vietnam and Southeast Asia. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 16 CHICOM, POL 16 CHICOM, and POL VIET S, respectively)

4 See Document 42.

5 See footnote 2, Document 4.

53. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 53. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President1

Saigon, February 19, 1964—6 p.m.

1. In reply to your 1256,2 I believe persistent and patient execution of current civil and military plans will bring victory-provided external pressures would be about as they were when I got here last summer. These pressures come from Communist China, North Viet-Nam, Laos, Cambodia and France, and I believe they have been increasing, although I cannot prove it. Effective steps to lessen, and perhaps eliminate, these pressures would be most helpful.

2. Believe that within Viet-Nam, U.S. is giving enough economic and military assistance with one exception: an increase of funds to pay for the increase in the pay of the Army and of paramilitary forces.3

Lodge4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1583 from Saigon to the Department of State, where it was received at 7:21 a.m. and passed to the White House at 8:30 a.m. Telegram 1583 is the source text.

2 In telegram 1256, February 18, from the President to Ambassador Lodge, Johnson reminded Lodge that it had been 2 weeks since he delivered the President’s personal message to Khanh (see footnote 2, Document 25). The President asked for a report for his own guidance on any further steps the United States should take to be of assistance and, in particular, any additional military or economic assistance Lodge might need to carry out existing or recommended policies. (Ibid., POL 23–9 VIET S)

3 In telegram CAP 64047 from the White House, February 20, Johnson responded that the request for increase in pay would be addressed immediately. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

4 Telegram 1583 bears this typed signature.

54. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, White House 54. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, White House1

Washington, February 20, 1964, 12:17 p.m.

SUBJECT

South Vietnam

The President met today with the Secretaries of State and Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Under Secretary Ball, Director McCone, and the members of Mr. William Sullivan’s committee on policy and operations in South Vietnam.

After an intelligence briefing on the current situation and a full discussion of the work of the committee, the President directed the following actions:

1. Any requests for assistance or other Washington action from Ambassador Lodge should be given prompt and sympathetic response. Such staff work as may be required to back up such requests in Washington should be given the highest priority, so that decisions can be reached quickly.

2. Contingency planning for pressures against North Vietnam should be speeded up. Particular attention should be given to shaping such pressures so as to produce the maximum credible deterrent effect on Hanoi.

3. For the time being, American dependents in Vietnam should be encouraged to accept voluntary repatriation. Early next month, the Secretary of Defense will consult with Ambassador Lodge on whether dependents should be evacuated and will make appropriate recommendations to the President and the Secretary of State upon his return.

4. The Department of State will explore in a positive manner the possibilities opened up by the recent proposals of Prince Sihanouk for a conference in Phnom Penh on the problem of Cambodian neutrality.2

M V Forrestal

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV, Memos and Misc. Secret. Drafted by Forrestal. Copies of this memorandum were sent to Rusk, McNamara, Taylor, McCone, Bell, and Sullivan.

Prepared for this meeting, which lasted 1 hour, was an agenda, annotated by McGeorge Bundy, which reads as follows:

“1. Situation Briefing (5 minutes); 2. Intelligence and Reporting, (A) Cooper Activities, (B) French Activities; 3. Operations, (A) Response to Lodge Message, (B) Policy on Dependents [Bundy wrote at this point “P[resident] prefers”], (C) Other Matters; 4. Diplomatic Problems, (A) Cambodia, (B) Laos, (C) Others; 5. North Viet-Nam, (A) Intelligence [Bundy wrote “increase efforts”], (B) Propaganda [Bundy wrote “increase”], (C) Operations; 6. Planning, (A) Johnson Subcommittee [Bundy wrote “Speed up”], (B) Question of Time Phase.” (Ibid.)

2 See American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, p. 847, footnote 7.

55. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 55. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President1

Saigon, February 20, 1964—8 p.m.

This is in further reply to your 1256.2

1. I believe various pressures can and should be applied to North Viet Nam to cause them to cease and desist from their murderous intrusion into South Viet Nam. I have made detailed recommendations in a memo dated October 30, 1963,3 of which Under Secretary Harriman has a copy, and to which I believe I referred briefly to you when you received me on November 24.4

2. In light of recent terrorism against Americans in Saigon,5 I believe North Viet Nam should be told secretly that every terrorist act against Americans in South Viet Nam will provoke swift retaliation against North Viet Nam.

3. On the basis of knowledge available to me, I do not think this will bring on nuclear war with ChiComs or with anyone. It simply puts U.S. and South Viet Nam on a par with ChiComs and North Viet Nam in the struggle against the Viet Cong. At present, we let them have a sanctuary from which they operate against us, whereas we not only have no sanctuary, but do not operate against them in any significant way.

4. If the above recommendation is adopted, we should consider announcing just before undertaking it that we are evacuating all U.S. dependents. Our announcement should make it crystal clear that this step is being taken because we are cleaning the decks for action and intend to make things tougher for the V.C. Evacuation should not appear to be a frightened response due to Viet Cong terrorism.

5. Believe the South Vietnamese expect us to be brave and that there are big advantages to be gained by not disappointing them.

6. My present policy regarding American dependents is that any American who wishes to leave Viet Nam and return to the U.S. be allowed to do so. I reckon that only a few will want to go but that those who are unhappy here should not be required to stay.

7. In regards U.S. children in Saigon, I am in close touch with parents’ organization whose present attitude is not to close school. They have question under constant review. General Khanh told me this morning he hopes to move school very soon to a more secure location.

8. In answering your telegrams, I am most anxious to keep you fully informed, and at the same time, not give you too much to read. If you wish my wires to be different in length and format, please advise.

Lodge6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1594 from Saigon which is the source text. A note on the White House copy of this telegram indicates that the President saw it. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV, Cables)

2 See footnote 2, Document 53.

3 Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 656–659. Sullivan sent a copy of Lodge’s paper of October 30, 1963, to McNamara on February 24, 1964. (Memorandum from Sullivan to McNamara, February 24; Department of State, Bundy Files, WPB Special Papers, I of II, 1963)

4 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, p. 635–637.

5 Thus far in February, there had been 15 terrorist attacks against Americans, including bombings of a U.S. theater and a softball game in which 5 Americans were killed and over 50, including official dependents, were wounded.

6 Telegram 1594 bears this typed signature.

56. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 56. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, February 22, 1964—5:28 p.m.

I appreciated your 15942 which corresponds to much of my own thinking. Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, with my approval have already begun preparing specific plans for pressure against NVN, both in the diplomatic and military fields. Secretary McNamara will be visiting you early in March to review with you that subject and other aspects of the counter-insurgency campaign. Then or very soon thereafter we should make definite decisions.

I agree that any announcement of the evacuation of dependents must be made in such a way as to show we are getting tougher, not softer, and Bob McNamara will take this up with you also. In the meantime, the policy you have suggested in your paragraph 6 is just what I have already instructed the Departments to implement.

I value these direct exchanges with you on top policy matters. We should keep them up.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1281 to Saigon, which is the source text. McGeorge Bundy sent a draft of this telegram and the text of Lodge’s message, supra, to Palm Springs, California, where the President was vacationing. The text of Bundy’s covering cable to the President reads as follows:

“Next two following messages are an incoming from Lodge on enlarging our effort in North Vietnam and a draft response for the President. I send these now because of the President’s desire to be very quick and effective in responses to Lodge’s messages. The draft answer is being cleared with Rusk and McNamara, and we can get it out as soon as we have the President’s own comments.”

“The memorandum to Harriman which Lodge refers to [see footnote 3, supra] is sensible but tentative in form, and does not show strong advocacy of anything different from what we have been doing. My own notes on the President’s November meeting with Lodge show nothing significant on North Vietnam. We therefore believe that the draft answer is fully responsive, and we assess the incoming message as sincere and reasonable, as far as it goes.” (Telegram CAP 64050, February 21; Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV)

2 Document 55.

3 Telegram 1281 does not bear President Johnson’s signature.

57. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 57. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Chairman of Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)1

Washington, February 21, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

As you are aware, one of the alternatives which is now being reviewed with respect to the situation in Vietnam is a carefully planned program designed to exert increasing military pressures upon the government of North Vietnam, with a view to inducing that government to terminate its support and encouragement of the insurrection in South Vietnam and curtail Pathet Lao activities in Laos. The military pressures which might be applied extend from relatively minor covert activities, which you are already examining, to open GVN or U.S. air or sea non-nuclear attacks upon the DRV.

There are a number of military uncertainties which must be resolved, to the extent possible, before political decisions affecting such military actions can be taken. Accordingly, I should like to have your views upon the following matters: 1. The overall capabilities of the DRV and of the Chinese Communists for military action, with specific reference to: (a) The types and magnitudes of actions which are possible, taking into account current Communist logistic capabilities.

(b) The geographic areas within which such actions might be undertaken.

(c) The time period within which the enemy forces could be brought to bear.

(d) The enemy capability for concurrent reactions, as for example, reactions both in Southeast Asia and in Korea and/or Taiwan off-shore islands.

2. What military actions against North Vietnam, employing air and naval power, but not ground forces beyond the scale of smallscale raids, might be: (a) undertaken by the GVN and within the plausible range of GVN capabilities

(b) assertedly undertaken by the GVN, even if outside the plausible range of GVN capabilities;

(c) undertaken by the U.S. without public acknowledgment;

(d) undertaken by the U.S. along with, or after, a public declaration by the U.S. of an intent to exert military pressure upon the DRV with a view to forcing a termination of the insurrection in the South?

What targets would be most effective to attack from the standpoint of: (a) specific effect on DRV capability against Laos, South Vietnam, and Thailand;

(b) interdiction of main communication routes between the DRV and Communist China, plus interdiction of sea communications into North Vietnam;

(c) more generalized target patterns designed to inflict damage on key installation in the DRV but to minimize the effect on the civilian population as a whole?

While the assessment of the impact of possible courses of action on DRV continued support of operations in South Vietnam and Laos is in large part an intelligence question that should be addressed by intelligence authorities as well, I would appreciate the views of the JCS as to the courses of action under one or more of the above headings that would in your judgment be most likely to bring about cessation of DRV support for operations in South Vietnam and Laos and at the same time be least likely to lead to stepped-up conflict and adverse reactions in third countries.

3. Assuming that, in response to the attacks upon the DRV, the DRV and/or the Chicoms undertake large scale troop movements over the border into one or more of: (a) South Vietnam

(b) Laos

(c) Thailand or Burma

(d) South Korea

(e) Taiwan

What U.S. effort, air, sea, and land, would be required to contain such an invasion? If intelligence indicated that such a movement were contemplated by the enemy, what actions against North Vietnam and mainland China would be likely to deter such a response?

In each of these circumstances, or any likely combination of them, to what extent could the U.S. effectively counter such actions through air and naval responses only (without the use of ground forces other than those presently deployed) utilizing each of the following means: (a) conventional ordnance only:

(b) conventional ordnance plus classified non-nuclear munitions. The degree of increased effectiveness to be expected from the latter should be specified along with the considerations for and against employment.

[Subparagraphs (c) and (d) (5–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

4. Assuming that the Chicom reaction included air action from mainland bases (either against SVN or other air bases, or supporting aircraft carriers) to what extent could this air threat be countered by: (a) actions against enemy aircraft only, without attacks upon mainland bases, or

(b) selective attacks upon the Chinese bases and air defenses utilizing:

(i) Conventional ordnance (plus classified munitions if significantly more effective)

[Subparagraph (ii) (1–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

[Subparagraph (c) (2 lines of source text) not declassified]

5. What modifications must be made in existing contingency plans in order to provide for U.S. reactions which would depend primarily upon air activities rather than the intervention of substantial U.S. ground forces?

In view of the broad scope of these questions, I believe that the JCS will wish to create a special planning unit that can devote itself exclusively to these problems on a continuing basis. I appreciate that a detailed response may require a longer time, but believe that we must have your preliminary judgment on these questions for consideration prior to our anticipated departure for South Vietnam about 4 March. Accordingly, I would appreciate it if a preliminary response could be available for discussion with me not later than Monday, March 2. Our review at that time will almost certainly uncover additional questions and refinements that would form the basis for the next phase of the examination.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, Vietnam 092. Top Secret. Attached to the source text was a covering memorandum from William Bundy to McNamara, February 21, which reads as follows:

“The attached memorandum, prepared in response to your request, will obtain JCS views on a number of critical questions affecting our actions in Vietnam. The answers will also be helpful to the work of the Sullivan Committee. We have coordinated this request with the Joint Staff.”

58. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harking) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 58. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Harking) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)1

Saigon, February 21, 1964—4:15 p.m.

MAC 665. Subj: CAS third appraisal.2 Ref JCS 734, DTG 182258Z Feb.3

1. Except for the spectacular and eye catching lead sentence, I have no quarrel with most of the statements contained in the CAS survey team appraisal. Where the statements are clean-cut, the supporting information was usually provided by my field personnel and reflected in reports already sent to Washington by this headquarters. Where the statements are sweeping, they are based on opinion or an unfortunate penchant for generalizing from the specific. My detailed comments follow and are geared to the specific paragraphs of the CAS message. A. Area vs. People. Since August there has been a steady, gradual erosion of GVN control of territory, this erosion has become progressively worse and more noticeable subsequent to 1 Nov 63. In 23 RVN provinces the VC dominate in over 50 percent of the area. Report is in error where it states Binh Duong is 80 percent VC controlled; degree of control by VC is 45 percent. However, Phnoc Tuy in which the area is over 80 percent controlled by the VC is not mentioned in the report. All this has been reported by MACV. It is still considered here that GVN control is complete or predominant over 70 percent of the people in the rural area, while VC control is complete or predominant over 18 Percent. There is another 3 percent over which neither GVN nor VC have dominance. Then there are also the 1,687,000 in the major cities which are definitely under GVN control.

B. National level direction of most, but not all, programs has been weak since 1 November. It is difficult to have direction without an effective government. Khanh, however, is meeting now with [regarding?] a national pacification plan today or by Monday. The effectiveness of military operations may be low but they do proceed according to the national plan and are certainly not without direction. It is logical for the corps to do the derivative planning within assigned areas and to direct and control the operations of its major subordinate units. The divisions within a given corps face different problems in terms of terrain, enemy and population. As regards military civic actions, the program began to get excellent backing in early January to include directives to the field and addresses by top members of the MRC. In a sharp departure from prior practices, twenty million plasters were allocated to the corps for military civic actions. Officials charged with administering the Chieu Hoi program are convinced it will become functional again under General Khanh’s leadership.

C. E. F. Concur with contents. In this connection; see US Mission monthly status reports for December and January respectively; Section V and Annex X thereto of US Mission quarterly evaluation for period ending [end?] of December, and pare 6E, MACV headway reports since 8 January.4

D. The experienced Embassy official assigned to monitor and support youth activities states it is not entirely accurate to say that GVN is inactive in their appeal to youth since active programs are carried on by USIS and USOM with the active cooperation of appropriate ministries of GVN. It is true there are no programs carried on to the vast extent of the Cong Hoa or Combatant Youth under the Diem regime. As a matter of fact, GVN propaganda mechanisms are quite active. The statement that “no newspapers are produced outside of Saigon” is not only ill-advised, but false. For example, 183 village district newspapers are operating (of the 200 programmed by USOM). The average circulation per newspaper is 450 three times weekly. These are widely read as demonstrated by requests received last week from Kien Giang, Kian Hoa, and Chaong Thzen for additional paper supplies to increase circulation. Kien Quoc, a provincial newspaper, is produced in four different editions weekly for the key provinces of Quang Ngai, Tay Ninh, Binh Duong and Long An with a provincial circulation of 35,000 each. Periodicals are numerous; for the population alone, USIS produces Huong Que (Rural Life-125,000 copies monthly) and Gioi Tu Do (Free World-150,000 copies monthly) aimed at the student population.

G. The statement “presence of Russian-designed carbines” is misleading. It is true that originally the carbine was Russian-designed—20 years ago. However, the weapon in question is ChiCom PE 53 carbine, which is obsolete in the Chinese Communist army. No knowledge here of Czech submachine guns. Reference is probably to ChiCom 7.62 mm modified K–50 submachine guns. ARVN has a habit of calling this weapon Czech. No information available in this headquarters regarding VC abandonment of weapons during the incident in Quang Tri; it is very unlikely this happened, since VC are not that fat in weapons. The friendly forces are not outmanned & outgunned by the enemy in IV Corps, although certain VC elements in this area such as the 96th and 306th Battalions are considered well trained, aggressive and competent units and they have given good accounts of themselves in several instances. The VC through massing of forces can achieve temporary numerical superiority in areas of their choosing but overall they cannot approximate the RVN strength in either manpower or materiel. The heaviest weapon of the VC is the 81 mm mortar. The VC [have] no 105 or 155 howitzers, no APC’s or armored cars, no support aircraft and no heavy river craft.

H. Concur.

2. As a general comment this message appears to be a combination of rehashing old information previously reported, plus the reporting of unevaluated individual observations not necessarily in consonance with an overall analysis of the situation in a division tactical area. I am concerned over the disregard of the terms of reference for this group that is demonstrated by the scope of this report. JCS message 362–64 [?] January 1964,5 indicates that the role of this group is to “assist in developing techniques to improve [less than 1 1ine of source text not declassified] intelligence collection.” This example of unilateral reporting on matters outside their quarter and competency, without the benefit of the advice of this headquarters and other interested agencies can only be detrimental to the achievement of a joint, inter-agency intelligence effort and more important, is likely to introduce misleading, if not incorrect, information into the national decision making process.

We have nothing to hide but do have updated info on many of the problems covered by the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] team report, and feel that such reports should be coordinated before being dispatched.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, South Vietnam. Top Secret; Eyes Only. The JCS sent copies of this cable to McNamara, Gilpatric, Anthis, and William Bundy.

2 Document 50.

3 In this telegram, the Joint Chiefs requested Harkins’ views on the third appraisal. (National Archives and Records Administration. RG 213. ICS Files)

4 None found.

5 Not printed. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files)

59. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 59. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President1

Saigon, February 22, 1964—2 p.m.

This is in further reply to your 1256.2

1. In my 15833 I mentioned the external threats to Viet-Nam and the steps which should be taken internally. In my 15944 I referred in detail to steps which should be taken with regard to North Viet-Nam. In this telegram, I suggest steps to be taken with regard to France.

2. Because French is by all odds the Western language which the largest number of Vietnamese possess the best and because they have many personal relationships with individual French people, General De Gaulle’s declaration on neutralism is having a demoralizing effect on the will to win of both senior and junior officers, and of the politically conscious population generally which is quite out of proportion to French power here which is actually quite skimpy. It starts a line of thought which runs: “It was Laos last year; this year it will be Cambodia; and next year it will be us.” Obviously such thinking does not make for bravery and for hard fighting. To this psychological campaign is added the activity of French agents; Gen. Khanh’s statement to me which is yet to be verified that these agents have conspired with the Viet Cong terrorists during the last week; and reports that some of the explosives which have been found near the theater and the stadium in which Americans were wounded and killed were of French origin. All of this can have a potentially very dangerous effect on Franco-American relations, and they create a totally false and dangerous emphasis here in Viet-Nam. I firmly believe that conditions are fundamentally much worse in North Viet-Nam than they are here. Yet, due in large part to De Gaulle’s public utterances and the work of French agents, this community is concentrated on itself and its own fears instead of taking the initiative against an enemy which is having a very hard time in many ways.

3. I suggest, therefore, that General De Gaulle be told that all men of good will obviously desire the end of the Viet Cong war and the creation of a Vietnamese state which is not a satellite, which is free and independent and which is strong enough to be neutral if it wants to be. There is no disagreement about the goal, but simply as to how we are to achieve it. The following questions therefore arise: a. How can so called “neutralization” be attained if the aggressor is determined not to be neutralized, as is obviously the case as regards North Viet-Nam?

b. South Viet-Nam is experiencing a change of government after a period of deterioration with an inevitable temporarily adverse effect on the war effort. Obviously, the word “negotiation” makes no sense when one side is much weaker than the other. Under these circumstances, there is no negotiation; there is simply an ultimatum and a capitulation. If France had gone to a “neutralizing” conference in 1943, for example, it would merely have confirmed the occupation by the German army. VC activity is not as devastating as was German occupation, but the comparison is applicable. How then can South Viet-Nam go respectably to an international conference when she is weak on the battlefield, and when to go to an international conference under those conditions is to go to inevitable defeat?

c. How can one avoid the conclusion that a chief of state who talks about neutrality at such a time is lessening the will to win of the Viet-Nam army and would thus bring Viet-Nam to a conference weaker than she is already?

d. In view of the fact General De Gaulle must be aware of the above, why does he speak of neutralism at the worst possible time from the standpoint of a truly just solution thus directly helping the Communists and why does he speak publicly of something which should not be public at all, but which should be the subject of a very secret declaration to North Viet-Nam, accompanied by effective pressures of many different kinds?

4. I suggest this one question be then put to him: “Believing you to be a man of good will who would not intentionally work to destroy the RVN or the vital interests of U.S., I, President Johnson, ask you to make a public statement making it clear that your remarks about neutralism were not meant to apply to the present time.”

Lodge5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1606 from Saigon, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt at the Department of State.

2 See footnote 2, Document 53.

3 Document 53.

4 Document 55

5 Telegram 1606 bears this typed signature.

60. Telegram From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Smith) to the President, at Palm Springs, California 60. Telegram From the Executive Secretary of the National Security Council (Smith) to the President, at Palm Springs, California1

Washington, February 22, 1964.

There follows another pair of messages from and to Lodge. The first is a long and important proposal for dealing with the French.2 The second is an interim answer3 which we will send as soon as the President approves.

This is the trickiest area yet opened in this dialog, and I am working with Sullivan and Tyler to prepare alternatives for President and Secretary on their return. Meanwhile, they will probably wish to discuss the matter together. (Message from Lodge)

(Draft answer to Lodge from the President follows.)

“Your 1606 has been relayed to me in California. Dean Rusk and I will talk about it here. Let me say at once that we entirely agree with the purpose of your recommendation and that the problem is simply to find the right ways and means of getting the French to understand the damage done by their current position. Ambassador Bohlen has tried repeatedly on this, but I agree with you that we must leave no stone unturned in this effort.”4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Also sent to Rusk in Palm Springs. The source text is the copy Smith sent to the Department of State as White House telegram CAP 64056, February 22. No time of transmission appears on the original message, but CAP 64056 was received in the Department of State at 1:49 p.m.

2 Document 59.

3 See below.

4 The reply as it was approved in slightly different form reads as follows:

“Your 1606 has been relayed to me in California. Let me say at once that Secretary Rusk and Ambassador Bohlen have probed the French repeatedly to impress upon them futility and danger of empty talk of neutralization of South Viet Nam. We will keep at the French end of it and wish to be informed of any evidence local French activity cutting across our efforts.”

“We must expend every effort and mobilize every resource to get Viet Nam strong enough to be independent and feared by any aggressor. We believe that your leadership can make this the driving zeal of every American working with the Vietnamese and that a dedicated and united effort on the American side can inspire them and impress Hanoi with the danger of pursuing its present course.” (Telegram CAP 64058, February 22; Department of State, Central Files, PER-Taylor, Maxwell)

61. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Secretary of State 61. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, February 25, 1964.

Mr. Read has asked for my comments on Walt Rostow’s paper entitled, “Habana and Hanoi.”2 You will appreciate that I have no competence to make any observations on the Venezuela-Cuba situation and will therefore address my remarks exclusively to the corollary problem which we face in Viet Nam.

First, as I know Mr. Rostow agrees, action against North Viet Nam can never be a substitute for the hard, grubby job of routing out the Viet Cong in the areas where they have established themselves in the South. Despite the fact that they have control, direction, and a certain amount of supply from the North, the Viet Cong, especially in the Delta areas, have a sustaining strength of their own. Therefore, any action which might be taken against the North must be designed to bring the problem in the South within manageable dimensions and not in the vain hope that it can be eliminated purely by pressure on Hanoi.

Secondly, it seems to me that we have to give explicit and active attention to the Soviets. If we propose any moves in North Viet Nam, we should at the same time consider how we can neutralize Soviet reaction. I feel, without having gone into this in detail, that such neutralization might require a fairly broad “peace offensive” erected against the Soviets on matters nearest to the heart, such as Germany, trade, credits, etc. In other words, if we are going to produce a reaction from the North Vietnamese and the Chinese, we should at the same time be actively dangling before the Soviets some reasons for them to look the other way.

Therefore it would seem to me hardly propitious for us to consider simultaneous action in North Viet Nam and in Cuba, no matter how thoroughly we attempt to dissemble either event as being of indigenous origin. Soviet prestige is very actively engaged in Cuba, not only in its confrontation with the U.S. but also in its conflict with the Chinese. Therefore any prospects we might have of deflecting Soviet attention from a more active policy in North Viet Nam would, in my opinion, be seriously compromised by engaging the Soviets simultaneously in the Caribbean.

I believe that if we decide upon more active measures with respect to both Hanoi and Habana, we should undertake them in separate sequence. and with very carefully tailored parallel steps in other directions.

W. H. Sullivan

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET N. Secret; Sensitive. Copies were sent to U. Alexis Johnson and Rostow.

2 Rostow’s paper, February 22, dealt primarily with potential U.S. responses to the discovery of Cuban weapons in Venezuela. Rostow suggested that after reconnaissance and a leaflet drop by U.S. aircraft, Venezuelan military aircraft attack a Cuban target as a reprisal. Rostow then drew a parallel with Vietnam as follows:

“The same principle might be applied in North Viet Nam; that is, if our first overt acts of violence in the north were against targets directly related to North Viet Nam aggression against the south (for example, the Vinh radio station), we could share in the warning leaflet drop, ride high-cover and deal with any escalation, while the South Viet Nam air force would actually attack the chosen target or targets. Once again, this would dramatize the principle at work; be consistent with the notion that our objective is to help the South Vietnamese defend their independence, and that we were merely protectors of that principle, in conformance with the 1954 treaty; and make it somewhat easier for Mao to keep out of the act; although, once again, we cannot go into this without being prepared for escalation.”

Rostow also thought that military action against Cuba might “carry enough conviction in Hanoi and elsewhere that the mere massing of our forces in Southeast Asia would, against that background, be a credible demonstration that we were prepared to act against the north.” (Ibid., S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam)

62. Editorial Note 62. Editorial Note

At a news conference on February 29, 1966, President Johnson announced that William P. Bundy was replacing Roger Hilsman as Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs. The President also answered questions on Vietnam. For the complete transcript of the news conference, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book I, pages 322–329. Bundy became Assistant Secretary-designate on March 10 and was approved by the Senate on March 16.

63. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 63. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, February 29, 1964—8:43 p.m.

340. For Ambassador from Secretary. Re your 1601.2 As result your telegram, we requested Ambassador Bohlen to submit his advice as to what we might usefully say to DeGaulle and urged that every effort be made to comply with your request.

Bohlen has now replied,3 stating that in his view the most effective approach in Paris at present is through Couve de Murville, and we are now instructing him to conduct such an approach along the lines you suggest, especially to see whether a public statement clarifying French policy in Viet-Nam is possible. If this approach does not succeed, Bohlen suggests that he should come back here for consultation. President is authorizing Bohlen to approach Couve as he recommends, and depending on Couve’s response we will consider further aspects of Bohlen’s proposal.

Herve Alphand requested to see me today and affirmed (a) France is not engaged in conspiracy in Southeast Asia against US effort, (b) France remains solidly anti-communist and this applies to Southeast Asia, (c) France does not wish to see military effort in South Viet-Nam fail, (d) There is no understanding between Paris and Peiping regarding Southeast Asia, (e) France wishes to keep in closest consultation with US on Southeast Asian matters.4

Clearly we must evaluate this in light of further discussions with French, and implications of some of their recent actions and statements.

Let me repeat that we share your sense of urgency about improving French public position.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy and Rusk and cleared and initialed by Rusk. Attached to a copy of this telegram at the Johnson Library is a note from Read to Bundy indicating that this telegram “is the substance of what the Secretary and the President agreed to at lunch today.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV)

2 This reference is in error and should be to either telegram 1606, Document 59 or to telegram 1613 from Saigon, February 24, in which Lodge reported information from a “very authoritative source that GVN intends to break off relations with France because they think France is going to recognize Hanoi and break with GVN, and they want to beat them to it.” In telegram 1613, Lodge again suggested that De Gaulle be convinced to issue a brief public statement saying that his earlier calls for neutralism in Southeast Asia did not apply to the present time. A De Gaulle statement of this kind would, in Lodge’s opinion, prevent the potential break in relations between South Vietnam and France and discourage neutralist tendencies in South Vietnam which were sapping the war effort. (Department of State, Central Files, POL FR–VIET S)

Telegram 1601 from Saigon, February 20, reported on a ceremonial call by Lodge, Felt, and Harkins on General Minh. (Ibid., POL 15–1 VIET S; published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 216B.

3 In telegram 4061 from Paris, February 26. In addition to recommending an approach through Couve de Murville, Bohlen stated that going through De Gaulle would only produce vague and ambiguous statements and would convince de Gaulle that he had forced the United States to throw itself on his mercy. Bohlen also said that De Gaulle did not have an operational or general plan for a neutralized Vietnam and might even be considering temporary Communist control of all Vietnam from which a Yugoslavia-like Vietnam would emerge. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 The memorandum of conversation of this meeting, February 28, 3:30 p.m., is ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330.

64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 64. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, March 1, 1964—6:30 p.m.

5534. Please pass following message from Secretary to Foreign Secretary:

“Thank you very much for your message of February 29 about South Viet-Nam.”2

“Let me say at once that we will keep in closest touch with you about further developments in that area. The Viet Cong have obviously attempted to take maximum advantage of changes of government in Saigon and the dislocations which these changes inevitably produce. Whether this increased effort on their part can be sustained over any period of time is not yet clear but there is no doubt that there is a deterioration of morale and effectiveness on the South Viet-Nam side. McNamara’s visit will attempt to sort out just where the problems are and what might be done to deal with them.”

“As we see it there are three broad alternatives before us in South Viet-Nam. We could withdraw and leave Southeast Asia to the communists. We could continue on our present course and do everything possible to assist the South Viet-Namese to win their own war. We could escalate the war by positive and direct military pressures on Hanoi. I can assure you that the second course is the one we greatly prefer. We cannot adopt the first course, with its calamitous results for the entire free world, and the third course is obviously one which would be turned to with the greatest reluctance.”

“We are not convinced that the second course has exhausted its possibilities. We shall do everything we can to make it succeed. Unfortunately, there is not the sense of solidarity in the free world which would give this course the greatest chance of success. The recognition of Peiping by Paris clearly signals to Peiping that their course of militancy pays dividends. The talk of neutralization is phony, given the fact that there is not the slightest indication that North Viet-Nam is interested in breaking away from the communist camp. If neutralization simply means that the US abandons its support of South VietNam, then neutralization is a formula for a communist takeover of Southeast Asia. We have repeatedly said to the other side that if they want to get American forces out of Southeast Asia the way to do it is to leave their neighbors alone.”

“I should like to put to you the dividends of concentrating very hard on Laos at this point. If the Geneva Accords of 1962 were to be fully implemented, the situation in South Viet-Nam would be drastically improved. In Laos we have a firm and flat commitment from the Soviet Union as well as solemn commitments from Hanoi and Peiping. Surely on this even Paris can act with complete solidarity with you and us and other free world countries. The Viet Minh presence in Laos and the free use of Laos as an avenue of infiltration into South VietNam are unacceptable violations of the Accords of 1962. Perhaps you could stimulate Paris to give forceful and public support to those Accords and to make it quite clear that all of us in the free world are determined on performance. I feel that we in Washington are in a position to insist upon this because, as you will recall, we went a long way to meet Paris in working out the Accords of 1962 and in accepting and supporting Souvanna Phouma as the Prime Minister. I can tell you that we are much concerned about attitudes expressed by Ambassador Millet who seems to think that General Phouma is the problem and that Souvanna Phouma ought to make his peace at any price with the Pathet Lao. This I suppose is consistent with the view expressed to us since 1961 by Paris that France will not commit a single soldier to Southeast Asia.”

“In any event, the purpose of this message is to let you know that we shall certainly keep in touch before any new or important decisions are made about courses of action in Southeast Asia other than those on which we are now embarked.”

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Drafted and approved by Rusk and cleared with Tyler, Green, and Sullivan.

2 The message asked for clarification of press stories that the United States was contemplating some form of offensive policy toward North Vietnam and asked for “some advance inkling” of U.S. plans and intentions so that the British Government could concert with the United States on a line to take in public. (Ibid.)

65. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 65. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, March 2, 1964.

JCSM–168–64

SUBJECT

Removal of Restrictions for Air and Ground Cross-Border Operations

1. By JCSM–136–64, dated 18 February 1964, subject: “Vietnam and Southeast Asia (U),”2 the Joint Chiefs of Staff forwarded recommendations for certain steps to be taken immediately to revitalize the counterinsurgency campaign in South Vietnam. That memorandum advised that other actions were also under study, among which was the subject removal of existing restrictions related to ground and air cross-border operations. This memorandum contains the views and recommendations of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on that subject.

2. While our available hard intelligence does not reveal the exact dimensions of the infiltration of men and materials into South Vietnam from the North, and the true extent to which the Viet Cong and their North Vietnamese supporters are utilizing sanctuaries in Laos and Cambodia, there is mounting evidence that these are of such proportions as to constitute an increasingly important factor in the war. Modern weapons of Chinese communist origin, including recoilless rifles and quadruple-mounted heavy machine guns, are appearing in the hands of the Viet Cong in South Vietnam in increasing numbers, partially offsetting the tactical advantage we have derived heretofore from the use of air mobility and armored personnel carriers. Viet Cong military capabilities are growing significantly in terms of well trained, well armed, and well directed hard core units, indicating the extent and effectiveness of the support being provided by Hanoi in terms of arms, equipment, trained cadre, and operational direction. There is evidence that small Viet Cong units have used Cambodia as a sanctuary for a considerable period of time. Additionally, there has occurred recently an incident wherein a battalion-sized Viet Cong unit, several hundred strong, after making a devastating attack, withdrew into their inviolable sanctuary in Cambodia. All our experience in counterinsurgency indicates that when the insurgents enjoy the advantage of such sanctuaries and support across international borders, their elimination will be a most difficult, if not impossible, task.

3. In the face of the serious menace to our ultimate victory represented by the above, we continue to operate under the limitations of self-imposed restrictions. These restrictions are outlined in Appendix A hereto.3 Their effect is to deny to ourselves and our South Vietnamese Allies the essential means to satisfy urgent military requirements for interdiction of infiltration routes, pursuit, and destruction of enemy forces who take refuge in their sanctuaries across the borders.

4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the time has come to lift the restrictions which limit the effectiveness of our military operations. Certain military operations across the borders of Laos and Cambodia are considered essential to successful prosecution of war. Specifically, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that authority be sought for the conduct of operations as described in Appendix B hereto4 which have been proposed by the Commander in Chief, Pacific. An analysis of the military benefits to be gained versus the possible risks involved is also contained in Appendix B.

5. Since the actions considered here represent only one segment of the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommendations in relation to revitalizing the Vietnamese campaign, it is suggested that this paper be held and considered in connection with the other papers bearing on the Vietnamese campaign.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor5
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive.

2 Document 51.

3 Not printed.

4 In Appendix B, not printed, the JCS recommended that the South Vietnamese adopt a policy of hot pursuit of hostile Viet Cong forces into the Demilitarized Zone, Cambodia, and Laos, and that U.S. advisers be allowed to accompany them; also that the 2d U.S. Air Division be allowed hot pursuit on the same basis. In addition, the JCS recommended low-level reconnaissance of Laos and Cambodia by U.S. aircraft, encouragement of overt operations by South Vietnam against the Viet Cong in Laos (with U.S. advisers and cooperation with friendly Lao forces), and covert ground operations into Cambodia.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

66. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 66. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, March 2, 1964.

JCSM–174–64

SUBJECT

Vietnam

1. This memorandum responds to your memorandum, dated 21 February 1964, subject as above.2 For purposes of clarity, each question in your memorandum has been repeated and underlined,3 followed by the answer thereto. The response to the separate portions of your memorandum follow: a. The over-all capabilities of the DRV and of the Chinese Communists for military action, with specific reference to: (1) The types and magnitudes of actions which are possible, taking into account current Communist logistic capabilities.

(2) The geographic areas within which such actions might be undertaken.

(3) The time period within which the enemy forces could be brought to bear.

(4) The enemy capability for concurrent reactions, as for example, reactions both in Southeast Asia and in Korea and/or Taiwan offshore islands.

Answer: Over-all capabilities of the DRV and ChiCom follow: (a) It is currently estimated that 13 ChiCom infantry divisions, less heavy artillery and armor, plus nine DRV divisions could be logistically supported during the dry season (November–May) in initial moves against Southeast Asian countries. (b) It is currently estimated that the ChiCom Air Force, by redeploying and operating from airfields in South China, Hainan, and North Vietnam, could make available about 400 jet fighters and 125 jet light bombers for operations in Southeast Asia.

(c) The ChiCom naval capabilities include harassing tactics by PT boats, mining operations, and possibly some submarine activity (four to six maintained on station).

(d) With regard to logistic support of DRV/ChiCom aggression in Southeast Asia, the onset of the wet season will bring about a considerable reduction in the capability to support large-scale offensive operations. Further study will be necessary to determine specifics.

(e) The ChiComs have the capability to launch limited ground and/or air attacks concurrently in widely separated areas such as Southeast Asia, South Korea, and Taiwan. However, logistic limitations severely restrict their ability to sustain a major land, sea, and air campaign in more than one area. By concentrating their efforts in any geographic area, they could mount a major campaign comprising land, sea, and air forces as indicated in Appendix C.4

b. What military actions against North Vietnam, employing air and naval power, but not ground forces beyond the scale of small-scale raids, might be: (1) undertaken by the GVN and within the plausible range of GVN capabilities;

(2) assertedly undertaken by the GVN, even if outside the plausible range of GVN capabilities;

(3) undertaken by the US without public acknowledgment;

(4) undertaken by the US along with, or after, a public declaration by the US of an intent to exert military pressure upon the DRV with a view to forcing a termination of the insurrection in the South?

Answer: Military pressures can be applied to North Vietnam in the form of air strikes, amphibious raids, sabotage operations, and a naval blockade. The Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF) have a very limited capability to conduct air strikes, amphibious raids, and sabotage operations in North Vietnam. By the utilization of nonattributable air support, e.g., Farmgate-type operations, the VNAF air effort could be intensified and expanded for conducting air strikes against LOCs, military installations, and industrial targets. With respect to Farmgate, augmentation with the B–57 jet aircraft, as recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will greatly enhance its capability. The introduction of US air and naval elements, even though not openly acknowledged, would permit further selective destruction of the above targets. Openly announcing US intentions would provide more freedom of action for using military force in achieving clearly stated limited objectives. More detailed information is contained in Appendix A. 4 Additionally, a scenario (Appendix B) 4 has been developed which outlines those actions necessary to the accomplishment of a program of increasing pressures against North Vietnam.

c. What targets would be most effective to attack from the standpoint of: (1) specific effect on DRV capability against Laos, South Vietnam, and Thailand;

(2) interdiction of main communications routes between the DRV and Communist China, plus interdiction of sea communications into North Vietnam;

(3) more generalized target patterns designed to inflict damage on key installations in the DRV but to minimize the effect on the civilian population as a whole?

Answer: Targets, the destruction of or damage to which would have the most effect on DRV operations against Laos, South Vietnam, and Thailand, include airfields, POL storage facilities, bridges, and military installations. Interdiction attack in Laos and North Vietnam would assist in reducing support to the Pathet Lao and the Viet Minh/Viet Cong. In addition, sustained interdiction attacks of specified railroad facilities, roads, and water routes would disrupt ChiCom support of the DRV. The destruction of selected industrial facilities and power plants will further reduce DRY’s war-supporting capability. Targets have been selected in terms of key installations, minimizing destruction to the population as a whole. The treatment of target systems is contained in Appendix A. Annex to Appendix A lists representative targets by category and order of attack within category.

d. Assuming that, in response to the attacks upon the DRV, the DRV and/or the ChiComs undertake large-scale troop movements over the border into one or more of: (1) South Vietnam

(2) Laos

(3) Thailand or Burma

(4) South Korea

(5) Taiwan

What US effort, air, sea, and land, would be required to contain such an invasion? If intelligence indicated that such a movement were contemplated by the enemy, what actions against North Vietnam and mainland China would be likely to deter such a response?5

Answer: The ChiComs/DRV would be unable to undertake large-scale military actions in more than one area at a time due to logistic limitations and availability of forces, although military pressures might be exerted in several areas. US forces required to counter aggression in each of the areas listed in your memorandum are set forth in Appendix D.6 In addition, certain actions (such as making clear to the DRV and the ChiComs our limited objectives, alerting and deploying US forces, U.S. Assessment of the Khanh Government 115 and increasing reconnaissance programs in pertinent areas) may deter such responses on the part of the DRV and ChiComs. These actions are treated further in Appendix D.

e. In each of the circumstances in subparagraph d above, or any likely combination of them, to what extent could the US effectively counter such actions through air and naval responses only (without the use of ground forces other than those presently deployed) under several alternatives as to weapons employed?

Answer: (a) In the broad application of land and sea based air power, nonnuclear attacks may not cause the ChiCom/DRV to cease aggression; however, nuclear attacks would have a far greater probability of causing them to desist. Sea power would be most effective in the form of a blockade, but would require imposition for a considerable time before it would have a marked effect on ChiCom/DRV aggressive operations. Other naval actions such as an amphibious feint could be used to supplement the effect of the blockade. Use of classified conventional munitions in an air and naval response would tend to increase the effectiveness of such response on a sortie-by-sortie basis. However, there is relatively little advantage to the use of classified munitions against hard targets. An expanded treatment is contained in Appendix D.

(b) The Joint Chiefs of Staff emphasize that in initiating actions against the DRV there must be a readiness and willingness on the part of the United States to follow through with appropriate contingency plans to counter DRV/ChiCom reaction as required. Also listed in Appendix D are certain related military measures which should be accomplished to improve the US military readiness posture to execute contingency plans. The most important of these is the deployment of US air strike and air defense units to Thailand and South Vietnam as necessary. An attack carrier strike force is available to move within striking distance of North Vietnam.

f. Assuming that ChiCom reaction included air action from mainland bases (either against SVN or other air bases, or supporting aircraft carriers), to what extent could this air threat be countered by: actions against enemy aircraft only or selective attacks against Chinese bases and air defenses utilizing conventional or alternatively low yield nuclear weapons employed to minimize both collateral damage and fallout?

Answer: With respect to air defense, the air defense capabilities in Southeast Asia, Taiwan, Japan, and Korea are inadequate to cope with saturation attacks. Accordingly, enemy air should not be permitted to operate from sanctuaries, but should be attacked at the sources. However, occasional air attacks on Saigon and similar key localities must be anticipated. Additional study is required to provide specific data requested in your memorandum.

g. What modifications must be made in existing contingency plans in order to provide for US reactions which depend primarily upon air activities rather than the intervention of substantial US ground forces?

Answer: (a) CINCPAC operation plans provide for the application of military power against the DRV and ChiComs. These are: i. Plan 33—provides for overt employment of US forces in retaliatory attacks against North Vietnam.

ii. Plan 34–A—provides for RVNAF military operations in North Vietnam.

iii. Plan 99—provides for overt employment of US forces in military operations designed to stabilize the situation in Laos and South Vietnam.

iv. Plan 94—provides for overt operations employing US forces in air strikes against a ChiCom nuclear production facility.

v. Plan 32—provides for the over-all defense of Southeast Asia.7

(b) While CINCPAC has numerous plans which call for substantial US air effort in conjunction with the intervention of US ground forces, there are no specific plans based solely on air and naval responses which apply to all of the situations contained in this paper. The Joint Chiefs of Staff will direct the preparation of such plans as required.

h. The view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as to the courses of action that would most likely bring about cessation of DRV support for operations in South Vietnam and Laos.

Answer: (a) US intentions and resolve to extend the war as necessary should be made clear immediately by overt military actions against the DRV.

(b) Military actions should be part of a coordinated diplomatic, military, and psychological program directed at deterring the enemy and preparing the world for extension of the war.

(c) We should prepare military actions, one in the form of a sudden blow for shock effect, another in the form of ascending order of severity with increasing US participation; the purpose of both being to bring about cessation of DRV support of the insurgency.

(d) Initial military preparations should provide for: i. Overt demonstrations of US intentions through US low level aerial reconnaissance over Laos and North Vietnam.

ii. Expansion of RVN activities including Farmgate aircraft, into North Vietnam by: (Outlined in Appendix A.) 1. Air strikes

2. Amphibious raids

3. Sabotage

4. Harassment of shipping and fishing activities.

(e) Preparation should be initiated by the US and GVN for: i. Increasing the intensity of efforts against the DRV by: 1. Armed reconnaissance along the principal supply routes from DRV to Laos.

2. Destruction of: (i) Highway bridges along the principal supply routes from DRV to Laos.

(ii) Military targets in DRV and Laos which directly support the insurgency.

(iii) Airfields in DRV which are used for aerial resupply to Laos.

(iv) POL installations and major LOC facilities between China and DRV in North Vietnam.

(v) Industrial base targets in the Hanoi/Haiphong area.

3. Mine laying in selected areas.

4. Conducting cross-border operations.

5. Undertaking a maritime blockade of DRV

2. An assessment of enemy reactions to the military actions listed above indicates that the Chinese communists view Laos and South Vietnam as DRV problems. It is unlikely that the ChiComs would introduce organized ground units in significant numbers into the DRV, Laos, or Cambodia except as part of an over-all campaign against all of Southeast Asia. They might offer the DRV fighter aircraft, AAA units, and volunteers. They would assume an increased readiness posture and ChiCom aircraft might be committed to the defense of North Vietnam. The Soviets would probably be highly concerned over possible expansion of the conflict. To the extent that Moscow believed the Hanoi and Peiping regimes in jeopardy, Sino-Soviet differences would tend to submerge. It is believed that Moscow would initiate no action which, in the Soviet judgment, would increase the likelihood of nuclear war. The appraisal of possible enemy reaction is contained in Appendix C.

3. The foregoing discussion provides the preliminary judgments of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as you have requested; however, they desire to reaffirm the view expressed by memorandum to you, dated 22 January 1964,8 concerning the overriding importance to the security interests of the United States of preventing the loss of RVN. The North Vietnamese direction and support of the insurgency in the RVN is one of the controlling factors in the continuation of the war. Accordingly, intensified operations are warranted and essential at this time to convince both the DRV and ChiCom leadership of our resolution to prevail.

4. It is recognized that the program of intensified operations contemplated herein involves a change in US policy. Nevertheless, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that those actions described in paragraph 1h above be approved as a basis for discussion and planning with US and GVN officials in your forthcoming visit to Southeast Asia.9 In making this recommendation, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that even if success attends our efforts to cause the DRV to desist from aiding the Viet Cong, the latter can by their own efforts sustain the insurgency for an indeterminate period at a reduced level.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Military Plans Against NVN, March 1964. Top Secret; Sensitive.

2 Document 57.

3 Printed here in italic type.

4 Not printed.

5 At this point, McNamara wrote the following note in the margin: “air strikes at 1) ChiCom airfields 2) lines of supply. Why not assume massive use of US air both B47’s & sea based & land based in SVN.”

6 Not printed.

7 Regarding OPLAN 34A, see footnote 2, Document 4. The text of OPLAN 99–64 is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. 11, Memos (B), 5/64–6/64. OPLAN 32–64 is ibid., Memos (A), 5/64–6/64. Texts of OPLAN 32–64 and OPLAN 94–64 are in the National Archives and Records Administration. RG 218, JCS Files.

8 See Document 17.

9 At this point, McNamara wrote in the margin: “OK, fuller use of massive U.S. air power in lieu of US gd forces.”

67. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of Defense 67. Memorandum Prepared in the Department of Defense1

Washington, March 2, 1964.

SUMMARY STATEMENT ON SOUTH VIETNAM

1. The Problem

In Southeast Asia today the Free World is facing an attempt by the Communists of North Vietnam to subvert and overthrow the non-Communist government of South Vietnam. North Vietnam has been providing direction, control, and trained cadres for the 25,000 Viet Cong guerrillas and the 60,000 to 80,000 irregulars engaged in harassment, systematic terror, and armed attacks on the people of South Vietnam.

2. Our Objective

Our purpose in South Vietnam is to help the Vietnamese maintain their independence. We are providing the training and the logistic support which they cannot provide themselves. We will continue to provide that support as long as it is required. As our training missions are completed, certain of our troops can be withdrawn. In December 1000 men came home. This group included, for example, two military police units whose airport guard duty had been taken over by Vietnamese trained for that purpose.

3. The Current Situation

In the past four months, there have been three governments in South Vietnam. Each of them has appointed its own cabinet members, its own provincial governors, and its own senior military leaders. The Viet Cong have taken advantage of the confusion resulting from these changes by raising the level and intensity of their attacks. They have been using larger forces and more powerful weapons.

This increased activity has had a good deal of success. Strategic hamlets formerly under government protection have been lost to the Viet Cong; roads formerly open to free movement have been closed. On the other hand, Viet Cong fatalities have been high. The unfavorable rate of 3 or 4 Viet Cong killed for every Vietnamese has continued. Although 15,000 to 20,000 Viet Cong have been killed during the past 12 months, their strength has remained approximately level through receipt of cadres from North Vietnam and recruits from South Vietnam.

4. Alternative Courses of Action

At least four alternatives are open to us today: A. We can withdraw from South Vietnam. Without our support the government will be unable to counter the aid from the North for the Viet Cong. Vietnam will collapse, and the ripple effect will be felt throughout Southeast Asia, endangering the independent governments of Thailand and Malaysia, and extending as far as India on the west, Indonesia on the south, and the Philippines on the east.

B. We can seek a formula that will “neutralize” South Vietnam. But any such formula will only lead in the end to the same result as withdrawing support. We all know the communists’ attitude that “What’s mine is mine and what’s yours is negotiable.” True neutralization would have to extend to North Vietnam as well, and this possibility has been specifically rejected by the North Vietnamese and Chinese Communist governments.

C. We can send the Marines and other U.S. ground forces against the sources of the aggression. But if we do, our men may well be bogged down in a long war against numerically superior North Vietnamese and ChiCom forces.

D. We can continue our present policy of providing training and logistical support for the South Vietnam forces. This policy has not failed. We propose to continue it.

Secretary McNamara’s trip to South Vietnam will provide us with an opportunity to appraise the future prospects for this policy, and the further alternatives that may be available to us.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. No classification marking. In a covering memorandum, McNamara informed the President that this was the 2-page South Vietnam summary which he had requested.

68. Memorandum Prepared by the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) 68. Memorandum Prepared by the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)1

Washington, March 3, 1964.

MEMORANDUM ON VIETNAM

Following my trip to Saigon in late December, 1963, I concluded that while the problems of accomplishing the U.S. objectives in South Vietnam are not insurmountable they are indeed formidable and there were more reasons to be pessimistic about obtaining our objectives than there were reasons to be optimistic.2

Since then Khanh’s coup has removed Generals Don, Kim, Xuan and Dinh. This has precipitated a decided change in the situation, necessitating a reassessment of the outlook.

In making such a reassessment the following areas must be considered:

1. The South Vietnamese Political Situation.

a. General Khanh has demonstrated that he is an able military leader. He is young (36 years old), relatively inexperienced. He was a lieutenant in 1954 and void of any political experience. He is unknown to the people and hence there is no evidence of strong popular support or great confidence in his leadership on the part of the people. We note considerable gossip among the people with whom the Station is in contact indicating lack of confidence in Khanh and his government.

b. General Khanh has appointed General Big Minh as Chief of State and three Vice Prime Ministers. General Minh is little more than a figurehead if that and has indicated some residual unhappiness at having been displaced by Khanh. Of the three Vice Prime Ministers, Nguyen Ton Hoan is a leader of the Dai Viet Party with a strong political motivation, but has been out of the country since 1954 until January of this year. Nguyen Xuan Oanh is a technician in economics and finance. He has spent most of the past 18 years out of his country and returned only this year. Do Mau is a general, formerly Chief of the Military Security Services and attache in Paris, but has little background in the cultural and social affairs he is supposed to supervise.

c. In addition he has appointed a slate of ministers. These have been drawn from various political and religious groups and with some attention to their geographic origin in an attempt to include most currents of opinion. Due to the lack of experience of the ministers, however, and their varying backgrounds, we cannot expect the cabinet to be especially strong. In addition some able men were not selected because of prior associations with Diem-Nhu, Minh-Don or the French and some others have not wished to serve because of the uncertainty as to the future of this government. We are already receiving reports of planning for new coupe, especially from the political circles of the Dai Viet party. We conclude that the prospects for a strong government are not bright.

d. In the provinces and districts there is both confusion and lack of direction. Some chiefs appointed by Minh have been removed, others do not know their future. Most are awaiting guidance from the new government in Saigon. Therefore, there is no strong political direction at the level of province and district chiefs.

e. As a result of what appears to be a weak and ineffective central government and a confused situation at the level of provinces and districts, many essential programs such as the strategic hamlet program and various civic action programs have come to a virtual halt. This is giving the VC an opportunity to fill this vacuum with their own political and military action with the result that many areas have been lost to the government and there is a growing feeling that the VC may be the wave of the future.

All of the above leads to the conclusion that the situation is worse now than it was in December and therefore I am more pessimistic of the future of the American cause in South Vietnam than my December report reflects.

2. South Vietnam Military Organization

a. The organization still exists in the proportions built up by Diem-Nhu and taken over by Minh-Don. However, there is some evidence that morale is low because of constant changes in leadership at the senior and intermediate levels. This situation might change as the new commanders assume control.

The situation is particularly bad within the Security Forces in Saigon. There have been three different commanders of the Saigon Police and Security Forces in the last few months. We are receiving reports of increased VC activities in Saigon itself. Lack of morale in the military and lack of confidence in Khanh’s leadership is causing a new round of coup plotting and also rumors of plans to assassinate Khanh. Either might happen. Khanh is being warned of these plans and plots and is said to be taking precautions. However, his success is dependent upon his mastering the role of leader of the country and being accepted as such by officers at all levels, as well as by the civilian, political and private leadership.

From the above I conclude that the military situation, bad in December, has worsened and the problem of reversing the trend is formidable. A continuation of the present nature of GVN and U.S. military and political actions does not appear to me to be enough to reverse current trends toward defeat.

4.[sic] Viet Cong Activities

Militarily the Viet Cong situation has improved in the last 90 days. They have organized 5 additional battalions, their communication network has been improved, and there are indications that they are organizing units into regiments. Captured equipment gives evidence that VC’s now have heavier equipment then they possessed a year ago, bazookas, mortars, anti-aircraft, etc. Much of such heavier equipment is of Chinese Communist origin but does not reflect any sudden great increase of direct Chinese Communist support or presence as much of it could come from DRV inventories. Of the smaller arms, the largest amounts are American made (most captured but some older items infiltrated). The VC’s also use some equipment which originated in Communist China, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union. The VC’s appear to have substantial supplies of arms, perhaps not the most modern, although they still probably have a serious logistic, maintenance and ammunition problem.

VC leadership seems to be sound; their political action and terrorism are effective, as evidenced by their ability to persuade whole areas to abandon the strategic hamlet program and turn in their arms as a price for pacification.

There is a continuing flow of evidence that VC operations are being directed from North Vietnam, leadership is being supplied from the north as well as war materiel and trained cadres. However it is evident that a very substantial part of the VC organization, strength and support is indigenous to South Vietnam.

I can only conclude from my observations that both militarily and politically the VC are gaining at the moment.

5. United States Operations

1. The military operations conducted by MACV follow the pattern of equipping, training and advising the RVN to get out and fight the war. The Korean situation was different; American forces fought and inspired the Koreans to do likewise. In Vietnam we have had limited experience with this technique but it seems to have been favorable among the Special Forces. There are many causes for Vietnamese reluctance to rush out and fight stemming from the long history, some doubt as to the eventual outcome, many early abuses and the lack of any strong appeal from the GVN. Whether American participation can overcome this or may intensify xenophobic feelings about the Whiteman’s war is not clear. It is clear that the present course is not successful.

The various units which were trained for the purpose of defending their own strategic hamlets should be used in this way, that is, as a defensive organization and not as offensive units. They are neither trained nor capable of offensive operations. The concept of the civilian defense units should be expanded, along the “oil stain” principle of the Pacification Plans.

Intelligence has been spotty. There has been submersion of bad news and an overstatement of good news. For the past year we have been misinformed about conditions in Vietnam. The entire intelligence apparatus is undergoing review and reorganization. It is essential that this be completed promptly and that there be a very close liaison between the J–2 organization, dealing with enemy capabilities, and the J–3, dealing with RVN capabilities and plans.

I conclude that our military operations in South Vietnam have not been as successful as we assumed up to last December. I think the whole concept has to be reviewed. It is the only time in our history that we have put such a large force into a country for the purpose of telling others to go out and fight. It is conceivable that we have unwittingly lifted the responsibility for the success of the battle from the shoulders of the South Vietnamese onto our own shoulders without accepting combat responsibility. In other words we may have gone beyond a MAAG operation, but have not selected the best way to carry out a combat operation in Vietnamese circumstances.

6. New Courses of Action

In view of the fragile political situation and the deteriorating military situation, one asks the question, “What should we do?” The courses of action are these: 1. Immediately develop a program which will remove us from South Vietnam by negotiating a neutralist “solution”. In doing so we must recognize that such a negotiation would lead to South Vietnam falling to the Communists. With this, we could expect others in Southeast Asia to follow “The Domino Theory”. Laos would probably fall quickly. Burma and Cambodia would certainly move closer to Peiping and we would need considerable treasure, effort and luck to keep Thailand from slipping away through accommodation or Communist subversion. On the other hand, this might be inevitable if the situation in South Vietnam should be even now beyond the point of no return. The evidence to date, gloomy as it is, does not bear out this prospect as one cannot say that Khanh and company with new and better U.S. support of various kinds cannot develop enough dynamism to hold the Viet Cong to give the GVN and the U.S. time and opportunity to begin turning the tide. We should also recognize that DRV resources and strength are limited and that while they will undoubtedly continue their outside instigation and steady support of the Viet Cong, this prospect is not one of a sudden escalation of their effort.

2. We can continue as we are now doing, restricting ourselves to actions of the same type we have been engaged in. This to me does not seem to be productive. 15,000 or 16,000 Americans have been engaged now for two years training and directing the South Vietnamese. Likewise the South Vietnamese are supplied with all of the arms and ammunition they can use; therefore an increasing quantity of materiel, except in certain special items, would not be productive. Nonetheless, present trends are down and will probably remain so if no great changes occur in either GVN performance or U.S. techniques.

3. We could greatly increase the U.S. military and political commitment in Vietnam and surrounding areas and take a far greater direct role in the operations. This would be accomplished by a series of actions to step up the dynamism and effectiveness of Khanh’s government and its programs. This would require a very direct input into the political posture of the Khanh government and its machinery at the national level and a great increase in our counterinsurgency advice and support at the local levels. As an element of this program we might add the placing of U.S. combat forces in South Vietnam to secure the Saigon base and strengthen Khanh’s government against possible coupe. These moves might have some negative effects in terms of highlighting the issue of white-faced intervention but the overall result would appear to be more positive than negative.

4. We could carry out dramatic operations against North Vietnam, theoretically non-attributable but actually well identified as coming from South Vietnam with U.S. support. The consequences of this type of action must be examined but, more important, we must make a judgment as to whether action of this type would accomplish the U.S. objectives in South Vietnam. It seems obvious to me that unless the Khanh government is strengthened in South Vietnam, then carrying the action into North Vietnam would not guarantee victory. It might stop the North Vietnamese supply for a short time. It would not stop the Viet Cong military or political action. It would not guarantee victory. If, on the other hand, the Khanh government can be strengthened, then actions against North Vietnam would be warranted although the cost and risk to the United States would be great. There would be danger that the war would escalate, either through large scale DRV operations into South Vietnam or Laos, Chinese Communist support in these areas, threats of Chinese Communist air strikes against Saigon or U.S. naval forces, or Soviet naval convoying of shipping into the DRV. We should of course be prepared for such contingencies in undertaking any course of extreme pressures against North Vietnam, although I incline to the view that the Communist powers would not in fact feel that such extreme reactions were either necessary or worth the risks involved. I do not think that any extreme U.S. pressures against the DRV would materially affect Sino-Soviet relations.

I am inclined to believe that if the political climate in South Vietnam is proper, then it is worth taking these risks, as the loss of the game in South Vietnam would have too serious consequences to be acceptable. On the other hand, if the Khanh government remains fragile, if the people remain disinterested, and disaffected, and we are continually confronted with coup plotting and the consequent hazards, if the resentment of American presence increases, then it appears to me that carrying the war to North Vietnam would not win the war in South Vietnam and would cause the United States such serious problems in every corner of the world that we should not sanction such an effort.

5. There are steps that can be taken to strengthen the Khanh government. Some of these are: a. The strategic hamlet program must be revitalized and attacked as the top priority. Plans exist for the implementation of this program according to the “oil stain” concept. The regular forces must establish as their primary duty the reinforcement of the strategic hamlet program according to these plans and the clearing and holding of additional areas. The irregular forces must be supported, trained, advised and inspired by a considerable increase in U.S. Special Forces and AID support, possibly organized as a separate Peoples’ Defense Authority.

b. A concentrated program of political action and agitation at the grass roots level must be established using supplied teams to conduct such agitation, organization and motivation efforts in conjunction with the strategic hamlet program. Additional information and civic action efforts must be conducted in support of these teams.

c. Assistance should be obtained from the Chinese Nationalist Government in a discreet but major scale manner. Detailed recommendations on this point have been submitted separately.3

d. An unofficial political advisor should be appointed to General Khanh to assist him in his early efforts as Chief of Government. Personnel having experience along these lines with Macapagal, Sarit, and others are available within CIA. In addition to the advisor to General Khanh appropriate advisors should be selected for other key political leaders.

e. Operations should be conducted against Viet Cong personnel and facilities across the Lao and Cambodia borders. In order to conduct such operations reconnaissance both by air and ground will be necessary. These operations should be conducted on a non-admitted (not necessarily deniable) basis.

f. The posture of U.S. personnel in Vietnam must be one of aggressive leadership although they might claim only an “advisory” mission. Thus the maximum use should be made of U.S. channels, organization and appeal to the lower ranking Vietnamese, even at the cost of some noses out of joint at the higher ranks. Our personnel must share the dangers of the Vietnamese peasants and fighting men and take full responsibility for stirring them into maximum action against the Viet Cong in their own protection and for no other purpose. Building overall loyalty to the Saigon government should be a secondary matter, to be sought after security is obtained, not as means thereto.

g. In our diplomatic approaches in Southeast Asia, we must establish the strengthening of the Khanh regime and the morale of the Vietnamese people as our primary objective. All steps in Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Taiwan must be taken in this context. It will be particularly important to forcefully demonstrate our rejection of the neutralist solution advocated by the French. This may give us problems in Cambodia and Laos, but these would be both more manageable and of lesser gravity than a growth of defeatism their alternatives might inspire in Vietnam.

h. Consideration should be given to the dispatch of a U.S. battle group to the Saigon area. The ostensible mission of this group would be to insure the security of the Saigon area as the base for operations against the Viet Cong. Its real purpose would be the support of the Khanh government against possible neutralist coupe. There are solid arguments pro and con on the use of combat troops in this manner. General Khanh’s own approval would have to be obtained and his judgment might be best on the subject.

5.[sic] With these steps we should be able to strengthen the Khanh government enough to permit us to decide whether continuance along that line alone will be adequate to defeat the Viet Cong or whether these steps must be supplemented by operations against North Vietnam. In the absence of these steps, operations against North Vietnam would in any case not likely be worth the cost. With these steps we might be able to win without attacking North Vietnam but we at least would have sufficient basis to make such activities profitable.

6. The next few weeks or so are probably critical. We may find that Khanh and South Vietnam simply don’t have it, or just don’t want to be rescued by the U.S. But, if we find instead that there is still some stretch in the situation, then victory may yet come in time. It would be long in coming, in the best of circumstances, but we should never forget that the DRV and Chinese Communists have their own weaknesses, which could grow in time, and that if the peasant in South Vietnam could be assured of his physical security for some sustained period he would no longer actively support the Viet Cong. His support would be accelerated if he could be convinced that in addition to security he could look forward to social, economic and political betterment through loyalty to the GVN.

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, WPB Special Papers. Secret. There was no designated recipient of this memorandum indicated on the source text, but a handwritten note by William Bundy reads: “McCone Draft. Bundy Working.”

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 735–738.

3 Apparently a reference to an undated and unattributed memorandum received in ISA on March 25 on possible Chinese Nationalist aid to the South Vietnamese in South Vietnam, North Vietnam, and the South China Sea. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 306, 092 Vietnam) When reviewing his papers after he left office, William Bundy noted on the source text that this idea was “a bug with McCone.”

69. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President 69. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President1

Washington, March 4, 1964.

SUGGESTED ITEMS FOR EVENING READING

1. French Policy in Viet-Nam—Chip Bohlen met today with Couve in Paris and was told that France has had no military or operational policy in Viet-Nam for the past 9 years and, therefore, is not working against U.S. interests.2 Couve made a personal suggestion, that a “political objective”, such as ultimate mutual withdrawal of U.S. and Viet Cong forces, would promote our military aims.3 He was not suggesting a conference, although admitting that we might have to deal with the Chinese Communists. Couve did not respond to Bohlen’s mention of a French statement on Viet-Nam but agreed that French official silence would be desirable.

[Here follow items 2–7 which were unrelated to Vietnam.]

Dean Rusk4

1 Source: Department of State, President’s Reading File: Lot 74 D 164. Secret; No Distribution.

2 As reported in telegrams 4165 and 4173 from Paris, both March 4. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 When the Embassy in Saigon learned of this suggestion by Couve de Murville, it cabled the Department of State that such a proposal revealed a “very fundamental French misunderstanding of the true nature of the Viet Cong.” In telegram 1713, March 9, the Embassy explained that the Viet Cong were “indigenous communists” many of whom derived from the Viet Minh cadres who remained in the south after 1954. They had to be eliminated or won over; they could not be induced to withdraw in 1964 any more effectively than they had been in 1954. The Embassy asked that this fact be stressed to the French Government and added that, should South Vietnam learn that the United States was “toying with such an idea,” the effect in Vietnam would be “unfortunate.” (Ibid.) The White House copy is published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 211E.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

III. The McNamara-Taylor Mission To Vietnam and the McNamara Report, March 4–April 3III. The McNamara-Taylor Mission To Vietnam and the McNamara Report, March 4–April 3

70. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the President,

Washington, March 4, 1964

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–36–71. Top Secret. Drafted by Taylor.

71. Summary Record of the 523d Meeting of the National Security Council, White House,

Washington, March 5, 1964, 4:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 4. Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. An attached attendance list indicates that 23 persons attended the Vietnam portion of the meeting.

72. Letter From the President to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, March 5, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 1470. Presidential Instructions. No classification marking.

73. Letter From the President to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, March 5, 1964

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Presidential Instructions. Secret.

74. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Members of the McNamara-Taylor Mission to Vietnam

Washington, March 5, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, WPB Special Papers. Confidential. Addressed to Bell, McCone, McNaughton, William Bundy, Sullivan, and Sylvester who, with the addition of McNamara and Taylor, made up the mission to South Vietnam. They arrived in Saigon on March 8 and returned to Washington on March 12.

75. Memorandum for the Record by Brigadier General W.W. Stromberg of the Army General Staff

Saigon, March 8, 1964.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–233–69. Top Secret; US Eyes Only. Stromberg sent a copy of this memorandum to Lodge, Taylor, McNamara, and Harkins.

76. Memorandum Prepared by the Ambassador to France (Bohlen)

Washington, March 12, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. Confidential. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 211H. Bohlen was in Washington for consultations. A note on the source text indicates that the President saw this memorandum and a covering note. The President met with Bohlen from 6:02 to 6:27 p.m. on March 12. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record of this meeting has been found.

77. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 13, 1964—1:11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Taylor described this meeting in Swords and Plowshares, pp. 309–310.

78. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 13, 1964—1:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23 VIET S. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

79. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, March 13, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President, Vol. 11. No classification marking.

80. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Intelligence (Cline) to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)

Washington, March 14, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXX, CIA. Secret.

81. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, March 14, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President, Vol. II. No classification marking. Although there is no indication on the source text, this memorandum was presumably prepared in anticipation of the interview with the President by broadcast media representatives on March 15. See footnote 6, Document 79.

82. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, March 14, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that McNamara saw this memorandum on April 2.

83. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, March 15, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security Files, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. II. Secret.

84. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President

Washington, March 16, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. Secret. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 499–510 and published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 148A. On March 16, Bromley Smith sent a slightly revised version of this memorandum to the National Security Council for consideration at a March 17 meeting. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V) A March 2 preliminary draft of this memorandum was prepared by William Bundy over the weekend of February 29–March 1, designed, in Bundy’s words, as an “overall vehicle for thought and also designed by Secretary McNamara to serve as a possible framework for his report upon his return.” Bundy’s covering memorandum and the draft are ibid., Vol IV. They are published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 157A. On March 4, an abbreviated version of the draft was sent to those officials attending the March 5 NSC meeting (see Document 71). This March 4 draft is in Department of State, Bundy Files, WPB Special Papers. An undated White House copy of the abbreviated March 4 draft, received for filing on March 6, is published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 146D. Two additional drafts of the full memorandum, March 5 and March 13, are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. Important differences between these drafts and the final memorandum as submitted to the President are noted in footnotes below.

85. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, March 17, 1964—9:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted in the White House and approved by Rusk. Transmitted as telegram 1454 to Saigon, which is the source text.

86. Summary Record of the 524th Meeting of the National Security Council,

Washington, March 17, 1964, Noon.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, U.S. Policy Toward Vietnam. Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. A full attendance list for this meeting is ibid.

87. National Security Action Memorandum No. 288

Washington, March 17, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAMs. Secret

88. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan),

Washington, March 17, 1964, 5:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Carolyn J. Proctor of Secretary Rusk’s staff.

89. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 18, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. Secret.

90. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, March 18, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. No classification marking.

91. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, March 19, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1776 from Saigon, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State.

92. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, March 20, 1964—5:58 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. The message was drafted in the White House and approved by Rusk. Transmitted as telegram 1484 to Saigon, which is the source text.

93. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, March 23, 1964—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET–S. Top Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1803 from Saigon, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State.

94. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, March 23, 1964—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis.

95. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Special Assistant in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Thompson)

Washington, March 23, 1964.

Source: Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia, Vietnam, McNamara’s Speech, 3/26/64. Confidential. Rusk took this memorandum to a luncheon meeting with the President, McGeorge Bundy, and McNamara at the White House on March 24, where the McNamara speech was approved substantially as originally drafted. No record of the luncheon meeting has been found. (Memorandum from Read to Rusk; Department of State, President’s Reading File: Lot 74 D 164)

96. Message From the President to the Ambassador in France (Bohlen)

Washington, March 24, 1964—6:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. The message was drafted in the White House; discussed and revised at a 1 p.m. luncheon meeting among the President, Rusk, McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Transmitted as telegram 4793 to Paris, which is the source text. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 296A. A draft with McGeorge Bundy’s handwritten revisions is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos.

97. Message From the Ambassador in France (Bohlen) to the President

Paris, March 25, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 4486 from Paris, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State.

98. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France

Washington, March 25, 1964—7:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted in the White House, cleared by William Bundy and Rusk, and approved by Sullivan. Repeated to Saigon.

99. Memorandum for the Record of the White House Daily Staff Meeting,

Washington, March 30, 1964, 8 a.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers. T–217–69. Secret: Eyes Only. Drafted by William Y. Smith.

100. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 30, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Luncheons with the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. I, Part 2. Secret.

101. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Blouin) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)

Washington, March 30, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 092 Vietnam. Top Secret.

102. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, March 31, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos. Top Secret. This covering memorandum is also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 002725.

103. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 1, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos. Top Secret.

104. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 1, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 002725.

105. Message From the Ambassador in France (Bohlen) to the President

Paris, April 2, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. III. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 4615 from Paris, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State. The Department of State also summarized this telegram as an item for the President’s evening reading, April 2. (Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 64 D 164, President’s Evening Reading File. 1964)

106. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State

Paris, April 3, 1964—noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis.

107. Summary Record of the 526th Meeting of the National Security Council,

Washington, April 3, 1964, 2 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

70. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the President, 70. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the President,1

Washington, March 4, 1964

[Here follows discussion unrelated to Vietnam.]

4. He then opened the subject of our coming trip to Saigon and asked what course I was inclined to recommend at this moment. I told him that, in general, I felt our program should consist of two main parts; one, an intensive continuation of the counterinsurgency campaign within South Vietnam and, second, a progressive program of selective air and naval attacks against North Vietnam using means beyond those employed in the past. The other Chiefs expressed themselves generally in accord. They also were of the opinion that it was unlikely that the ChiComs would intervene in strength. However, once embarked on the program the US must carry it to success, cost what may.

5. The President accepted the need for punishing Hanoi without debate, but pointed to some other practical difficulties, particularly the political ones with which he was faced. It is quite apparent that he does not want to lose South Vietnam before next November nor does he want to get the country into war.

6. The President is impressed with the danger of another coup. He feels we must make General Khanh “our boy” and proclaim the fact to all and sundry. He wants to see Khanh in the newspapers with McNamara and Taylor holding up his arms.

7. He directed a check made on all requests from Harkins for help since November to see if any have been rejected or significantly curtailed. He anticipates queries from Congress on this score.

8. He asked that we initiate a State/DOD/CIA/COMUSMACV examination of the realism of Senator Mansfield’s plan for a neutralization of North and South Vietnam. He expressed indignation over the Saigon article by Keyes Beech dated 22 February (attached)2 which revealed US military thinking on an expansion of the war. He directed me to talk to Harkins about it.3

Maxwell D. Taylor4
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–36–71. Top Secret. Drafted by Taylor.

2 Not attached.

3 A handwritten note on the margin reads: “Done, MDT, 13 March ’64.”

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

71. Summary Record of the 523d Meeting of the National Security Council, White House, 71. Summary Record of the 523d Meeting of the National Security Council, White House,1

Washington, March 5, 1964, 4:30 p.m.

1. Secretary McNamara’s Trip to South Vietnam

Secretary McNamara gave an oral summary of what he intends to accomplish by visiting South Vietnam. In a report which he will make upon his return, he will comment on the current strength of the Khanh government, the outlook for the future, and on alternative courses of action which might be taken to improve the situation in Vietnam. He said he would be prepared to make both an oral and a written report.

Mr. Bundy commented that the President was not being asked to make decisions prior to the return of Secretary McNamara.

Secretary Rusk said he was taking a sober view, even a pessimistic view of developments in South Vietnam. Listing the points of weakness in the situation in Vietnam was a way for us to concentrate on courses of action to overcome these weaknesses. Our attention should be concentrated on what we can do to improve the course we are now on.

The President asked whether it was true that all recommendations made by Ambassador Lodge had been dealt with without exception—promptly and generally favorably. Secretary McNamara replied affirmatively, as did Director Bell and Director McCone. Secretary Rusk said the only exception was the proposal which Ambassador Lodge had made with respect to how to handle De Gaulle’s support of the neutralization of Vietnam.

[Here follows item 2 which was unrelated to Vietnam.]

Bromley Smith2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 4. Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. An attached attendance list indicates that 23 persons attended the Vietnam portion of the meeting.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

72. Letter From the President to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 72. Letter From the President to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, March 5, 1964.

Dear Mr. Secretary: I am giving you this personal letter instead of any more formal instruction, as you leave on your important mission to Saigon, but I shall be grateful if you will share it with the senior officers who are going with you.

I will not ask you now to prepare a formal report, but I do hope that you and your colleagues will work together to bring back the most careful possible assessment of the situation and of the best possible courses of action for improving it. Some of these possibilities have been discussed in a preliminary way here in recent days, but what we now need is an assessment of all the possibilities and needs on the spot.

I particularly want your opinions and recommendations to be framed in the light of your discussions with Ambassador Lodge and his colleagues, and with the leaders of the Vietnamese Government. I look to you, as its senior officer, to coordinate the work of this mission.

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 1470. Presidential Instructions. No classification marking.

73. Letter From the President to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 73. Letter From the President to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, March 5, 1964

Dear Bob: One of the most important things you can do for me in South Vietnam is to talk privately on my behalf with Cabot Lodge. I have the highest regard for him as a patriot and a public servant, and I want him to know at first-hand of my determination that we in Washington must do everything we can to back him up as the top American in Vietnam. He is an old friend of mine from the Senate, and the simplest way of emphasizing my high opinion of him to you is to say that I recommended him for your job after the election of 1952.

When we had our first meeting with Ambassador Lodge, on November 24,2 I told him that I counted on him to take full charge of our effort there and to press our views as strongly as possible on the Government. I also told him that we would back him up in every part of the country team. We have made all the personnel changes which he has requested, and which it was quite proper for him to request in his effort to discharge his responsibilities. You should make it clear that we mean to continue to be responsive to his needs, and that just as we count on him to insist on first-class performance out there, we have taken fairly energetic steps of our own to ensure that the team in Washington working on Vietnam is as good as we can make it.

I have asked the Ambassador to make sure that we know of any new recommendations and proposals which he or his colleagues may wish to press with us, and on his only specific proposal relating to our own support of the struggle in Vietnam-the support for the military pay raise-I believe we have responded promptly.3 We are also doing all that we can through Ambassador Bohlen, and here in Washington with Ambassador Alphand, to get across to the French the importance of their own posture in Vietnam, and while Bohlen does not. think we can get the public statements that Ambassador Lodge wants, we have pressed him to do everything that he can in this direction.

As I read the messages from Ambassador Lodge, these are the specific areas in which he has asked for our support, but I want you to be sure to tell him that we will rely on him and his associates to keep us fully and currently apprised of their needs as they see them. We may not always be able to achieve what they ask, but we will always try, within the limits of our resources and capacities.

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Presidential Instructions. Secret.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 635–637.

3 See footnote 2, Document 53. On March 9, Forrestal prepared for McGeorge Bundy a memorandum assessing “the extent to which we have responded to Lodge’s requests.” After reviewing the cable traffic since January 1, Forrestal concluded that there were only two major policy requests from Lodge which were still unresolved: the proposed statement from De Gaulle clarifying his call for neutralism of Vietnam, and Lodge’s tentative requests for bringing pressure on North Vietnam. Forrestal explained that the need for considerable planning and policy decisions at the highest level were responsible for these requests going partially unanswered. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V, Memos; published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 128C)

McGeorge Bundy passed a copy of Forrestal’s memorandum to the President on March 11 stating that further action should await McNamara’s return and “that I think we are in slightly better shape on both issues than Forrestal makes out.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. II)

74. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Members of the McNamara-Taylor Mission to Vietnam 74. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the Members of the McNamara-Taylor Mission to Vietnam1

Washington, March 5, 1964.

SUBJECT

McNamara-Taylor Mission to South Vietnam

The purpose of our mission is to appraise the current strength of the SVN government; to review the political and military trends of the past four months; to estimate the outlook for the future, assuming no change in current US policies; and to evaluate alternative courses of action in the event it appears current policies will not lead to attainment of our objective.

I do not propose to submit a final written report to the President immediately following our return. Instead, I shall prepare a draft memorandum from which another report will be made. I hope it will be possible for the senior members of the party to concur in all significant points in the draft memorandum; in the event we cannot agree, the dissenting views will be expressed fully as footnotes to the report.

While in SVN, I believe we should minimize both formal and informal contacts with the press. Please review your plans for any such discussions with Arthur Sylvester before they take place and inform him of the substance of the discussions after the event.

I do not believe it should be necessary for individual members of the party, while in SVN, to send interim reports to their Departments or Agencies in Washington. If at any time you believe such a report is required, please furnish me a copy of the proposed message.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, WPB Special Papers. Confidential. Addressed to Bell, McCone, McNaughton, William Bundy, Sullivan, and Sylvester who, with the addition of McNamara and Taylor, made up the mission to South Vietnam. They arrived in Saigon on March 8 and returned to Washington on March 12.

75. Memorandum for the Record by Brigadier General W.W. Stromberg of the Army General Staff 75. Memorandum for the Record by Brigadier General W.W. Stromberg of the Army General Staff1

Saigon, March 8, 1964.

This morning, Sunday, 8 March 1964, I paid a call on General Duong Van Minh. A single soldier stood guard behind the closed gate. I saw no other security except possibly three civilian occupants of a white jeep across the street. One of these assisted me in gaining entrance by speaking in Vietnamese to the soldier guard who spoke neither English nor French. At his residence in Saigon, I presented General Minh with a box of orchids and the red canary which was the personal gift of General Wheeler. When I explained to him that the gifts were a token of the high esteem with which he is held in the Pentagon as a soldier and patriot, he was visibly touched. Tam, his son was in the house as was General Kim’s son whose name I did not catch. Mrs. Minh joined us for a brief period. She appeared nervous and sad. I attempted to carry out our discussion in English as I had assumed General Minh had continued his English lessons since I had last seen him in 1961, but he quickly reverted to French.

Initially, we covered events leading up to the overthrow of the Diem government. He said he regretted terribly to have been obliged to organize the coup as he had the greatest admiration for the President. As the internal situation deteriorated and he saw that Diem was losing the support of the people to ever greater degrees, General Minh said he constantly attempted to influence the President to make the necessary reforms and to rid himself of the influence of his family and other evil people who surrounded him. Finally, when he-saw that Diem would never listen, he decided to overthrow him before the Viet Cong did so. General Minh said he prepared the coup during a period of two years. For all but three months of this period, General Kim was his only confidante. They constantly discussed possible situations, personalities, forces and the risks involved. Three months before the coup went in, General Minh sent Kim to General Don to cut the latter in. (Kim is married to Don’s sister Gabrielle.) Don agreed to the coup. One month before the coup, General Minh asked General Dinh, whose III Corps was essential to success, to his home. This was the critical moment. There was some talking around the point on the part of both but finally, General Dinh suddenly said “Big Brother, our country is in danger, tell me what to do.” General Minh gave him his instructions. Finally, every key General and agency was brought into the coup except for General Cao’s IV Corps and the Navy. General Cao was not brought in as he was pet of Diem’s. The Corps Deputy was in on it. Dinh’s III Corps was between Cao and Saigon; and besides, plans had been made to control or destroy two essential ferries between III and IV Corps areas. General Khanh, then CG, II Corps was in on the coup but told Minh he would remain at Pleiku. This way Minh said Khanh could stand back and go either way depending on how the coup worked out. General Khiem played an important role. General Minh did not cut the Navy in as they were too unreliable. He charged General Xuan, CG of the Quang Trung Training Center outside Saigon to take care of the Navy whose headquarters was taken with 40 men. Xuan was also given the job of taking care of the Saigon police; a cause of worry to Minh. During the last month’s preparation for the coup, Minh was able to reconcile Dinh and Kim.

(After the abortive coup of 11 November 1960, Kim, then Commandant of the Military Academy at Dalat, had been arrested by Dinh.) In any case before the 1 November 1963 coup, Kim forgave Dinh in order that the larger interests of their country could be served. The final consideration that encouraged all of them to go ahead with [was] the knowledge of the disenchantment of the United States with Diem’s government and that the revolutionary government would probably be quickly recognized and supported. General Minh said it was regrettable that his junta had been overthrown because if people could have been patient, he felt they would have pulled the country back on the road to victory. He said that the situation had been deteriorating for so long and with such increasing acceleration, that the situation was bound to continue to deteriorate for a period under his junta before the effect of their measures could be felt. He said it was like a dive bomber plunging at a target. Even after the pilot pulls back on the stick, there is a period when the plane continues in its original speed and direction. He said one of the main objectives of the junta was to win back the support of the people. One of the important considerations here, for example, was to cease promptly attacks on inhabited areas where the Viet Cong were reportedly holed up. General Minh said that ground and air attacks in such situations which resulted in casualties among the civilians had been causing the government to lose the support of the people. Minh said that the relatives and friends of the victims became embittered. Minh said that, therefore, his junta attempted to get rid of the internal Viet Cong organization in the villages. Once the Viet Cong lost their “guides” who prepared their entry into the villages, the Viet Cong would be afraid to enter. He said maybe Americans could not understand how the Viet Cong could be driven out of the villages but that I could be assured the Vietnamese understood how this could be done. Minh said once the Viet Cong was separated from the villages, they could be isolated and destroyed. In the meantime, the infliction of casualties on innocent people would have ceased and chances of winning back their support would be increased. He also said that the junta had been attempting to find effective province and district chiefs who were natives of the area. Minh said this was essential as it carried along with it a built in information system on [of] old family ties and friendships. He said the junta had been making real progress in this program and cited these successful operations in point. One was the district of Cho Cao where the villagers gave information on the Viet Cong inside the village, disappeared from the village before the attack and enabled friendly forces to gain a victory without harming the civilian population. Minh said General Don was on the spot to verify personally the operation The next operation, the success of which was due to information provided by the people was the destruction of a Viet Cong depot on the Canal Commerciale in the Plaine des Joncs. Don was there also to verify personally. The last operation Minh mentioned was the successful ambush set by a friendly battalion of the 21st Division. The Viet Cong were caught in a canal at Chuong Thien in the IV Tactical Zone. It was the first time in the history of the war that friendly forces had been able to set up an ambush of battalion size. It was made possible by the information furnished by the local people. He said of course the measures which make the people want to give information take a long time to implement. Unfortunately, Khanh and the others were young and impatient.

Minh said the junta knew about the 30 January coup one hour before it went off. The other members called Minh and wanted to take immediate action. Minh, however, said they should do nothing and see what would happen as to set Vietnamese against Vietnamese would only play into the Viet Cong hands. Minh said he is absolutely positive that the charges of neutralist and plotting with the French are completely false. He said that although he did not know Kim well before 1959, he had observed him closely ever since. In fact, he had put him to some severe tests of his determination and loyalty and Kim has passed them all. He said that because of his concern over De Gaulle’s philosophy of neutralism, he had convoked key French bankers and other businessmen of Saigon whom he knew to his office to inform them how empty and dangerous such a philosophy was. He said these were all official visits. Kim and Don always participated in these meetings. Kim was always the most adamant in denouncing De Gaulle’s views to the point where Minh had to remonstrate with Kim about his violent reaction. Minh then stated that he had watched all the other members of the junta closely and worked with them during their three months in power and that all of them were staunch patriots and only desire to defeat the Viet Cong.

Minh said so long as these Generals remain under arrest2 the Army will be cut by schisms and the war effort will not be pushed vigorously. He said since the coup many officers have talked to him about the situation in a way they would talk to no other officer. They are bitter and frustrated about it. Minh says he calms them down by telling them to following his example and wait for them to be freed which he is sure will be done. He tells them that he, Minh, loves these Generals as much or more than they do. Minh says the problem stems from the fact that all of these officers have a host of loyal supporters. Don was CG, I Corps for five years and the population in I Corps area and the officers who served there admire and support Don. The same applies to Dinh, who served as CG of II Corps for two years and then for two years as CG, III Corps. As for Kim, an intellectual, Minh said, he had been running the schools. Kim has a group of supporters among senior officers dating from Kim’s duty as Commandant of the C & GS School. There is also a large group of young officer supporters dating from the time he was Commandant of the Military Academy. Xuan has his supporters stemming from young officers and NCO’s who served under him during his long tenure at the Quang Trung Training Center.

Minh said that besides the bad morale problem caused by their unjust imprisonment the Army needs badly the experience of these officers. He sited as an example the impossibility of the young and inexperienced Khiem attempting to serve as both Minister of Defense and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. He mentioned General Duc, recently promoted to CG of IV Corps being both incompetent and crazy. Minh admitted he arranged for Duc to return from France after the 1 November coup but now regretted it. He thought Duc, who had been carrying out a campaign against the Diem regime from outside the country, would be a useful patriotic officer. Minh arranged for doctors care for Duc’s crazy tendencies as he believes it comes from some physical ailment. Moreover, Duc proved to be irritable and constantly unhappy about everything. Minh said he believes Khanh gave him the IV Corps job [to] pacify him. As for Khanh, Minh feels that through inexperience, he is trying to develop a climate for politics too fast and that this could be dangerous for the country. However Khanh believes this makes a good image in the eyes of the rest of the world. Minh said after all there was no party system under Diem. Minh mentioned Khanh’s willingness to let the Dai Viet operate, a party formed around 1943 to oppose the Japanese occupation. He cited General Thieu, Chief of Staff of the Joint General Staff and a Catholic, who is a member of the Dai Viet. He says Thieu’s brother is Minister of Youth, as I understand it, and is also in the Dai Viet. Minh said the Vice-President also of the Dai Viet, Nguyen Ton Hoan, did not accept that post to remain there indefinitely. He covets the Presidency. Khanh seems happy to have the Dai Viets (Catholics) and the Buddhists in a sort of friendly opposition. In the meantime, try as he may, it will be difficult for Khanh to regain the support of the people. He is putting more and more of the old Diem crowd back in power. He is using the same Diem experts to organize his visit to the countryside and “spontaneous” demonstrations. These tactics, as for Diem, only promote counter-propaganda. Counter-propaganda against the Americans will probably result from “spontaneous” demonstrations such as the one organized for Mr. McNamara this morning at the airport.

However, Minh said the number one problem now was to reunify the Army and carry the war vigorously to the Viet Cong. He said we can worry about Khanh’s political fortunes later. He said the four generals must be freed and reintegrated into the Army or the war will not be carried through vigorously because so many officers throughout the Army will not have their hearts in it.

Minh said Khanh must call these officers in, state there has been a misunderstanding, offer his apologies and reintegrate them into the Army.

At this point, I told General Minh that if Khanh refused, and if he or any other group was thinking of a coup, it would be disastrous for both our countries and only the Viet Cong would benefit. Besides, I told him, another coup would just further deteriorate the morale of the Army and destroy the faith of the people. I told him that my superiors in Washington were counting on him to put the interests of his country and his people above his own and to lend his enormous prestige and popularity to support the government, restore the morale of the Army, and prosecute vigorously the war against the Viet Cong.

He thought for a long time and replied he would do everything in his power to support Khanh. However, he said he would like Ambassador Lodge, who enjoys tremendous prestige with the Vietnamese people, Mr. McNamara, and General Taylor to force Khanh to reintegrate the four generals back into the Army. He said the Americans have the power to do it and that it was absolutely essential in order to get the war going again. He said that the reintegration process must be handled carefully. If Khanh told them directly Khanh would be dead of old age before they would accept. If Minh can talk to them (he was unable to see them up to this point) he can influence them to accept, as it is a question of prestige and honor. Minh is ready to give his personal guarantee that the four will bury the hatchet in the interest of the country. Minh will also handle their assignments personally, with the concurrence of Khanh, in order to avoid an embarrassing assignment situation as between these older, more experienced officers and the new crop of generals.

Then as concerns the Army, Minh said he would do everything possible so as to reunify the Army for the government. He said there was only one man in all of Vietnam who had the possibility of doing it and that was he, Minh. He stated he wanted to emphasize the word possibility.

I asked General Minh if he couldn’t see any other alternative to the problem of the four generals, such as, for example, freedom and retirement with full benefits. He reacted promptly and vigorously and stated that it wouldn’t work and that the only solution for the good of the country was reintegration. He said such a solution would not repair the schisms at all, that the deception of the officer corps would remain.

W. W. Stromberg3

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–233–69. Top Secret; US Eyes Only. Stromberg sent a copy of this memorandum to Lodge, Taylor, McNamara, and Harkins.

2 Generals Tran Van Don, Le Van Kim, Ton That Dinh, and Mai Huu Xuan were arrested during the January 30 coup.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

76. Memorandum Prepared by the Ambassador to France (Bohlen) 76. Memorandum Prepared by the Ambassador to France (Bohlen)1

Washington, March 12, 1964.

Ambassador Lodge had asked some time ago that we endeavor to obtain from General De Gaulle some clarifying statement in regard to French policy towards Viet-Nam. The Ambassador’s request, as I recall it, was based, at least in part, upon a desire to restrain the Viet-Namese from breaking with France on the assumption that France was about to recognize Viet Minh. It was also dictated by the bad effect France’s unclear position was having on Viet-Namese morale.

We gave this request of Ambassador Lodge the most careful consideration in Paris and came to the conclusion that any approach to General De Gaulle on this subject would be fruitless. We also noted and so reported to Saigon that there seemed to be no possibility of any French recognition of Hanoi. I feel very definitely that a request of General De Gaulle to clarify a statement which he had purposely left ambiguous would not only not produce the result desired, but also might offer the General an opportunity to restate his very generalized view of Viet-Nam; namely, that neutralization and unification, and similar vague terms were the only possible bases for a solution there. Furthermore, it would tend, I believe, to convince him that the United States was urgently in need of some French help in the Viet-Namese situation. We should always remember that De Gaulle has stated on a number of occasions directly to American officials, to President Kennedy in May of 1961, and to me, his belief that we could not succeed in the course that we are pursuing. It is also not clear exactly what type of clarification we desired. For all of these reasons, I thought at the time, and still do, that any approach to De Gaulle merely for clarification of French policy would be a very serious mistake and would most certainly not yield the result desired.

However, if, as I have reported from Paris, we are able, following Secretary McNamara’s visit to devise a course of action in Viet-Nam with a clear political objective, I believe then it would be worthwhile my going to see General De Gaulle to explain this policy and its objective to him and to request the cooperation of France in its achievement. This, of course, is dependent upon our ability to work out some form of coherent policy which I could take to De Gaulle.

On the other hand, if there are considerations of which I am not aware which would make it important, even with the certainty of a refusal, to have made an effort with De Gaulle. I am of course entirely prepared to do it.

C. E. Bohlen

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. Confidential. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 211H. Bohlen was in Washington for consultations. A note on the source text indicates that the President saw this memorandum and a covering note. The President met with Bohlen from 6:02 to 6:27 p.m. on March 12. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record of this meeting has been found.

77. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 77. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 13, 1964—1:11 p.m.

1740. CINCPAC for POLAD. In a conversation yesterday with Secretary McNamara, General Taylor and I on the US side and Generals Khanh and Khiem on the GVN side, General Khanh agreed that actions designed to exert increased pressure on NVN could be a helpful assist to his effort but would be no substitute for successful actions in SVN against the VC. General Khanh said that his “base” in SVN was not strong enough as yet for overt operations against NVN; however. he would like to “redouble” covert operations right away.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Taylor described this meeting in Swords and Plowshares, pp. 309–310.

78. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 78. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 13, 1964—1:30 p.m.

1744. CINCPAC for POLAD. Following based on uncleared memorandum of conversation of final meeting between Secretary McNamara and party with General Khanh and GVN representatives on March 12.

General Khanh opened discussion by referring to preliminary discussions with Secretary McNamara during trip to Hue on March 11 concerning a proposed National Service Act for SVN. Khanh said his government prepared embark upon program to mobilize all human and material resources to fight VC. As envisaged by General Khanh proposed National Service Act would have two major components: military service and civil defense. Breakdown as follows:

Military service comprised of: RVNAF (3 years service; actual strength: 227,000; planned: 251,683). Civil Guard (3–1/2 years; actual: 90,032; planned: 119,636). SDC & hamlet militia (4 years; actual: 257,960; planned: 422,874). Civil defense comprised of civil service corps, cadre corps, National Youth, and political-administration corps.

Khanh noted military service component self-evident and, response McNamara’s question, confirmed that civil defense component included civil administration corps for work in countryside. Khanh emphasized that in civil defense sector all civilians would be included; for example, in Saigon might be possible assign trained youth to perform some of static police functions while police were pursuing more important police duties. This segment also included civic action teams for hamlets and villages.

Khanh emphasized figures were planning figures only and designed give idea of number of military and civilians required and indicate financial implications of plan. Eventual numbers would be flexible in that they would depend on such factors as population in a particular area, whether area was actually in danger of VC attack, and strength of VC in particular area, etc.

McNamara stated that US, and he assumed GVN, would wish to study strength figures carefully; however, his first impression was that figure of 422,874 SDC and hamlet militia appeared unduly large and would be difficult to support. Khanh responded that in actual practice total numbers may not reach this level. In fact, number may not exceed 300,000 SDC and hamlet militia actually deployed against VC. Here again figures were flexible and would have be refined depending on actual situation in various areas.

General Taylor noted ascending length of service for Civil Guard (3–1/2 years) and the SDC/hamlet militia (4 years) over RVNAF (3 years) and inquired whether it was because the former groups would be operating close to home. Khanh affirmed this, noting soldiers in ARVN have to move often and take their families with them. Now difficult recruit CG and SDC forces for deployment like ARVN troops. Therefore Khanh felt since they stay close to home they could be expected serve a slightly longer period of service.

Khanh then asked General Thieu to explain breakdown under civil defense sector of proposed National Service Act. Thieu stated that all men from age 18 through 40 would be required to participate in the national pacification effort. Most of them, such as those in civil service corps and cadre corps (those now in countryside) would serve in same positions they now occupy. Others, such as national youth group up to age 40, would be required serve in city and countryside and would be organized into small groups to assist ARVN and Civil Guard. Category of political-administration corps would consist of cadres planned for assignment to villages and hamlets. General Thieu estimated that 125,000 such cadre would be required. In first instance, GVN will ask for volunteers; if insufficient volunteers come forward, the necessary cadres will be drafted. Time spent in political-administration corps would count against military service. McNamara stated general approach appeared excellent but he questioned whether GVN would need 125,000 cadre. McNamara pointed out this number added to total figures for Civil Guard, SDC and hamlet militia, constituted an extremely large figure. If assumed there are approximately 6 million men of draft age in SVN, ratio of estimated figures to total draft-eligible population appeared disproportionate. While genera] concept was excellent it would be desirable to look most closely at planning figures.

Khanh replied that he intended make maximum effort in first instance in 8 critical provinces surrounding Saigon, noting that in certain hamlets now de facto situation exists where people must defend themselves. However, a National Service Act would have a very good effect in Saigon and the other urban areas.

McNamara inquired whether upon his return to Washington he could tell President Johnson that General Khanh’s government was prepared embark on a program of national mobilization of human and material resources and whether President Johnson in turn could inform the American people that General Khanh has put SVN on the national mobilization basis. Khanh replied in the affirmative and asked for agreement in principle from us to his proceeding with concept as outlined. McNamara indicated that he viewed concept favorably and asked Ambassador Lodge for his views.

Ambassador stated that he favored general concept but thought that detailed figures should be looked into carefully. Ambassador also believed that emphasis should be placed first on 8 critical provinces surrounding Saigon. General Khanh expressed his thanks for agreement in principle.

General Harkins noted that a mobilization law was in fact in existence but that few people knew about it. He pointed out that ARVN, CG and SDC were not up to their authorized military strengths. Khanh said that he realized this but believed it still desirable to have a new law setting forth a national service or mobilization program. Harkins stated that MACV and other elements of US Mission would like to work closely with Khanh and his chief aides in developing such a law. Khanh replied this well understood. McNamara said it was agreed on American side that general concept was a wise one and that we should proceed on this basis.

Khanh then inquired whether it was desirable to raise CG to same relative status as ARVN as regards salary, pensions, survivors benefits, etc. He estimated that total cost would be in neighborhood of one billion plasters. McNamara thought this was highly desirable. General Taylor inquired whether this would involve any change in role or mission of Civil Guard. Khanh replied in negative stating that it was merely question putting Civil Guard on comparable basis with ARVN as concerns benefits he had mentioned. McNamara observed that he felt all agreed in principle on this.

McNamara inquired how long Khanh estimated it would take to recruit and train administrative cadre for 8 critical provinces near Saigon. Khanh estimated approximately one month, in any event he believed cadres could be in place by end of April. Khanh said GVN would aim for volunteers for this effort and it was not necessary to await promulgation of National Service Act.

In response Taylor’s question as to how long Khanh anticipated it would take to draft and promulgate National Service Law, Khanh observed that GVN was a fairly compact organization at present and that law could be ready for his signature in very short time. Taylor pointed to necessity give due regard to democratic forms in developing and announcing a National Service Act. Khanh agreed and said that at same time a major effort was being made to pacify the countryside, he intended to push for concurrent development of democratic institutions and forms. McNamara suggested that when Khanh ready announce a National Service Act that he also re-emphasize related actions already taken and those planned for the future, such as those for expansion of national economy, for increased educational opportunities in hamlets, for increased production of rice, for marketing of fish, and so forth. McNamara believed a well publicized announcement of this nature would find ready response among people and would materially assist Khanh to obtain and hold support of Vietnamese people. Ambassador Lodge agreed and added that, despite statement of General De Gaulle to the effect that we could not win a military war in SVN, Americans were well aware that war here is an inter-related one having political, economic, social and psychological aspects. Memcon being pouched.2

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23 VIET S. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Not found.

79. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 79. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, March 13, 1964.

You may or may not want these for night reading, but you should have them available: At Tab A is McNamara’s full draft report2 of which you got a brief this morning.3

At Tab B is his draft White House statement4 which both Dean Rusk and I think needs a lot of revision.

At Tab C is a fascinating document prepared for possible publication in Foreign Affairs by Ambassador Lodge.5

For the TV show on Vietnam,6 I myself would quietly but firmly spell out the following themes: 1. Neutralization of the whole area has been repeatedly denounced by the Communists and is therefore not practicable now.

2. The right of people to choose their own course is exactly what we are supporting, and if foreign interference and subversion should end, the need for our help will end.

3. While the danger of the threat continues, American support will be firm and strong.

4. Secretary McNamara and a first-rate team have made a most careful study which has led to constructive suggestions that are now being reviewed within the Government.

5. We are strong, calm and determined, in a situation which has danger but also hope.

6. The Ambassador is our top man in the field, and you are proud of the U.S. unity which has been developed both here and in Vietnam in the first hundred days.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President, Vol. 11. No classification marking.

2 Not attached, but see Document 84.

3 The President met briefly and individually with McNamara and then McGeorge Bundy between 8:50 and 10 a.m. on March 13. Later in the day from 12:15 to 1:23 p.m., he met with McNamara, Rusk, Taylor, McCone, and McGeorge Bundy as a group. Apparently the President was briefed on the draft McNamara report on one, some, or all of these occasions. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary)

4 Not attached. Reference is to a draft version of a White House statement of March 17, printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, vol. 1, pp. 387–388. An undated text of the proposed White House statement and a copy with handwritten revisions by McGeorge Bundy are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V.

5 Not attached, but a draft of the article is attached to a letter from Lodge to Harriman March 3; ibid.

6 For the transcript of the President’s television and radio interview conducted by representatives of the major broadcast services, March 15, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book I, pp. 361–375.

80. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Intelligence (Cline) to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) 80. Memorandum From the Deputy Director for Intelligence (Cline) to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)1

Washington, March 14, 1964.

SUBJECT

Recommended Actions for South Vietnam

1. In my memorandum to the DCI, 30 October 1963,2 just before the “Big” Minh coup in Saigon, I argued against U.S. support for coup plotting on the grounds that: “If a coup succeeds it will result in the kind of dislocation and confusion characteristic of post-coup South Korea and the Dominican Republic.” This phenomenon is exactly what we have been witnessing in South Vietnam in the last four months. My arguments, which went for naught, in favor of bolstering the shaky Diem regime are even more compelling toward support of the Khanh regime. It is probably our last chance to halt the spiral of confusion of purpose and defeatism that may destroy our position in Southeast Asia.

2. The simple question raised in the McNamara report3 is whether, with ample U.S. support of counterinsurgency efforts in South Vietnam, the recent trend toward Viet Cong victory can be reversed, and substantial, sustained progress made toward stabilization. I believe the odds are 6 to 5 against this favorable trend setting in within the next 3 to 4 months, as concluded by McNamara, so long as North Vietnamese political, military and logistic support are freely available to the Viet Cong. Furthermore, I think the loss of virtually all U.S. prestige and influence in Southeast Asia is likely if a favorable trend does not set in in South Vietnam soon. Consequently, it seems to me too great a gamble for the United States to rely solely on the measures recommended for South Vietnam during the next 3 to 4 months. Instead, I recommend that the measures recommended by McNamara be supplemented as soon as operationally feasible by adopting steps 1 through 3 of “Possible Later Actions” plus all four actions suggested in your footnote to the conclusion (p. 14) of the report. Personally, I would also recommend the “rejected” course of action of furnishing a U.S. combat unit (perhaps a battalion landing team) to insure the security of U.S. personnel and-implicitly-the Khanh regime’s control of the Saigon area.

Ray S. Cline4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXX, CIA. Secret.

2 Not found.

3 Document 84.

4 At the bottom of the source text, Cline added a postscript on Cambodia, but acknowledged that it went “beyond the scope of the measures intended to save South Vietnam.”

81. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 81. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, March 14, 1964.

BROAD QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON VIETNAM

1. Why is South Vietnam important to us?

First, it is a key element in Southeast Asia. Southeast Asia in turn is an area whose size and importance are plain to see-almost 250 million people and a land and sea area stretching from China to Australia, and from the Philippines to India. Second, we have a commitment there in honor and in national interest. Ten years ago President Eisenhower rightly decided to support the new government of South Vietnam and we have continued that support ever since in good times and in bad. Indeed the language of that first commitment reminds me very much of the language we still use (Eisenhower letter to Diem attached at Tab A)2 It speaks of our assistance against subversion and aggression. It speaks of the need for effective performance and reform in Vietnam. It speaks of the need to respond to the aspirations of the people of Vietnam themselves.

In recent months the danger and difficulty in Vietnam have increased, but this is no time to quit, and it is no time for discouragement.

2. What are the prospects now?

I am working right this week end with Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara and General Taylor on this problem, and I can tell you that while there have been troubles and difficulties in recent months out there, we are going to keep right on with our basic present program and purpose. I am proud of the improvement in the coordination of the American effort both here and in Saigon, and we expect to take further measures to strengthen our support for the free people of South Vietnam.

I am particularly encouraged by reports from the Ambassador and from Secretary McNamara on the quality of the present leadership of South Vietnam. I have had an encouraging personal message from General Khanh, and we are very hopeful that his government will be able to take the strong and effective measures which are needed on every front out there.

I am sure the Vietnamese people will respond to this kind of leadership because it is quite foreign to the traditions of the area to give in to pressures which are directed from Peking. (Some deliberate connection of the Communists with China may be helpful in Saigon.)

3. Can this be ended by 1965?

1965 has never been anything more for us than a target for the completion of certain specific forms of technical training and assistance. A struggle of this kind needs patience and determination. We and our friends in Vietnam entirely agree that as time goes on the responsibility for effective work in all fields should be carried more and more by the Vietnamese themselves. No one who is working effectively against Communism need be worried about American determination and persistence. We mean to keep at it out there.

McG. B.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President, Vol. II. No classification marking. Although there is no indication on the source text, this memorandum was presumably prepared in anticipation of the interview with the President by broadcast media representatives on March 15. See footnote 6, Document 79.

2 Letter dated October 25, 1954; Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. XIII, Part 2, pp. 2166–2167.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

82. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 82. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, March 14, 1964.

JCSM–222–64

SUBJECT

Draft Memorandum for the President, Subject: “South Vietnam”2

The Joint Chiefs of Staff have reviewed the subject memorandum and concur with the recommendations subject to the following comments:3

a. The Joint Chiefs of Staff do not believe that the recommended program in itself will be sufficient to turn the tide against the Viet Cong in South Vietnam without positive action being taken against the Hanoi Government at an early date. They have in mind the conduct of the kind of program designed to bring about cessation of DRV support for operations in South Vietnam and Laos outlined in JCSM–174–64, subject: “Vietnam,” dated 2 March 1964.4 Such a program would not only deter the aggressive actions of the DRV but would be a source of encouragement to South Vietnam which should significantly facilitate the counterinsurgency program in that country. To increase our readiness for such actions, the US Government should establish at once the political and military bases in the United States and South Vietnam for offensive actions against the North and across the Laotian and Cambodian borders, including measures for the control of contraband traffic on the Mekong.

b. In view of the current attitude of the Sihanouk Government in Cambodia, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend authorizing now hot pursuit into that country.

c. With regard to the reaction times contained in recommendation 12 of the subject memorandum, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the time of reaction for border control and retaliatory actions against North Vietnam should be reduced to 24 hours and the time for the initiation of the program of “graduated overt military pressures” reduced to 72 hours. These times are considered feasible as soon as an aerial mining capability has been established in the VNAF.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that McNamara saw this memorandum on April 2.

2 Reference is to a March 13 draft of Document 84.

3 Within the JCS, Commandant of the Marine Corps General Greene and Chief of Staff of the Air Force General LeMay were critical of McNamara’s draft report. Greene wrote that the 12 recommendations “offer little more than a continuation of present programs of action in Vietnam,” and reiterated the view that if the United States was to stay and win in Vietnam, then that objective should be pursued with the full concentrated power of the United States. Greene stated, “half measures won’t win in South Vietnam.”

General LeMay agreed with McNamara’s recommendations to support and stabilize the Khanh government, but took exception with the view that the “military tools of the GVN/US effort” were sound and adequate. LeMay felt that to do the job in Vietnam, the Viet Cong had to be attacked in their Cambodian sanctuaries and North Vietnam’s supply and reinforcement lines through Laos could not be left unmolested. General Greene’s comments are in JCS 2343/346–1, March 17, and General LeMay’s are in CSAFM–263–64 to JCS, March 14; both in National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files, JMF 9155.3/3100 (13 Mar 64), as quoted in Historical Division, Joint Secretariat, JCS, The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the War in Vietnam, 1960–1968, Part 1, Chapter 9, pp. 18 and 19)

4 Document 66.

83. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 83. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, March 15, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

This memorandum is designed to help to clarify the issues that are likely to be before you at 10 A.M. Monday.2 As I see it, the problem of our next steps with respect to Vietnam falls into four parts:

1. Action in South Vietnam itself.

2. Action relating to Cambodia and Laos.

3. Action against North Vietnam.

4. Relations with France.

Following are my comments on each item.

1. Action in South Vietnam itself.

I think we have agreement all around on Item 1, which remains the most important of the lot. Bob McNamara assured me today that his twelve recommendations fully cover everything Lodge is asking for within South Vietnam, and then some. He further assures me that Lodge himself spoke of six crucial needs for action in Vietnam, and that all six are more than covered within his recommendations.

2. Action relating to Cambodia and Laos.

The McNamara report is so drafted as to leave you leeway in these two areas. It would authorize hot pursuit and ground operations over the Laotian line, but it is noncommittal about operations across the Cambodian border. McCone and Lodge would like to go further, especially with respect to Cambodia, and I find that Dean Rusk is also strongly inclined to move in this direction if the right combination of political and practical steps can be devised. I think there is room here for you to move in a direction which is at once useful to South Vietnam and effective as a response to the Ambassador’s own desires. We will not have final plans on this tomorrow morning, but I think the field is a productive one and that a good resolution can be found. I think it is particularly desirable that we should have Lodge work on the practical process of this matter with Khanh directly.

3. Action against North Vietnam.

On this one we have agreement between McNamara and Khanh, at least for the present, that overt action against North Vietnam is undesirable. There is also agreement that the covert program should be intensified. As a practical matter, McNamara believes that this program will not amount to very much, and I agree with him, but I believe it essential that we authorize Lodge to strengthen it in any way that he can work out with Khanh. The one specific Lodge request which is still outstanding in this area is his proposal of late February that we warn the North Vietnamese of direct retaliation in response to any terrorist attack on Americans. McNamara tells me that the concern over the lives of Americans had been greatly reduced by the time of his visit last week, and that therefore this is not now a live issue. But at the end of the current deliberations, you will wish to go back to Lodge again.

4. Relations with France.

It is now agreed that Bohlen should go to work directly with General De Gaulle, as soon as possible after the General’s return from Mexico. This will not be for about another ten days. The Department will be drafting a detailed instruction to Bohlen this week, and Dean Rusk’s current intent is to let Ambassador Lodge and Ambassador Bohlen both comment on this instruction before it is made final. This seems to us the best we can do to keep all parties in line.

There are other questions which need to be discussed tomorrow morning, like the shape of the White House statement to follow the more formal meeting on Tuesday. For internal Pentagon reasons, McNamara is very eager to put out a substantial account of the current situation in terms which are acceptable to his military colleagues. I myself doubt that this should be done at the White House level, and we will have alternative statements for your consideration in the morning.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security Files, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. II. Secret.

2 From 10:12 to approximately 11:15 a.m. on March 16, the President met with McNamara, Ball, Taylor, and McGeorge Bundy in an informal meeting to discuss the McNamara report. No record of the meeting has been found. For the approved report, see Document 84.

84. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President 84. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President1

Washington, March 16, 1964.

SUBJECT

South Vietnam

This report addresses two questions:2

1. What is the present situation in Vietnam? (What is the trend of the counterinsurgency program, how stable is the Khanh government, and what is the effectiveness of our current policy of assisting the South Vietnamese Government by economic aid, military training and logistical support?)

2. How can we improve that situation? (What are the plans and prospects of the Khanh government and what more should they be doing, and what more should the U.S. be doing under present or revised policy, in South Vietnam or against North Vietnam?)

To answer the questions, the report will review: I. U.S. Objectives in South Vietnam; II. Present U.S. Policy in South Vietnam; III. The Present Situation; IV. Alternative Present Courses of Action; V. Possible Later Actions; VI. Other Actions Considered But Rejected; and VII. Recommendations.

I. U.S. Objectives in South Vietnam

We seek an independent non-Communist South Vietnam. We do not require that it serve as a Western base or as a member of a Western Alliance. South Vietnam must be free, however, to accept outside assistance as required to maintain its security. This assistance should be able to take the form not only of economic and social measures but also police and military help to root out and control insurgent elements.

Unless we can achieve this objective in South Vietnam, almost all of Southeast Asia will probably fall under Communist dominance (all of Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia), accommodate to Communism so as to remove effective U.S. and anti-Communist influence (Burma), or fall under the domination of forces not now explicitly Communist but likely then to become so (Indonesia taking over Malaysia). Thailand might hold for a period with our help, but would be under grave pressure. Even the Philippines would become shaky, and the threat to India to the west, Australia and New Zealand to the south, and Taiwan, Korea, and Japan to the north and east would be greatly increased.

All of these consequences would probably have been true even if the U.S. had not since 1954, and especially since 1961, become so heavily engaged in South Vietnam. However, that fact accentuates the impact of a Communist South Vietnam not only in Asia, but in the rest of the world, where the South Vietnam conflict is regarded as a test case of U.S. capacity to help a nation meet a Communist “war of liberation.”

Thus, purely in terms of foreign policy, the stakes are high. They are increased by domestic factors.

II. Present U.S. Policy in South Vietnam

We are now trying to help South Vietnam defeat the Viet Cong, supported from the North, by means short of the unqualified use of U.S. combat forces.3 We are not acting against North Vietnam except by a very modest “covert” program operated by South Vietnamese (and a few Chinese Nationalists)-a program so limited that it is unlikely to have any significant effect. In Laos, we are still working largely within the framework of the 1962 Geneva Accords. In Cambodia we are still seeking to keep Sihanouk from abandoning whatever neutrality he may still have and fulfilling his threat of reaching an accommodation with Hanoi and Peking. As a consequence of these policies, we and the GVN have had to condone the extensive use of Cambodian and Laotian territory by the Viet Cong, both as a sanctuary and as infiltration routes.

III. The Present Situation in South Vietnam

The key elements in the present situation are as follows: A. The military tools and concepts of the GVN/US effort are generally sound and adequate.4 Substantially more can be done in the effective employment of military forces and in the economic and civic action areas. These improvements may require some selective increases in the U.S. presence, but it does not appear likely that major equipment replacement and additions in U.S. personnel are indicated under current policy.

B. The U.S. policy of reducing existing personnel where South Vietnamese are in a position to assume the functions is still sound. Its application will not lead to any major reductions in the near future, but adherence to this policy as such has a sound effect in portraying to the U.S. and the world that we continue to regard the war as a conflict the South Vietnamese must win and take ultimate responsibility for. Substantial reductions in the numbers of U.S. military training personnel should be possible before the end of 1965. However, the U.S. should continue to reiterate that it will provide all the assistance and advice required to do the job regardless of how long it takes.

C. The situation has unquestionably been growing worse, at least since September: 1. In terms of government control of the countryside, about 40% of the territory is under Viet Cong control or predominant influence.5 In 22 of the 43 provinces, the Viet Cong control 50% or more of the land area, including 80% of Phuoc Tuy; 90% of Binh Duong; 75% of Hau Nghia; 90% of Long An; 90% of Kien Tuong; 90% of Dinh Tuong; 90% of Kien Hoar and 85% of An Xuyen.

2. Large groups of the population are now showing signs of apathy and indifference, and there are some signs of frustration6 within the U.S. contingent: a. The ARVN and paramilitary desertion rates, and particularly the latter, are high and increasing.

b. Draft dodging is high while the Viet Cong are recruiting energetically and effectively.

c. The morale of the hamlet militia and of the Self Defense Corps, on which the security of the hamlets depends, is poor and falling.

3. In the last 90 days the weakening of the government’s position has been particularly noticeable. For example: a. In Quang Nam province, in the I Corps, the militia in 17 hamlets turned in their weapons.

b. In Binh Duong province (III Corps) the hamlet militia were disarmed because of suspected disloyalty.

c. In Binh Dinh province, in the II Corps, 75 hamlets were severely damaged by the Viet Cong (in contrast, during the twelve months ending June 30, 1963, attacks on strategic hamlets were few and none was overrun).

d. In Quang Ngai province, at the northern edge of the II Corps, there were 413 strategic hamlets under government control a year ago. Of that number, 335 have been damaged to varying degrees or fallen into disrepair, and only 275 remain under government control.

e. Security throughout the IV Corps has deteriorated badly. The Viet Cong control virtually all facets of peasant life in the southernmost provinces and the government troops there are reduced to defending the administrative centers. Except in An Giang province (dominated by the Hoa Hao religious sect) armed escort is required for almost all movement in both the southern and northern areas of the IV Corps.

4. The political control structure extending from Saigon down into the hamlets disappeared following the November coup. Of the 41 incumbent province chiefs on November 1, 35 have been replaced (nine provinces had three province chiefs in three months; one province had four). Scores of lesser officials were replaced. Almost all major military commands have changed hands twice since the November coup. The faith of the peasants has been shaken by the disruptions in experienced leadership and the loss of physical security. In many areas, power vacuums have developed causing confusion among the people and a rising rate of rural disorders.

5. North Vietnamese support, always significant, has been increasing: a. Communications between Hanoi and the Viet Cong (see classified annex).7

b. Since July 1, 1963, the following items of equipment, not previously encountered in South Vietnam, have been captured from the Viet Cong: ChiCom 75 mm, recoilless rifles.

ChiCom heavy machine guns. U.S. .50 caliber heavy machine guns on Chicom mounts.

In addition, it is clear that the Viet Cong are using Chinese 90 mm rocket launchers and mortars.

c. The Viet Cong are importing large quantities of munitions and chemicals for the production of explosives: Approximately 50,000 pounds of explosive-producing chemicals destined for the Viet Cong have been intercepted in the 12 months ending March 1964. On December 24, five tons of ammunition, of which one and one-half tons were 75 mm recoilless rifle ammunition, was captured at the Dinh Tuong Viet Cong arsenal. Ninety percent was of ChiCom manufacture.

D. The greatest weakness in the present situation is the uncertain viability of the Khanh government. Khanh himself is a very able man within his experience, but he does not yet have wide political appeal and his control of the Army itself is uncertain (he has the serious problem of the jailed generals).8 After two coupe, as was mentioned above, there has been a sharp drop in morale and organization, and Khanh has not yet been able to build these up satisfactorily. There is a constant threat of assassination or of another coup, which would drop morale and organization nearly to zero.9 Whether or not French nationals are actively encouraging such a coup, de Gaulle’s position and the continuing pessimism and anti-Americanism of the French community in South Vietnam provide constant fuel to neutralist sentiment and the coup possibility. If a coup is set underway, the odds of our detecting and preventing it in the tactical sense are not high.10

E. On the positive side, we have found many reasons for encouragement in the performance of the Khanh government to date. Although its top layer is thin,11 it is highly responsive to U.S. advice, and with a good grasp of the basic elements of rooting out the Viet Cong. Opposition groups are fragmentary, and Khanh has brought in at least token representation from many key groups hitherto left out. He is keenly aware of the danger of assassination or coup and is taking resourceful steps to minimize these risks. All told, these evidences of energy, comprehension, and decision add up to a sufficiently strong chance of Khanh’s really taking hold in the next few months for us to devote all possible energy and resources to his support.

IV. Alternative Present Courses of Action

A. Negotiate on the Basis of “Neutralization”

While De Gaulle has not been clear on what he means by this and is probably deliberately keeping it vague as he did in working toward an Algerian settlement-he clearly means not only a South Vietnam that would not be a Western base or part of an alliance structure (both of which we could accept) but also withdrawal of all external military assistance and specifically total U.S. withdrawal. To negotiate on this basis-indeed without specifically rejecting it would simply mean a Communist take-over in South Vietnam. Only the U.S. presence after 1954 held the South together under far more favorable circumstances, and enabled Diem to refuse to go through with the 1954 provision calling for nationwide “free” elections in 1956. Even talking about a U.S. withdrawal would undermine any chance of keeping a non-Communist government in South Vietnam, and the rug would probably be pulled before the negotiations had gone far.12

12 The March 5 draft contained an extensive discussion of “just what kind of a solution we might be prepared to accept at some point through the path of negotiation.” This section suggested refining thinking on possible acceptable points to be included in future negotiations. Essentially, the 1954 Geneva Accords would provide the framework of the U.S. position with the following exceptions: 1) Removal of restrictions on external military assistance; 2) Establishment of an effective guarantee of South Vietnam’s borders with a police mechanism more effective than the ICC; 3) An equivalent guarantee of Cambodia’s borders and a rewriting of the 1962 Laos accords; and 4) Removal of the 1954 provision for “free elections” in all of Vietnam. The discussion held that neutralization of North Vietnam was unattainable, but could be considered for tactical reasons. It concluded that “the guts of what we are after is that North Vietnam should renew its understanding not to interfere in the South, and that this undertaking should be subject to really effective control this time.”

B. Initiate GVN and U.S. Military Actions Against North Vietnam13

We have given serious thought to all the implications and ways of carrying out direct military action against North Vietnam in order to supplement the counterinsurgency program in South Vietnam. (The analysis of overt U.S. action is attached as Annex A.)14 In summary, the actions break down into three categories:

1. Border Control Actions. For example: a. An expansion of current authority for Laotian overflights to permit low-level reconnaissance by aircraft when such flights are required to supplement the currently approved U–2 flights.

b. Vietnamese cross-border ground penetrations into Laos, without the presence of U.S. advisors or re-supply by U.S. aircraft.

c. Expansion of the patrols into Laos to include use of U.S. advisors and re-supply by U.S. aircraft.

d. Hot pursuit of VC forces moving across the Cambodian border and destruction of VC bases on the Vietnam/Cambodian line.

e. Air and ground strikes against selected targets in Laos by South Vietnam forces.

2. Retaliatory Actions. For example: a. Overt high and/or low level reconnaissance flights by U.S. or Farmgate aircraft over North Vietnam to assist in locating and identifying the sources of external aid to the Viet Cong.

b. Retaliatory bombing strikes and commando raids on a tit-for-tat basis by the GVN against NVN targets (communication centers, training camps, infiltration routes, etc.).

c. Aerial mining by the GVN aircraft (possibly with U.S. assistance) of the major NVN ports.

3. Graduated Overt Military Pressure by GVN and U.S. Forces.

This program would go beyond reacting on a tit-for-tat basis. It would include air attacks against military and possibly industrial targets. The program would utilize the combined resources of the GVN Air Force and the U.S. Farmgate Squadron, with the latter reinforced by three squadrons of B–57s presently in Japan. Before this program could be implemented it would be necessary to provide some additional air defense for South Vietnam and to ready U.S. forces in the Pacific for possible escalation.

The analysis of the more serious of these military actions (from 2(b) upward) revealed the extremely delicate nature of such operations, both from the military and political standpoints. There would be the problem of marshalling the case to justify such action, the problem of Communist escalation, and the problem of dealing with the pressures for premature or “stacked” negotiations. We would have to calculate the effect of such military actions against a specified political objective. That objective, while being cast in terms of eliminating North Vietnamese control and direction of the insurgency, would in practical terms be directed toward collapsing the morale and the self-assurance of the Viet Cong cadres now operating in South Vietnam and bolstering the morale of the Khanh regime. We could not, of course, be sure that our objective could be achieved by any means within the practical range of our options. Moreover, and perhaps most importantly, unless and until the Khanh government has established its position and preferably is making significant progress in the South, an overt extension of operations into the North carries the risk of being mounted from an extremely weak base which might at any moment collapse and leave the posture of political confrontation worsened rather than improved.

The other side of the argument is that the young Khanh government needs the reinforcement of some significant successes against the North and without them the in-country program, even with the expansion discussed in Section C below, may not be sufficient to stem the tide.

On balance, except to the extent suggested in Section V below, I recommend against initiation at this time of overt GVN and/or U.S. military actions against North Vietnam.

C. Initiate Measures to Improve the Situation in South Vietnam

There were and are sound reasons for the limits imposed by present policy-the South Vietnamese must win their own fight; U.S. intervention on a larger scale, and/or GVN actions against the North, would disturb key allies and other nations; etc. In any case, it is vital that we continue to take every reasonable measure to assure success in South Vietnam. The policy choice is not an “either/or” between this course of action and possible pressures against the North; the former is essential without regard to our decision with respect to the latter. The latter can, at best, only reinforce the former.

The following are the actions we believe can be taken in order to improve the situation both in the immediate future and over a longer term period. To emphasize that a new phase has begun, the measures to be taken by the Khanh government should be described by some term such as “South Vietnam’s Program for National Mobilization.”

Basic U.S. Posture

1. The U.S. at all levels must continue to make it emphatically clear that we are prepared to furnish assistance and support for as long as it takes to bring the insurgency under control.

2. The U.S. at all levels should continue to make it clear that we fully support the Khanh government and are totally opposed to any further coupe. The ambassador should instruct all elements, including the military advisors, to report intelligence information of possible coups promptly, with the decision to be made by the ambassador whether to report such information to Khanh. However, we must recognize that our chances would not be great of detecting and preventing a coup that had major military backing.

3. We should support fully the Pacification Plan now announced by Khanh (described in Annex B),15 and particularly the basic theory now fully accepted both on the Vietnamese and U.S. sides-of concentrating on the more secure areas and working out from these through military operations to provide security, followed by necessary civil and economic actions to make the presence of the government felt and to provide economic improvements. This so-called “oil spot” theory is excellent, and its acceptance is a major step forward. However, it is necessary to push hard to get specific instructions out to the provinces, so that there is real unity of effort at all levels. A related matter is to stabilize the assignment of province chiefs and senior commanders and clarify their responsibilities and relationships.

Many of the actions described in succeeding paragraphs fit right into the framework of the Plan as announced by Khanh. Wherever possible, we should tie our urging of such actions to Khanh’s own formulation of them, so that he will be carrying out a Vietnamese plan and not one imposed by the U.S.

Civil and Military Mobilization

4. To put the whole nation on a war footing—to obtain the manpower for these efforts described below and to remedy present inequities and inadequacies in the use of manpower—a new National Mobilization Plan (to include a National Service Law) should be urgently developed by the Country Team in collaboration with the Khanh government. The present structure of decrees, dating from the Diem government, is haphazard and produces substantial injustices. The new Program for National Mobilization would both greatly increase the effectiveness of the war effort and be a strong visible sign of the government’s determination and will. Full attention should be given to the way it is presented so that it appears as a remedy for past injustices; and not as a repressive or totalitarian act.

5. The strength of the Armed Forces (regular plus paramilitary) must be increased by at least 50,000 men. About 15,000 of these are required to fill the regular Armed Forces (ARVN) to their present authorized strength. Another 5,000 would fill the existing paramilitary forces to authorized strengths. The balance of 30,000 men is required to increase the strength of the paramilitary forces, in whatever form these may be organized (see paragraph 7 below). (All of the foregoing strength figures are illustrative and subject to review, which review I have directed General Harkins to make in consultation with General Khanh.)

6. A Civil Administrative Corps is urgently required to work in the provincial capitals, the district towns, the villages, and the hamlets. “Hamlet civic action teams” of five men each are now beginning to be trained, on a small scale, to go into hamlets after they have been cleared, start the rehabilitation process, and train hamlet leaders to carry on. School teachers and health technicians are now assigned to some hamlets, many more are needed, and those on the job need to be retrained to higher competence. Many other types of technicians (e.g., agricultural workers) are needed, in varying numbers. Taking into account the fact that many hamlets are not now secure, and that adequate training is required, the initial goal during 1964 should be at least 7,500 additional persons; the ultimate target, at least 40,000 men for the 8,000 hamlets, in 2500 villages and 43 provinces. The administrators would come largely from the areas in which they serve and would be paid by the national government. The U.S. should work with the GVN urgently to devise the necessary recruiting plans, training facilities, financing methods, and organizational arrangements, and should furnish training personnel at once, under the auspices of the AID Mission. Further, maximum effort should be made to make use of the available trained personnel by assignment to provincial and village administration where needed.

Improved Military Forces

7. The paramilitary forces are now understrength and lacking in effectiveness. They must be improved and reorganized.

Specifically: a. What remains of the present hamlet militia (and related forces of a part-time nature for hamlet defense) should be consolidated with the Self Defense Corps into a single force compensated by the national government.

b. Pay and collateral benefits must be substantially improved at once. A reasonable course of action would be to raise the pay scale of the Civil Guard approximately to that of the regular Armed Forces, and to raise the pay scale of a reorganized Self Defense Corps approximately to the present level of the Civil Guard. In addition, measures should be taken to improve the housing and allowances of the families of both forces, so that they can live decently in areas near where the forces are operating.

c. Strength should be maintained and expanded by conscription, effectively enforced, and by more centrally directed recruitment policies.

d. Additional U.S. personnel should be assigned to the training of all these paramilitary forces.

e. The National Police require special consideration. Their strength in the provinces should be substantially increased and consideration should be given to including them as part of an overall “Popular Defense Force”. In expanding and improving the police, the AID Mission should make special arrangements to draw on the advice of the present British training mission under Brigadier Thompson because of its experience in Malaya. (Mr. Bell has instructed Mr. Brent, the USOM Chief, to accomplish this.)

8. An offensive Guerrilla force should be created to operate along the border and in areas where VC control is dominant. Such a force could be organized around present Ranger Companies and ARVN Special Forces and provided with special training and advice by U.S. Special Forces. The force should carry the fight to the VC on their own basis in advance of clear-and-hold operations on the conventional pattern.

Additional Military Equipment for the GVN

9. The Vietnamese Air Force should be strengthened at once by the substitution of 25 A–1H aircraft for the present 25 T–28s. The A–1H aircraft has a much greater bomb load and slightly better speed.16

16 Concurrently, the effectiveness of the USAF’s Farmgate operation will be increased by assignment of A–1E aircraft in replacement of B–26s and T–28s. Furthermore, in another important area, we are strengthening the U.S. intelligence and reporting system. [Footnote in the source text.]

10. Although there are no major equipment deficiencies in other forces, we should act at once to replace the present M–114 armored personnel carriers by 63 M–113s and to provide additional river boats. Additional lesser deficiencies should also be met at an estimated cost of approximately $10 million.

Economic Actions

11. The approved, but unannounced, Fertilizer Program should be particularly stressed and expanded and publicly announced. Its target of 85,000 tons for the present planting season (April–June) should probably be doubled for the next season and trebled the following season, both to provide immediate and direct benefits to peasants in secure areas and to improve the rice crops and export earnings. Estimates are that an additional ton of fertilizer costing around $70 can, if properly applied, produce additional yield of an equivalent two tons of rice, which might be sold for $110 per ton. Thus, the potential export improvement alone could be on the order of $20 million from this year’s 85,000 ton input.

US and GVN Costs of the Above Actions

The above actions will involve a limited increase in U.S. personnel and in direct Defense Department costs. More significantly, they involve significant increase in Military Assistance Program costs and in the budget of the GVN itself, with the latter requiring additional US economic aid. The estimates of additional annual costs are as follows: Action GVN Budget Costs Cost to U.S.

a. Raise military and paramilitary numbers and pay scales 5–6 billion piastres $30–40 million17

b. Enlarge civil administrative cadre 250 million piastres (1st year) $1,500,000 (first year)

c. Furnish additional military equipment $20 million (one time)

Conclusion

If the Khanh government can stay in power and the above actions can be carried out rapidly, it is my judgment that the situation in South Vietnam can be significantly improved in the next four to six months.18 The present deterioration may continue for a part of this period, but I believe it can be levelled out and some improvement will become visible during the period. I therefore believe that this course of action should be urgently pursued while we prepare such additional actions as may be necessary for success.

V. Possible Later Actions

If the Khanh government takes hold vigorously-inspiring confidence, whether or not noteworthy progress has been made-or if we get hard information of significantly stepped-up VC arms supply from the North, we may wish to mount new and significant pressures against North Vietnam. We should start preparations for such a capability now. (See Annex C for an analysis of the situation in North Vietnam and Communist China.)19 Specifically, we should develop a capability to initiate within 72 hours the “Border Control”20 and “Retaliatory Actions” referred to on pages 5 and 6, and we should achieve a capability to initiate with 30 days’ notice the program of “Graduated Overt Military Pressure.” The reasoning behind this program of preparations for initiating action against North Vietnam is rooted in the fact that, even with progress in the pacification plan, the Vietnamese Government and the population in the South will still have to face the prospect of a very lengthy campaign based on a war-weary nation and operating against Viet Cong cadres who retain a great measure of motivation and assurance.

In this connection, General Khanh stated that his primary concern is to establish a firm base in the South. He favors continuation of covert activities against North Vietnam, but until such time as “rear area security” has been established, he does not wish to engage in overt operations against the North.

In order to accelerate the realization of pacification and particularly in order to denigrate the morale of the Viet Cong forces, it may be necessary at some time in the future to put demonstrable retaliatory pressure on the North. Such a course of action might proceed according to the scenario outlined in Annex D.

VI. Other Actions Considered But Rejected

We have considered the following actions, but rejected them for the time being except to the extent indicated below: 1. Return of Dependents. We recommend that the present policy be continued of permitting dependents to return home on a voluntary basis, but not ordering them to do so. The security situation in Saigon appears to have improved significantly, and ordering dependents home would now, in the universal judgment of our senior people in Saigon, have a serious impact on South Vietnamese morale. It would also raise a serious question whether tours of duty for AID personnel would not have to be shortened. Thus, unless there are further serious incidents, or unless we were taking more drastic measures generally we believe compulsory return should not be undertaken.

2. Furnishing a U.S. Combat Unit to Secure the Saigon Area. It is the universal judgment of our senior people in Saigon, with which we concur, that this action would now have serious adverse psychological consequences and should not be undertaken.

3. U.S. Taking Over Command. It has been suggested that the U.S. move from its present advisory role to a role that would amount in practice to effective command. Again, the judgment of all senior people in Saigon, with which we concur, is that the possible military advantages of such action would be far outweighed by its adverse psychological impact. It would cut across the whole basic picture of the Vietnamese winning their own war and lay us wide open to hostile propaganda both within South Vietnam and outside. Moreover, the present responsiveness of the GVN to our advice-although it has not yet reduced military reaction time-makes it less urgent. At the same time, MACV is steadily taking actions to bring U.S. and GVN operating staffs closer together at all levels, including joint operating rooms at key command levels.

VII. Recommendations21

I recommend that you instruct the appropriate agencies of the U.S. Government: 1. To make it clear that we are prepared to furnish assistance and support to South Vietnam for as long as it takes to bring the insurgency under control.

2. To make it clear that we fully support the Khanh government and are opposed to any further coupe.

3. To support a Program for National Mobilization (including a national service law) to put South Vietnam on a war footing.

4. To assist the Vietnamese to increase the armed forces (regular plus paramilitary) by at least 50,000 men.

5. To assist the Vietnamese to create a greatly enlarged Civil Administrative Corps for work at province, district and hamlet levels.

6. To assist the Vietnamese to improve and reorganize the paramilitary forces and to increase their compensation.

7. To assist the Vietnamese to create an offensive guerrilla force.

8. To provide the Vietnamese Air Force 25 A–1H aircraft in exchange for the present T–28s.

9. To provide the Vietnamese Army additional M–113 armored personnel carriers (withdrawing the M–114s there), additional river boats, and approximately $5–10 million of other additional material.

10. To announce publicly the Fertilizer Program and to expand it with a view within two years to trebling22 the amount of fertilizer made available.

11. To authorize continued high-level U.S. overflights of South Vietnam’s borders and to authorize “hot pursuit” and South Vietnamese ground operations over the Laotian line for the purpose of border control. More ambitious operations into Laos involving units beyond battalion size should be authorized only with the approval of Souvanna Phouma. Operations across the Cambodian border should depend on the state of relations with Cambodia.

12. To prepare immediately to be in a position on 72 hours’ notice to initiate the full range of Laotian and Cambodian “Border Control” actions (beyond those authorized in paragraph 11 above) and the “Retaliatory Actions” against North Vietnam, and to be in a position on 30 days’ notice to initiate the program of “Graduated Overt Military Pressure” against North Vietnam.

Robert S. McNamara

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. Secret. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 499–510 and published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 148A. On March 16, Bromley Smith sent a slightly revised version of this memorandum to the National Security Council for consideration at a March 17 meeting. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V)

A March 2 preliminary draft of this memorandum was prepared by William Bundy over the weekend of February 29–March 1, designed, in Bundy’s words, as an “overall vehicle for thought and also designed by Secretary McNamara to serve as a possible framework for his report upon his return.” Bundy’s covering memorandum and the draft are ibid., Vol IV. They are published in Declassified Documents, 1975, 157A. On March 4, an abbreviated version of the draft was sent to those officials attending the March 5 NSC meeting (see Document 71). This March 4 draft is in Department of State, Bundy Files, WPB Special Papers. An undated White House copy of the abbreviated March 4 draft, received for filing on March 6, is published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 146D.

Two additional drafts of the full memorandum, March 5 and March 13, are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. Important differences between these drafts and the final memorandum as submitted to the President are noted in footnotes below.

2 The introduction highlighting the two questions to be addressed appeared in the March 13 draft. In previous drafts, the report was introduced as an analysis of problems in Vietnam, possible courses of action, and pro and cons of a program of military action against North Vietnam.

3 The adjective “unqualified” referring to use of combat troops first appeared in the March 13 draft. The last two sentences of section 11 were also added to the March 13 draft.

4 Mr. McCone emphasizes that the GVN/US program can never be considered completely satisfactory so long as it permits the Viet Cong a sanctuary in Cambodia and a continuing uninterrupted and unmolested source of supply and reinforcement from NVN through Laos. [Footnote in the source text that first appeared in the March 13 draft.]

5 In the March 5 draft the figure was 30 percent.

6 In the March 5 draft “declining morale” was used rather than “frustration.”

7 Not found.

8 The observation in the parenthesis was added to the March 13 draft.

9 Mr. McCone does not believe the dangers of another coup (except as a result of a possible assassination) at this time are as serious as he believes this paragraph implies. [Footnote in the source text that first appeared in the March 13 draft.1

10 In the March 5 draft, a section IV, “The Situation in North Vietnam and Communist China,” followed this paragraph. The section concluded that “the Viet Cong operation has been a North Vietnamese show from the beginning and almost certainly remains so,” and maintained that Hanoi did not need help from China nor did it want it. While leaning toward Peking rather than Moscow, North Vietnam wanted to win the war in the south “by itself.” The section highlighted North Vietnam’s vulnerabilities: agriculture, a weak industrial base, and dependence on outside sources for POL. The conclusion was that the North Vietnamese feared U.S. action and “serious pressure could affect Hanoi’s determination or at least lead them to throttle back.” The assessment concluded that the Soviet Union was presently unwilling to help North Vietnam and that China, despite its encouragement, was unwilling to commit itself to offering significant help.

11 In the March 13 draft, at this point was the phrase “it is more able than under any previous regime,” with a footnote in the source text that reads as follows:

“Mr. McCone, while encouraged by Khanh’s evident ability, does not believe that we have had enough experience with the members of Khanh’s government to be able to make this judgment.”

13 From this point, the March 5 draft differs both organizationally and substantively from the March 13 draft and final memorandum. The reorganization reflects the results of the McNamara Mission. Hereafter only differences between the March 13 draft and the final resort will be noted.

14 Not found.

15 Not found, but see footnote 3, Document 51.

17 Increases in GVN budget expenditures do not automatically require equal increases in U.S. economic aid. As a rough approximation, subject to later refinement, an increase of 5–6 billion piastres of GVN budget expenditures might require an increase of $30–40 million worth of imports financed through U.S. economic aid. Some of the imports undoubtedly could be obtained under P.L. 480. [Footnote in the source text.]

18 In the March 13 draft, the time frame for improvement was “the next three to four months” and an extensive crossed-out footnote reads as follows:

“Mr. McCone believes that the situation in South Vietnam is so serious that it calls for more immediate and positive action than I have proposed. His reasons are: ’(1) General Minh is discontented and his attitude will be a drag on Khanh’s efforts to activate the military and civilian establishments. (2) Khanh’s three Vice Premiers cannot give him the solid help that he needs because two of them, Hoan (an important political figure in Dai Viet Party) and Oanh (a capable economist and professor) have been out of the country for ten years or more and are therefore out of touch, and General Mau is known to be an affable but not a strong figure. General Khiem (Minister of Defense) is not particularly impressive. Parenthetically, it is reported to me that Generals Khiem, Mau and Thieu (Khanh’s Chief of Staff) are the trio who conceived the January 30th coup. (3) I have received so many reports that the ARVN, from field grade officers down, lack the motivation and will and/or techniques to confront the enemy that I cannot but accept this as probable truth. This is also present among the middle and lower level civil officials. (4) The morale of the people in the hamlets and villages and countryside is reported as very low. (5) The irregular forces, i.e., Civil Guard and Self Defense Corps, are ineffective and the Hamlet Militia have virtually disintegrated. (6) The Viet Cong situation is improving militarily, organizationally, and in their political power over the people of the countryside.’”

“He concurs in the actions outlined in the previous pages and in Sections V and V11 below, but states that they are ‘too little too late.’ In addition he would: (1) Have General Khanh meet immediately with Sihanouk for the purpose of developing a joint South Vietnam-Cambodia program to clear the Cambodian border. And, if there is no successful meeting, General Khanh with U.S. assistance would stop all traffic on the Mekong River into and from Cambodia, and would implement immediately ‘border control’ item (b) on page 5 above (i.e., Vietnamese patrols, with appropriate U.S. aerial resupply, into Laotian territory). (3) Have Khanh negotiate with Chiang Kai-shek for the movement of two or possibly three divisions into the southern tip of the Delta in order to give impetus and support to the hard-pressed ARVN effort in that area. (4) Implement immediately ‘retaliatory’ item (a) on page 6 above (i.e., overt U.S. air reconnaissance over North Vietnam). He recommends that the overflights be over populous areas for psychological in addition to intelligence purposes.”

19 Not found

20 Authority should be granted immediately for covert Vietnamese operations into Laos, for the purposes of border control and of “hot pursuit” into Laos. Decision on “hot pursuit” into Cambodia should await further study of our relations with that country. [Footnote in the source text.]

21 The March 13 draft contains a crossed-out footnote that reads as follows:

“Mr. McCone believes that these recommendations, in which he concurs without reservation, are inadequate to meet the ‘very serious situation confronting us in Vietnam and recommends the additional actions stated in the footnote to the Conclusions to Section IV of this Report for the reasons there stated.’”

22 In the March 13 draft, the amount of fertilizer to be made available reads “doubled.”

85. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 85. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, March 17, 1964—9:28 p.m.

1. I have now personally reviewed your cables 1754 through 17572 and have considered them with Secretaries of State and Defense. I am delighted to find that we have a very high measure of agreement.

2. Your comments on various sections of McNamara report3 make good sense to all of us, and report has been revised to meet most of your points. Revised version as approved today in National Security Council follows by air.

3. We have also shortened and amended the White House statement4 to reconcile it with your comments. Different people seem to view the past differently, but there is no point in letting such differences worry us as we go forward.

4. Specifically with respect to the comments in your 1757 your whole-hearted support of first eleven recommendations covers our most important efforts which are still in South Vietnam. On your additional comments, I have reached the following conclusions: (1) I think additional actions against Laos and Cambodia should be intensively examined. We have agreed that cross-border ground penetrations should be initiated into Laos along any lines which can be worked out by Khanh and Phoumi with Souvanna’s endorsement, and I will authorize low-level reconnaissance there wherever the present high-level flights indicate that such reconnaissance may be needed.

The questions of further U.S. participation and of air and ground strikes against Laos raise tough diplomatic issues and I have asked Rusk and McNamara to concert a further recommendation. My first thought is that it is important to seek support from Souvanna Phouma and to build a stronger case before we take action which might have only limited military effect and could trigger wider Communist action in Laos.

On Cambodia we find ourselves hard put to keep abreast of the rapid changes Sihanouk introduces into the scene.5 Our impression is that bilateral GVN-RKG talks may now be in progress and State has sent you some thoughts on those prospects.6 However, in the event of further deterioration, I would expect to authorize hot pursuit.

On overt high- or low-level reconnaissance over North Vietnam, we are not ready to make a decision now. I have asked that political and diplomatic preparations be made to lay a basis for such reconnaissance if it seems necessary or desirable after a few weeks, for military or political reasons, or both.

(2) As I read your comments on John McCone’s points, the main items are those discussed above on Laos and Cambodia. We agree that Mekong traffic is a trump card, and State has already sent you a message on this question.7

We agree that large-scale Chinese Nationalist incursion would be a mistake, but high quality advisers are different matter and we will send further thoughts on that.

(3) I have ordered a review of your paper of October 30.8 My own inclination is to favor such pressures, short of overt military action.

(4) Like you, I reserve judgment on such overt U.S. measures against North Vietnam. Question of direct retaliation for attacks on Americans is more complex. As I understand it from McNamara mission, these attacks are not an immediate present threat, but you are authorized to prepare contingency recommendation for specific tit-for-tat actions in the event attacks on Americans are renewed.

Your cable does not mention it, but Bob McNamara has reported your concern about the effectiveness of our representations to the French. I have discussed this matter with Bohlen and we now plan that he will raise these matters with General De Gaulle personally when latter returns from Caribbean. Department is drafting instructions and will circulate them for your comment before they are final.9 Meanwhile we may wish to consider whether at some point it would be fruitful for you to go to Paris yourself to explain the realities of the situation to the General. In the light of your wartime connection with France, this possibility seems to me to have real merit.10

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted in the White House and approved by Rusk. Transmitted as telegram 1454 to Saigon, which is the source text.

2 In these telegrams from Saigon, March 15, Lodge commented on the March 13 draft of the McNamara report. Lodge thought that the situation in South Vietnam had been growing worse since May, not September, 1963. He took exception to the view that U.S. officials in Vietnam were any more “frustrated” than was normal “in the tropics dealing with orientals,” and noted that CIA “old hands” reported some improvement in the lower Delta. Lodge thought that most former province chiefs were incompetent, did not consider the jailed Generals a threat to Khanh’s control of the army, and blamed the poor showing of South Vietnam in reacting to the Viet Cong’s challenge on the Diem government’s policies and legacy. As for McCone’s views, Lodge doubted that a meeting between Sihanouk and Khanh would accomplish much, and he considered stopping traffic on the Mekong bound for Cambodia and hot pursuit of Viet Cong into Cambodia as justifiable because Cambodia was no longer a “bona fide neutral.” Lodge opposed the idea of Chinese Nationalist troops in Vietnam, although he thought they and the South Koreans might serve as advisers. He opposed recommendation 12 of the McNamara report, recommended his idea of a “diplomatic carrot-and-stick approach backed by covert military means” in dealing with North Vietnam, and reserved judgment on overt U.S. military action against the North. (All ibid., POL 27 VIET S, except telegram 1756 which is POL 32 CAMBODIA–VIET S)

3 Supra.

4 See footnote 3, Document 86.

5 Sihanouk rejected a proposal for a quadripartite conference on Cambodia, rejected bilateral talks with South Vietnam on frontier differences, and sent a mission to Hanoi to discuss South Vietnamese border matters.

6 Apparent reference to telegram 1452 to Saigon, March 17. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 8 CAMB)

7 Not further identified.

8 Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. V, pp. 656–659.

9 See footnote 3, Document 92.

10 Telegram 1454 does not bear President Johnson’s signature.

86. Summary Record of the 524th Meeting of the National Security Council, 86. Summary Record of the 524th Meeting of the National Security Council,1

Washington, March 17, 1964, Noon.

REPORT OF SECRETARY MCNAMARA’S TRIP TO VIETNAM

In response to a request from the President, Mr. McCone reported that there was nothing new out of Vietnam this morning worthy of mention. Secretary Rusk said that we had preliminary information about what might become an important new development, i.e., that Sihanouk of Cambodia is turning away from North Vietnam and is prepared to work out an understanding with South Vietnam.

Secretary Rusk presented the recommendations on pages 17 and 18 of Secretary McNamara’s report on Vietnam (attached).2 He said that no one could guarantee that the proposed program would ensure success, but that if the situation in South Vietnam continued to deteriorate, the proposed recommendations provided for readying forces which could be used if it were decided later to take the war to North Vietnam.

Secretary McNamara said he had no additional comments to make but asked General Taylor to present the military actions discussed in the report. General Taylor began by commenting that highlevel overflights of North Vietnam are now possible, but if we required low-level reconnaissance, we will have to use U.S. planes overtly. General Taylor then covered the sections of the report, including border control actions, retaliatory actions, and the graduated overt military pressure program. He said that the kinds of military actions he described would produce strong reactions in Cambodia and in North Vietnam including, as a final act, asking the Chinese Communists to come to their support. Risk of escalation would be greatest if we undertook the overt military pressure program, and before doing so, we would want to improve the readiness of U.S. naval forces in the Pacific.

General Taylor said the Chiefs support the McNamara report. They favor readying forces now which would be required if it were decided later to take further military action than that recommended in the report. The Chiefs also want to examine the possibility of reducing from 72 to 24 hours the prior notice required to undertake actions against North Vietnam.

Secretary McNamara said that each Department and Agency concurs with the recommendations which fall in its area of responsibility. Ambassador Lodge agrees with all the recommendations except for his views on the need for overt reconnaissance of Cambodia. Mr. McGeorge Bundy pointed out that Ambassador Lodge’s recommendation on Cambodian reconnaissance has been overtaken by events. No decision on this matter can be taken until we have further information about the conversations which are taking place between Khanh and the Cambodians.

The President said it was his understanding that Ambassador Lodge approved all the recommendations in the report except the one which has been overtaken by events and which he can be told lies in the area of unfinished business. The President then asked Secretary McNamara to summarize all twelve of his recommendations.

Secretary McNamara said as to cost, the program proposed would involve an expenditure of between $50 million and $60 million by the South Vietnamese, but that the actual cost to us would be approximately $30 million. Some of the cost will be covered by PL 480 funds and the remainder will come from reallocation of funds to meet the new plans. No supplemental budget request will be necessary.

Secretary McNamara covered very briefly all twelve recommendations. He agreed that the Joint Chiefs of Staff should study the proposal to reduce the 72-hour notice proposal contained in Recommendation 12. He agreed that this time should be reduced if it is possible to do so without resulting in the maldeployment of our forces in the Pacific.

The President asked Secretary McNamara if his program would reverse the current trend in South Vietnam. Secretary McNamara replied that if we carry out energetically the proposals he has made, Khanh can stem the tide in South Vietnam, and within four to six months, improve the situation there.

The President summarized the alternatives to the recommended course of action, i.e., putting in more U.S. forces, pulling out of the area, or neutralizing the area. He said the course we are following is the only realistic alternative. It will have the maximum effectiveness with the minimum loss.

General Taylor said the Chiefs believed the proposed program was acceptable, but it may not be sufficient to save the situation in Vietnam. He commented that the Chiefs’ interest in military action against North Vietnam was based on their belief that action against North Vietnam might be necessary to make effective the program recommended by Secretary McNamara.

Secretary McNamara commented that Khanh had told him that he opposed taking the war to North Vietnam now because he felt that the South Vietnamese need a more secure base in the South before undertaking expanded military action.

The President said the McNamara proposals did not foreclose action later if the situation did not improve as we expected. He asked whether anyone present had any objections. Hearing none, he said the recommendations were approved.

The President, accompanied by Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, USIA Director Rowan, and Mr. McGeorge Bundy, went to his office where a draft press statement was revised and later issued. (Copy attached)3

Bromley Smith4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, U.S. Policy Toward Vietnam. Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. A full attendance list for this meeting is ibid.

2 Document 84

3 The final statement is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, pp. 387–388. Attached to a Department of State copy of the McNamara report of March 16 was a draft of this statement with handwritten revisions. (Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meetings, 3/17/64)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

87. National Security Action Memorandum No. 288 87. National Security Action Memorandum No. 2881

Washington, March 17, 1964.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Secretary of the Treasury

The Attorney General

The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Director, United States Information Agency

The Director, Bureau of the Budget

The Administrator, Agency for International Development

SUBJECT

Implementation of South Vietnam Programs

1. The report of Secretary McNamara dated March 16, 1964 was considered and approved by the President in a meeting of the National Security Council on March 17. All agencies concerned are directed to proceed energetically with the execution of the recommendations of that report.

2. The President, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, has designated the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs to coordinate the execution of the recommendations in the report.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSAMs. Secret

88. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan), 88. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan),1

Washington, March 17, 1964, 5:15 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM MR. ROWAN

R said in terms of our broadcast into North Vietnam, we are confused as to whether we should play up North Vietnam as tool of Chinese or that they are caught between Moscow and Peking. Sec said he would think the theme should be their leaders are leading them into an unnecessary and fratricidal struggle with their brothers and this is eating up their own resources and threatening them with unnecessary dangers. Sec said he would think R should draw the line between Hanoi leadership and their own people; and then the Chinese business; Sec said not to get into the Moscow-Peking aspect.

[Here follows discussion of matters unrelated to Vietnam.]

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Carolyn J. Proctor of Secretary Rusk’s staff.

89. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 89. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 18, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

I have read Bill Smith’s two memoranda on Vietnam2 with great interest. These support in appropriate cautious language some of the things which I have been hearing myself. It may be worthwhile for all of us if I commit to paper some additional evidence in support of Bill Smith’s worries.

Before Sullivan left for Saigon, he attended a meeting of the JCS with Secretary McNamara and General Taylor. Sullivan reported to me that he was impressed by the vehemence of opinion in the JCS for strong overt U.S. action against the North. Admiral McDonald was particularly outspoken, but the other Chiefs appeared to support his views.

General Anthis (who is Krulak’s successor) told me after a rather wet working dinner at Ray Cline’s office that he felt if we couldn’t “make the high jumps in South Vietnam, then we should pole-vault into the North”.

After the mission’s return from Saigon, Sullivan tells me that McNamara’s report was very strenuously criticized by some officers in MACV and some of his own team. Yesterday a correspondent from Time Magazine (Cook) told me he was convinced that the decision not to attack the North was made because President Johnson did not wish to face a domestic political crisis before the election. He said that his Pentagon sources were convinced that the correct decision in Vietnam was avoided for this reason. I told him this was hogwash and could not come from responsible officials and certainly not anyone who was associated with the top-level team representing all interested agencies who accompanied the Secretary.

So I agree with Bill Smith that there may be a problem developing here, but I don’t think it is quite like the missile gap issue in 1960. The difficulty then apparently was that the Eisenhower Administration felt it could not safely disclose enough of the facts to permit a reasonable explanation of the Government’s position. I don’t think quite the same problem exists with respect to our policies in Southeast Asia today. The question of whether or not overt U.S. forces should be used against the North depends upon an assessment of factors which are, in most instances, currently discussed in the press. Against the history of the Bay of Pigs and the October Cuban crisis, the advantage in political debate, I think, lies with the Administration. Prudence and caution are really more popular stances, I believe, than loud demands for war. The thing to avoid is too flat an impression that we have stopped thinking about all the possibilities.

I agree with Bill Smith that responsible officials in the Government should be encouraged to speak quite frankly about our current estimates of the position in South Vietnam and the rationale supporting McNamara’s recommendations. In speaking about the North, it should be emphasized that the situation is constantly being reviewed by Defense and State to see if further actions need be taken.

Actually, I am somewhat more worried by those who argue for a bugout in Southeast Asia than I am by the adherents of Rostow.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. Secret.

2 In March 17 memoranda to Bundy, William Y. Smith of the NSC Staff reported “undercurrents” of pessimism within the Department of Defense over the situation in South Vietnam. The belief was that there was no alternative to Khnah, yet he did not have the ability to rally the army. Furthermore, Smith reported that some feared that the Johnson administration was not taking forthright action because of the upcoming Presidential campaign. In his second memorandum, Smith drew an analogy between the missile gap issue in the 1960 campaign and Vietnam in 1964. Smith suggested that the Johnson administration should avoid the mistakes made by Eisenhower in 1960 by briefing opposition candidates on Vietnam and by making sure that the administration spoke with one voice. (Ibid.)

90. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 90. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, March 18, 1964.

Attached are two parting memoranda from Roger Hilsman to Dean Rusk which are worth your attention when you have a chance to read them. With exceptions, I think they are a good and clear assessment of the basic view of the matter which this Government has had right along. Roger is a better analyst than administrator, and this is the sort of thing he has done best. His specific proposal that we put some troops in Thailand is more attractive to State Department and White House staff than to the Pentagon, because its object is political and not military. I think you may hear more of this proposal in coming weeks.

McG. B.

Attachment

Washington, March 14, 1964.

Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Secretary of State2

Dear Mr. Secretary: As I leave Government service and the post of Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, I thought it might be useful for me to set down my thoughts on the persistent and stubborn problem of Southeast Asia, which has plagued us for the past decade.

Although our ability to control the course of events in Southeast Asia is inherently limited, I think the root of our present troubles there—in South Viet-Nam, Laos, Cambodia, and even Thailand—lies primarily in the gnawing doubts of both the Southeast Asians and the Communists as to our ultimate intentions in the region.

Since the fall of Dienbienphu, all Asians have wondered about our determination to fight in Southeast Asia, should fighting become necessary. Given the facts of life in a nuclear world, they are not impressed with the totality of our power even though the strategic balance tips heavily in our favor. Both free and Communist Asians scrutinize our actions and words for signs of U.S. determination to use appropriate force, tailored to the essentially limited political objectives we seek in this part of the world-that is, free and independent nations rather than bastions of anti-Communism. But of such determination they seem to feel they have seen few signs. The alacrity with which the Communists fell into line after we introduced troops into Thailand following the fall of Nam Tha illustrates the effectiveness of such moves as well as the fact that the Communists continue to worry that we might well fight if they push us too hard.

It seems to me that these doubts about our ultimate intentions are fundamental and recurrent wherever you look in Southeast Asia. We all say that Sihanouk is misbehaving because he feels that we are losing in South Viet-Nam. But even Sihanouk understands the extent of American power, and what he means by his statement that Communism is the wave of the future is most probably that he feels the United States is not prepared to do what is necessary to preserve Southeast Asia as a whole. Generosity, maturity, and restraint have not worked with Sihanouk. But so far it must seem to him that we are acting from weakness, and he might respond quite differently if he thought we were acting from strength.

In Laos, the Communists have pursued a two-track policy. They scratch away at the neutralist and conservative positions with one hand, pausing on each occasion to assess our reaction. With the other hand, they continue to toy with talks about a Government of National Union and implementation of the Geneva Accords. Quite clearly, they are keeping both lines open-ready to go ahead with implementing the Geneva Accords if and when they finally become convinced that we are both able and determined to permit them no other honorable alternative, and ready to nibble our position away completely if we appear indecisive.

The Thais, with infinite patience, are merely waiting. Although their indecision shows occasionally in reminiscences about their past successes in balancing off the rivalries of Great Powers, most Thais are prepared to be stubborn: they will match what they think is vigor with vigor and what they think is indecisiveness with indecisiveness.

The South Vietnamese are equally concerned. DeGaulle, Lippmann, and Mansfield have set the neutralist hares running with self-fulfilling prophecies that dishearten those who wish to fight and encourage coup-plotting among both the true neutralists and the simple opportunists. But what gives these lofty, unrealistic thoughts of a peaceful neutralist Asia their credibility is, again, fundamental doubts about our ultimate intentions.

A corollary to the preceding analysis is that we have so far failed as a Government to mesh fully the many different instrumentalities of foreign policy and thus to obtain full benefit from mutually reinforcing actions. This is true throughout Southeast Asia, but especially in South Viet-Nam. It applies to all instrumentalities of foreign policy equally, but it can best be summed up by Clausewitz’s dictum that war is politics pursued by other means. We must learn better how to tailor our military might, aid, etc., to political purposes and, most important, to orchestrate military power more neatly with diplomacy and politics.

If we can successfully convince our friends and allies as well as the Communists and those, such as De Gaulle and Sihanouk, who tend to serve the Communists’ purposes, that we are determined to take whatever measures are necessary in Southeast Asia to protect those who oppose the Communists and to maintain our power and influence in the area, we will have established an atmosphere in which our problems in Laos, Viet-Nam and Cambodia may be amenable to solution. In such an atmosphere, the Communist side must inevitably be more cautious as it contemplates the possibility that we might escalate hostility to a level unacceptable to them. It is not necessary that they be certain of what we will do; but we must give them reason to assume that we are prepared to go as far as necessary to defeat their plans and achieve our objectives.

I believe, therefore, that we must urgently begin to strengthen our overall military posture in Southeast Asia in ways which will make it clear that we are single-mindedly improving our capability to take whatever military steps may be necessary to halt Communist aggression in the area. Because Thailand, a loyal friend and ally, is the keystone of our position in Southeast Asia, we should begin by introducing substantial U.S. ground and air forces into that country in order (1) to imply clearly that we are prepared to introduce U.S. ground forces into Laos if necessary, and (2) to guarantee that, whatever else happens, Thailand itself will not be left to the mercy of Communist aggression. This step, in which some of our SEATO allies should be willing to join, must be accompanied by a diplomatic offensive designed (1) to reassure our friends as to our determination, and (2) to warn the Communist side that they are indeed playing a “deeply dangerous game.”

I scarcely need add that I do not envisage this U.S. buildup of a military presence in Thailand as susceptible to dismantlement in the short term. No matter what we do, our problems in Southeast Asia are not going to vanish overnight and we must be prepared to maintain a strong military posture in the area quite indefinitely. (I believe the Thais will gratefully accept and fully cooperate with such a determined U.S. approach to the mutual threat; as I say, all that really bothers them is doubt as to our intention to remain in the area.)

At the same time, we should keep clear in our own minds an important distinction between means and objectives in Southeast Asia. A strong military posture in Thailand is an instrument, not an objective. Its purpose will be served once Thailand and its neighbors have the wherewithal to maintain their own freedom and independence whether through new collective security arrangements or a gradual receding of the Communist threat.

Meanwhile, the strengthening of our position in Thailand, together with our flat assertions of determination to take whatever steps the situation in the area requires and our clear commitment to a victory in the guerrilla war in South Viet-Nam, would, in my view, make all of the problems we face in the area more susceptible to effective treatment.

By way of conclusion, I would say that we have not yet lost the struggle for Southeast Asia, and I see no reason for despair. But I believe we must focus on the essentials of the problems confronting us and pursue an integrated and coordinated policy toward the area as a whole if we are to come out on top. We must take action that will make it clear to friend and foe alike that we mean to fulfill our responsibilities in Southeast Asia.

I am attaching a separate summary of my views on the situation we face in South Viet-Nam.

Sincerely,

Roger Hilsman

Attachment

Washington, March 14, 1964.

Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Hilsman) to the Secretary of State3

SUBJECT

South Viet-Nam

In my judgment, the strategic concept that was developed for South Viet-Nam remains basically sound. If we can ever manage to have it implemented fully and with vigor, the result will be victory.

The concept is based on the assumption that villagers in Southeast Asia are fumed inward on themselves and have little or no sense of identification with either the national government or Communist ideology—that the villagers are isolated physically, politically and psychologically. In such circumstances, it is not at all difficult to develop a guerrilla movement. In Burma during World War II, about 150 Americans created a guerrilla force of 30,000, and did it with white faces. It is hardly surprising that the Viet Cong could do equally well or better in South Viet-Nam.

A corollary to this assumption is that the villagers’ greatest desire is security and that, if the villagers are given security, some simple progress towards a better life, and—most important of all—a sense that the government cares about them and their future, they will respond with loyalty.

The recent USIA survey of Long An4 gives some evidence of the validity of this assumption. 1,250 families were interviewed in Long An, which is among the worst of the Delta provinces. The results were as follows: In insecure villages, 75 percent of the people expressed an attitude towards the Viet Cong and the government that was essentially “a plague on both their houses”, and 25 percent of the people were silent. In relatively secure villages—those which could be penetrated by large Viet Cong groups but not by small patrols—50 percent of the people took a “plague on both their houses” point of view, and 50 percent were mildly pro-government. In very secure villages, which had also received some benefits, such as a school or a well, the people were 100 percent pro-government and expressed a determination to fight the Viet Cong.

On the basis of such an apparently valid assumption, the strategic concept calls for primary emphasis on giving security to the villagers. The tactics are the so-called oil-blot approach, starting with a secure area and extending it slowly, making sure no Viet Cong pockets are left behind, and using police units to winkle out the Viet Cong agents in each particular village.

This calls for the use of military forces in a different way from that of orthodox, conventional war. Rather than chasing Viet Cong, the military must put primary emphasis on clear-and-hold operations and on rapid reinforcement of villages under attack. It is also important, of course, to keep the Viet Cong regular units off balance by conventional offensive operations, but these should be secondary to the major task of extending security.

All this requires careful coordination of military operations, police efforts and rural development towards the primary objectives: the extension of security over the heavily-populated regions of the Delta, the cutting off of Viet Cong sources of supplies and especially recruits, and their dispersion into the jungles and mountains where they can be worn down by attrition, starvation and more conventional military means.

At the heart of the strategic concept are two basic principles:

The first is that of the oil blot. In the past, the GVN sought to blanket the whole country with so-called strategic hamlets which in many cases involved nothing more than wire-enclosed villages doused with political propaganda, with the Viet Cong agents left in place. The result was to blanket the Delta with little Dienbienphus—indefensible, inadequately armed hamlets far from reinforcements, that lacked both government benefits and police facilities to winkle out Communist sympathizers, with Viet Cong pockets left behind. In effect these were storage places of arms for the Viet Cong which could be seized at any time. After November 1st, the military began to demobilize some of these vulnerable villages and outposts, and a race developed between the government and the Viet Cong. The race may have ended in a tie, but the result is that the Viet Cong now have much better weapons and greater stocks of ammunition than they ever had before.

The second basic principle is that the way to fight a guerrilla is to adopt the tactics of the guerrilla—night ambushes, small patrols, and so on. In spite of all our pressures, this has never been done in Viet-Nam. Instead, the emphasis has been on large operations, artillery and air bombardments, and the use of cumbersome battalion-sized units which telegraph their movements to the Viet Cong.

As to the question of operations against North Viet-Nam, I would suggest that such operations may at a certain stage be a useful supplement to an effective counterinsurgency program, but that they would not be an effective substitute for such a program.

My own preference would be to continue the covert, or at least deniable, operations along the general lines we have been following for some months with the objective, since these are only pinpricks, not of forcing North Viet-Nam to its knees but of keeping the threat of eventual destruction alive in Hanoi’s mind. Then after we had made sufficient progress in the Delta so that all concerned began to realize that the Viet Cong were losing the support of the population, and that their ability to continue the war depended solely on North Vietnamese support, I think we should indicate as much privately to the North Vietnamese and follow this by selected attacks on their infiltration bases and training camps.

In my judgment, significant action against North Viet-Nam that is taken before we have demonstrated success in our counterinsurgency program will be interpreted by the Communists as an act of desperation, and will, therefore, not be effective in persuading the North Vietnamese to cease and desist. What is worse, I think that premature action will so alarm our friends and allies and a significant segment of domestic opinion that the pressures for neutralization will become formidable.

In sum, I believe that we can win in Viet-Nam with a number of provisos.

The first proviso is that we do not over-militarize the war—that we concentrate not on killing Viet Cong and the conventional means of warfare, but on an effective program for extending the areas of security gradually, systematically, and thoroughly. This will require better teamwork in Saigon than we have had in the past and considerably more emphasis on clear-and-hold operations and on police work than we ourselves have given to the Vietnamese.

The problems of getting effective teamwork is troublesome. Ideally, what we need is what the British had in Malaya—a Gerald Templer5 who has absolute authority to hire and fire anyone in any agency or department and through whom all reporting and all orders are transmitted.

My second proviso is that there be political stability in Saigon. The talk of neutralization is clearly very dangerous. It tends to be in the nature of a self-fulfilling prophecy-talk about neutralization disheartens those who must fully and vigorously implement the strategic concept and encourages those who are plotting for a neutralist coup.

I think we can counter such dangers most effectively by the proposals in my letter to you of March 14 dealing with the whole of Southeast Asia; if necessary, however, we might also station a Marine battalion in Saigon. Publicly, we could explain this as a move to protect American dependents; privately, we could pass the word in Viet-Nam that we wanted no more coups.6

To reiterate, I think that we have made the necessary and fundamental policy decisions on the over-all strategic concept. What remains is to implement this concept vigorously and with effective coordination.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V. No classification marking.

2 Secret. The letter was not attached to the covering memorandum from Bundy to the President. Hilsman sent copies of this letter and the attached memorandum to McNamara, McCone, Harriman, William and McGeorge Bundy, and Forrestal.

3 Secret.

4 Not further identified.

5 General Sir Gerald W.R. Templer, British Commander in Chief, Eastern Command, 1950–1951, and High Commissioner for the Federation of Malaya, 1952–1954.

6 McGeorge Bundy wrote the following marginal note: “No one in Saigon agrees.”

91. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 91. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President1

Saigon, March 19, 1964—3 p.m.

1. Thank you for your 1454.2 I will carry out the program with maximum energy.

2. It seems appropriate to comment further on two matters: first, the proposal to put pressure on North Vietnam, as referred to in your pare 4, subparagraph 3, so that they will cease their aggression; and, second, the imaginative and interesting suggestion, which deserves careful analysis, that I see General De Gaulle.

3. As regards pressure on NVN, I submit the following:

4. US problem in any underdeveloped country is how to apply our power. The Communists, confident that we will not use our missiles, are trying to take over the people in the underdeveloped countries right under our noses. It is as though we had a tremendous warship capable of dominating the seas, but were facing a problem in the middle of the desert. In such a situation our power seems useless.

5. Last autumn the US did face the problem of how to apply our power in South Vietnam. President Kennedy, very properly I thought, wanted to bring about some fundamental changes in the behavior of the GVN. But we seemed to be up against a blank wall. There seemed to be no way we could use our great power which would not either damage the war effort or bring on an economic panic with widespread unemployment and starvation.

6. Yet, finally, much thought and study in Washington and in the Embassy discovered ways to apply US power. We hammered away at one place and then at another and, after awhile, there was a crack in the blank wall. The beginning of a change in Diem’s attitude was becoming apparent when the Nov 1 coup came. A description of these methods is in my 949, Nov 6.3

7. Now we face the problem of how to apply our power to NVN, and we seem also to be up against a blank wall. Yet we seem to be quite sure of two things: (a) one single saturation raid on NVN could destroy the fruits of eight years’ fighting against the French and of ten years backbreaking labor since 1954; and (b) while there would be some sort of ChiCom reaction, the above raid would not bring on nuclear war or a real world war.

8. If NVN thought that the US had the will to use just what we have out here in Southeast Asia (the 7th Fleet, US Air Force units, etc.), they would see that they cannot afford a Viet Cong victory in SVN. The price would be too high.

9. The problem is how to persuade NVN, and a corollary is how to apply our power in relatively limited doses so as to give them a sample of how really dangerous we are. Some overt reconnaissance flights might be useful as an initial step.

10. What we can do to them should also be linked to what we can do for them-in terms of rice and removing whatever US personnel we intend to remove anyway.

11. I recommend that the same kind of intensive study be now given to the above in Washington that was given last fall to applying sanctions to Diem. I am confident that good results would be obtained and that some things which look pretty strong today would start falling apart.

12. As regards De Gaulle, I look forward to chance to comment, which you mentioned in your last paragraph, on instructions to Ambassador Bohlen. Paris seems honestly to believe that 1964 is 1954, which leads them into still other dangerous errors.

13. As regards my going to Paris to explain realities to the General, the following can be said in favor:

14. A life-time of association with the French, the wartime connection of which you spoke, and more recent contacts in 1960 and in 1961, at which time I located the headquarters of the Atlantic Institute in Paris, above all, the fact that I would be visiting him as your representative should bring about a change in attitude, if anything can.

15. On the negative side is the reaction in the GVN. Prolonged reflection convinces me that GVN, from General Khanh on down, would be filled with apprehension and that, given their mentality, nothing could convince them that I was not going to Paris to sell them down the river. As US representative, I am extremely prominent here, and a trip by me to Paris to see De Gaulle, at this time, would be a body blow to morale and would, with one hand, destroy what we are trying to do with the passage of time.

Lodge4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1776 from Saigon, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State.

2 Document 85.

3 Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. V, pp. 575–578.

4 Telegram 1776 bears this typed signature.

92. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 92. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, March 20, 1964—5:58 p.m.

1. We have studied your 17762 and I am asking State to have Bill Bundy make sure that you get our latest planning documents on ways of applying pressure and power against the North. I understand that some of this was discussed with you by McNamara mission in Saigon, but as plans are refined it would be helpful to have your detailed comments. As we agreed in our previous messages to each other, judgment is reserved for the present on overt military action in view of the consensus from Saigon conversations of McNamara mission with General Khanh and you on judgment that movement against the North at the present would be premature. We here share General Khanh’s judgment that the immediate and essential task is to strengthen the southern base. For this reason our planning for action against the North is on a contingency basis at present, and immediate problem in this area is to develop the strongest possible military and political base for possible later action. There is additional international reason for avoiding immediate overt action in that we expect a showdown between the Chinese and Soviet Communist parties soon and action against the North will be more practicable after than before a showdown. But if at any time you feel that more immediate action is urgent, I count on you to let me know specifically the reasons for such action, together with your recommendations for its size and shape.

2. On dealing with De Gaulle, I continue to think it may be valuable for you to go to Paris after Bohlen has made his first try. (State is sending you draft instruction to Bohlen, which I have not yet reviewed, for your comment.)3 It ought to be possible to explain in Saigon that your mission is precisely for the purpose of knocking down the idea of neutralization wherever it rears its ugly head, and on this point I think that nothing is more important than to stop neutralist talk wherever we can by whatever means we can. I have made this point myself to Mansfield and Lippmann and I expect to use every public opportunity to restate our position firmly. You may want to convey our concern on this point to General Khanh and get his ideas on the best possible joint program to stop such talk in Saigon, in Washington, and in Paris. I imagine that you have kept General Khanh abreast of our efforts in Paris. After we see the results of the Bohlen approach you might wish to sound him out on Paris visit by you.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. The message was drafted in the White House and approved by Rusk. Transmitted as telegram 1484 to Saigon, which is the source text.

2 Supra.

3 Telegram 1487 to Saigon, March 20. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S). For the instructions sent to Paris, see Document 96.

4 Telegram 1484 does not bear President Johnson’s signature.

93. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 93. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President1

Saigon, March 23, 1964—1 p.m.

Your 1484.2

1. I will of course be glad to comment on whatever you send me regarding pressure on the North.

2. I continue to agree that overt U.S. action should be withheld until after Viet-Nam and U.S. covert steps have been tried-and tried as part of an essentially diplomatic pressure move. I do not think that such a move, including the Viet-Nam and U.S. covert activities involved, is premature. If such an effort could be successfully carried out, it would obviously greatly discourage the VC and help General Khanh strengthen his southern base. In fact it might very much hasten the end of the war here. I have noted with interest your expectation of a showdown between the Chinese and Soviet Communist Parties and agree that this is a major element to be considered in any such diplomatic effort.

3. U.S. Mission (Country Team) will hear a report, pursuant to instruction in your 1454,3 paragraph 4, subparagraph 4 on “tit for tat” methods at the regular meeting this week.4

4. As regards De Gaulle, I will of course be glad to carry out your instructions to the best of my ability, should you decide you want me to go. I am commenting on proposed instruction to Ambassador Bohlen in separate telegram.5 I like your reasoning regarding knocking down the idea of neutralism and will discuss with General Khanh.

Lodge6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET–S. Top Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1803 from Saigon, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State.

2 Document 92.

3 Document 85.

4 According to telegram 1828 from Saigon, from Lodge to the President, March 25, a committee of CIA and military representatives from the Embassy reached the preliminary conclusion that for a program of “tit-for-tat” overt military actions against North Vietnam, aerial bombardment and aerial mine-laying were the preferred methods of counteraction. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 Document 94.

6 Telegram 1803 bears this typed signature.

94. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 94. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, March 23, 1964—4 p.m.

1806. For the Secretary from Lodge. Regarding your priority 1487,2 I recommend that the fourth unnumbered paragraph in instruction to Bohlen make it clear that what we want from De Gaulle is a statement that he does not favor his “neutralization” at the present time. We are not asking him to drop his idea for all eternity. What we want is a statement saying that he does not think it applies now.

“What we actually want from De Gaulle is a public statement, prior to SEATO meeting, that the idea of ‘neutralization’ does not relate to the attitudes or policies of the Government of Vietnam or its friends in the face of the current communist aggression.”

Perhaps the following line of argument may be helpful to Ambassador Bohlen for his own information and use as he deems opportune. It seeks to refute some of the misconceptions which have been put out in Paris, and also seeks to deal with the circumstances which are particularly vivid in Saigon. The argument runs as follows:

1. France and the U.S. are headed for a collision as regards VietNam. This is not due to a fundamental difference of interests but to a misunderstanding, which it is the business of diplomacy to straighten out. As one who rejoices in French strength, I am worried that so many highly placed Vietnamese sincerely believe that General De Gaulle wishes the destruction of the Republic of Viet-Nam; that French agents are trying to incite the assassination of the Chief of State; and that French agents have worked with the Viet Cong in the recent terrorism against Americans. I have on every occasion made it clear that I think these rumors are fantastic and impossible to substantiate and have often tried to persuade the Chief of State not to break off relations with France. But much more than my efforts is needed.

2. Also on February 20 the VC, in an official communication, said it “approves particularly President De Gaulle’s proposal to establish a regime of neutrality in South Viet-Nam”.

3. For these reasons, a statement by General De Gaulle himself to the effect that his idea of “neutralism” was not meant to apply at the present time would have a very constructive effect.

4. Beyond the helpful effect which it would have, it is also clearly justified by the situation in Viet-Nam and for the following reasons: a. The situation here is not hopeless at all. 1964 is not 1954. Vietnamese military are definitely on the track for the first time since the deterioration began in April of ’63. The brave are being rewarded; the cowards are being relieved. In order to enable the GVN to hold an area once it has been cleared, the U.S. is helping strengthen the militia and create a corps of civil administrators. A National Service Law will soon be in effect.

b. Also, contrary to what is often said in Europe, the Americans and Vietnamese are not seeking an exclusively military solution of the problem. Indeed we agree that an exclusively military solution of the problem would be impossible. Hand in hand with the attempt of the military to bring about order is a social revolution in which the U.S. is taking an active part and which also aims to bring education, health, economic well-being, land ownership, to the ordinary people. The U.S. agrees emphatically that this struggle cannot be won exclusively by military methods.

5. It should be emphasized that the U.S. is not, as is being said in Europe, trying to do with “16,000 men what France did not do with 200,000 men”. The U.S. effort is totally different; it has entirely distinct aims; it is not nearly as extensive and has not nearly as ambitious a goal as did the French aims in the early 1950’s.

6. The statement often made in Europe that “while the U.S. has its strategic interests in Viet-Nam, the French have their cultural and economic interests” is profoundly misleading. Actually, the strategic interest in the American-Vietnamese effort in Viet-Nam is directly to the advantage of the French doctor, the French schoolteacher, and the French businessman in Viet-Nam, just as their presence here helps Viet-Nam and thus helps U.S. interests here. American and French interests should not be put in contra-distinction with each other as they are mutually consistent.

7. The Communists realize that the American-Vietnamese effort is actually getting off the ground, which is why they are intensifying their neutralist talk. In the language of the Viet Cong, “neutralism” is the same thing as Communist victory. We realize that it is a coincidence, but it is a most unfortunate coincidence that General De Gaulle’s phrase “neutralism” is the identical phrase used by the Communists.

8. France has an influence in Viet-Nam way beyond what it contributes in the way of men, weapons and money. This is because French is still the Western language which is possessed by the largest number of Vietnamese (although the younger generation is trying hard to get away from French and to learn English). But at the present, the so-called people who count in Viet-Nam read French newspapers; in particular, they read the background news stories which the Agence France Presse gets from the Quai d’Orsay. Some are impressed by it and others are infuriated by it, and altogether no good purpose is served. If what is desired is the eventual neutralization of Indo-China or of Viet-Nam, the way not to do it is to create the furor which these statements out of Paris create. General De Gaulle is thus a very influential figure in Viet-Nam and, unwittingly, in a way which is defeating his own stated purpose.

9. A De Gaulle statement stating that he did not favor “neutralism” now would go far to correct the present bad situation, and at the same time, to promote a good result.

10. Such a statement not only does not foreclose a unified and neutral Indo-China at some future date; it would actually greatly facilitate such a result.

11. If a neutral Indo-China, or even a neutral Viet-Nam, were attempted at the present time, it would be foredoomed to failure. Since South Viet-Nam is not strong enough to bargain on an equal basis with North Viet-Nam, the holding of the conference would end the will to win in South Viet-Nam, and the net result would be to turn South Viet-Nam over to the North. By no stretch of the imagination can this be considered neutralism.

12. If so-called “neutralism” had been applied to France at any time between 1940 and 1944, the German Army would have remained in occupation in France. In fact, the initial German occupation before the collapse of the Vichy government was virtually the same kind of neutralism with regard to France which some appear to advocate today with regard to Viet-Nam. Those of us who have always wanted a strong France and are glad that France is strong today would have opposed “neutralism” for a France occupied by an hostile army in the ’40’s, just as we oppose “neutralism” for a Viet-Nam, which, though not occupied in the same sense, is under hostile attack in the ’60’s. And, one might add, just as we oppose “neutralism” for Berlin.3

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis.

2 See footnote 3, Document 92. The fourth unnumbered paragraph reads as follows:

3 In telegram 1510 to Saigon, March 24, Rusk thanked Lodge for his suggestions, which were being repeated verbatim to Ambassador Bohlen. He also noted: “The President has incorporated your suggested phrasing into paragraph four of his instructions to Bohlen and those instructions are being sent to Paris today.” Department of State. Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

95. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Special Assistant in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Thompson) 95. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Special Assistant in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Thompson)1

Washington, March 23, 1964.

SUBJECT

Comments on Proposed McNamara Speech2

I think the general tone and thrust of this speech is excellent but I detect one truly major problem toward the end of it. In the section “A Program to Meet Our Objectives” there is a listing of the options which President Johnson had before him prior to the McNamara visit. The manner in which the second option—“A Big War”—is treated leaves our reaction to this speech [option?] deliberately inconclusive.

I know that this is a useful device in maintaining a certain degree of uncertainty in the North. It is also valuable for dealing with the LeMays and the Rostows. However, that is not the audience which this particular speech is intended to address.

The basic purpose of the speech is to obtain broad support and particularly to state objectives which will be endorsed by the Mansfields and the Lippmanns. More pointedly, it is intended to separate the Mansfields from the Morses.

A second objective is to set forward our policy with precision in a way which will induce General De Gaulle similarly to define French policy. Indeed, we are telling De Gaulle that the McNamara speech will make our policy “precise”.

Therefore, deliberately to leave an area of imprecision in order to attain a commendable objective with respect to the North would be defeating the major purposes and the major addresses of the speech.

I would, therefore, recommend that the entire section concerning options be rewritten so that the only course of action which is described and discarded is the “neutralization” course. The speech could then remain silent on the question of the “Big War”.2

There are attached also certain suggestions by Joe Mendenhall for revision of the sections on pages four and five in the interest of clear historical accuracy.3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia, Vietnam, McNamara’s Speech, 3/26/64. Confidential. Rusk took this memorandum to a luncheon meeting with the President, McGeorge Bundy, and McNamara at the White House on March 24, where the McNamara speech was approved substantially as originally drafted. No record of the luncheon meeting has been found. (Memorandum from Read to Rusk; Department of State, President’s Reading File: Lot 74 D 164)

2 The speech was given on March 26 at the James Forrestal Memorial Awards Dinner of the National Security Industrial Association in Washington. For text. see Department of State Bulletin, April 13, 1964, pp. 562–570.

2 At this point, Sullivan added the following handwritten note: “I have discussed this with McNaughton, who says that McNamara does want to retain the ‘options.’ However these particular arguments have not been presented to him. WHS”

3 Attached but not printed.

96. Message From the President to the Ambassador in France (Bohlen) 96. Message From the President to the Ambassador in France (Bohlen)1

Washington, March 24, 1964—6:42 p.m.

As agreed [in] recent consultations Washington, you should seek early appointment with De Gaulle for frank discussion Vietnam. You should indicate that you will have message from me for the General, draft text of which appended this instruction.

In presenting this message, you should stress our determination to assure that communist-directed aggression will not succeed in overthrowing independent states in Southeast Asia and our willingness take necessary measures to implement that determination.

You should point out that in Vietnam, we have come to this determination after having thoroughly examined and rejected arguments for disengagement or for political negotiation starting from current circumstances. You should draw upon March 17 White House statement2 following National Security Council action on McNamara report3 to describe nature our current commitment and action which we pursuing jointly with Khanh Government.

What we actually want from De Gaulle is a public statement, prior to SEATO meeting,4 that the idea of “neutralization” does not apply to the attitudes or policies of the Government of Vietnam or its friends in the face of the current communist aggression. We want him to state that he does not favor “neutralization” of this sort at the present time. We are not asking him to drop his idea for all eternity. What we want is a statement that he does not think it applies now. French spokesmen like Couve and Baumel have repeatedly said in private that a US pullout now would be disastrous and that we must keep up our end in South Viet-Nam. What we need is some parallel expression from the General.5

We leave to your discretion whatever action you feel appropriate to develop the forum or the manner in which such a statement might be delivered. You will have noted from other messages that the Vietnamese Foreign Minister expects to be in Paris in the near future; and it might be opportune for the statement to appear in the form of a joint French-Vietnamese communique on that occasion.

You may use whatever argument or persuasion you deem most effective in the presentation of this demarche. But you should make it clear that we expect France, as an ally, to adopt an attitude of cooperation rather than obstruction in this critical area of United States interest. I would welcome any comments or suggestions you may have on the text of my message to De Gaulle and will consider them urgently with Secretary Rusk.

Secretary Rusk has sent an advance copy of this instruction to Ambassador Lodge, who made constructive suggestions which have been incorporated into the message as you have received it. The full text of his cable presenting additional argumentation for your demarche is being repeated to Paris.6

Message to De Gaulle

The most immediate and the most complex problem of foreign policy which faces the United States today is centered in Southeast Asia. The type of subversive aggression which is being conducted against independent states and innocent populations in that part of the world poses a dangerous threat to the prospects for the stable evolution of developing nations everywhere. The Republic of Vietnam is, at the present time, the principal target of this aggression. As you know, it is the policy of my Government to furnish assistance and support to the Republic of Vietnam for as long as it is required to bring this aggression and terrorism under control.

Our objective in the pursuit of this policy is to assist in the establishment, throughout Southeast Asia, of independent states, secure from their neighbors, and each with an opportunity to determine its own policies, both foreign and domestic.

It is understandable, in the larger perspectives of history, and, given the political and economic circumstances, that these states might eventually choose an international posture which could be described as neutral. In this sense, neutralization might be held out as a long term objective to which these states could aspire.

However, all our reports from the area show that current public discussion of this objective has left a twofold impression: First, that the present victims of aggression should adopt an attitude of neutrality towards it; and second, that these same victims should be required not to accept external assistance to meet that aggression. It seems clear to us that these two courses would amount to a prescription for disaster.

Ambassador Lodge has informed me that in Vietnam today, there is a widespread impression that France endorses such courses. This impression has stirred up a sharp reaction among many elements in Vietnam, a reaction which has been moderated only by our own diplomatic efforts. At the same time in private conversations leading representatives of France have made it clear that France does not believe US help can safely be ended now, and that France does not believe in letting the Communists take over South Viet-Nam.7

I believe it is important that all erroneous public impressions concerning the policies of nations which have an interest in the future of Southeast Asia be eliminated so that the problems of that area can be seen and dealt with as lucidly as possible. I have directed that the policy of the United States be set forth with precision; and senior members of my Government will do this in the course of the next few days.

It would be most helpful to our common cause if the real policy of France could also be clarified publicly in the minds of those who may feel disturbed by implications which have been read into its most recent expression. It would be particularly useful if such clarification should be made prior to the Manila meeting of the SEATO Council.

With these thoughts in mind, I have asked Ambassador Bohlen to discuss these matters with you and to report your views.8

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. The message was drafted in the White House; discussed and revised at a 1 p.m. luncheon meeting among the President, Rusk, McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy; and approved by Rusk. Transmitted as telegram 4793 to Paris, which is the source text. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 296A. A draft with McGeorge Bundy’s handwritten revisions is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos.

2 See footnote 4, Document 79.

3 Document 84.

4 The ninth Ministerial Meeting of the SEATO Council, Manila, April 13–15.

5 The last sentence of this paragraph was added to the draft by McGeorge Bundy: see footnote 1 above.

6 Document 94. On March 23, Lodge informed the President that he had told Khanh about the proposed demarche to De Gaulle and that Khanh was “extremely positive” about the idea of having a public statement by De Gaulle on record. (Telegram 1811 from Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) After a night’s reflection, Lodge informed the President that such a De Gaulle statement could pave the way for a new Vietnamese-French relationship and allow Khanh to drop his plan to break diplomatic relations with Paris. (Telegram 1817 from Saigon, March 24; ibid.)

7 The last sentence of the paragraph was added by McGeorge Bundy.

8 Telegram 4793 does not bear President Johnson’s signature.

97. Message From the Ambassador in France (Bohlen) to the President 97. Message From the Ambassador in France (Bohlen) to the President1

Paris, March 25, 1964—5 p.m.

We were informed this morning2 by the Quai d’Orsay at about same time that Deptel 47933 arrived that Khanh had taken up with French Charge a demand for a statement from De Gaulle about French position on neutrality (Embtel 4481).4 Since Khanh seems to have jumped the gun on us and in effect asked for what I was trying to obtain I wonder if we should not wait a day or so and assess French reaction before my seeking an interview with De Gaulle. However, on assumption that I will go through with this interview I would like to submit for your consideration the following suggestions in regard to the text of your message to De Gaulle. I assume this was designed to be presented in writing and we can of course add suitable salutation and closing.

I would suggest dropping paragraph four which as written seems to be our interpretation of French position. It is somewhat strong and I fear might produce an unnecessarily adverse reaction from De Gaulle. I would also eliminate last sentence of paragraph five since I think it extremely unwise to even hint to De Gaulle that “leading representatives of France” making statements about French policy which De Gaulle himself has initiated and which might lead him to the view that his position was being undercut by these “representatives”.

In place therefore of paragraphs four and five I would substitute the following: “The difficulty is that the term neutralization is being understood by certain people in Vietnam as having immediate application and not as a long-term objective. These people consider that any advocacy of neutrality at the present time really is a pseudonym for eventual Communist take-over. This impression has stirred up sharp reaction among many elements in Vietnam, a reaction which we have done our best to moderate through our own diplomatic efforts”.

The Quai also informed us of a conversation that you had with Alphand (I assume during Defferre’s visit). I would appreciate anything that you could let us have on this conversation.5

I shall not request an interview with de Gaulle until I hear further from you.6

Bohlen7

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 4486 from Paris, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State.

2 March 23.

3 Document 96

4 Khanh made this demand to Perruche on March 23, suggesting that the statement should make clear that even if future neutrality were desirable for Vietnam, the current struggle against the Viet Cong was the correct course. Should France do this, Khanh suggested that Vietnam could then remove economic restrictions on French imports and name a new Ambassador to Paris. Khanh added that the need for such a statement was both important and urgent; he had to have an answer by April 1. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 FR–VIET S)

5 From 4:43 to 4:50 p.m., March 24, the President met with Gaston Defferre, Mayor of Marseilles. (Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record of this meeting has been found.

6 Rusk called William Bundy on March 25 at 2:33 p.m., to discuss this cable. The transcript of their telephone conversation reads in part as follows:

“The Sec asked him if he had seen Bohlen’s message and Bundy said he had. Sec said it was bad that Khanh went roaring in. Bundy said we should have warned Bohlen Bundy said we were in an awful box, and said he was inclined to agree that Bohlen should put off his call to De Gaulle for a day or two. Sec said it would be very unwise to go roaring in. Sec said perhaps he had better in effect say that he had been informed about Khanh’s action and that we think it would be very unwise for Khanh to go on down this road. We have been urging maximum restraint on him in this matter. We were concerned by the known fact that neutralization would create problems in Vietnam and go on from there. Sec said we should do something as a consequence of what Khanh has said rather than a parallel move. Bundy asked if we should let the French know we were coming, so to speak, and Sec said no but to go because Khanh did this and try to get the thing in order. Sec said it was a rough one and that this rather guarantees that we would fail with De Gaulle. Sec thought maybe we should wait a couple of days. Bundy said we were not under specific gun and Monday they agreed would be OK.” (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

7 Telegram 4486 bears this typed signature.

98. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France 98. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in France1

Washington, March 25, 1964—7:02 p.m.

4818. For Ambassador.

1. The President has reviewed your 44862 and agrees with you that you should wait a day or so to assess French reaction before seeking interview with De Gaulle. He nevertheless believes that you should seek this interview without fail within the ’next week, adjusting your presentation to the situation as it then appears, and making the strongest possible argument to the General for a public clarification of the position of France.

2. The President does not wish any formal message from himself to be presented at this time, in the light of Khanh’s threatening démarche. Instead you should draw on the draft message in our 47933 as appropriate, making clear that these are Presidential views as well as those of the USG in general. You should present these views as an expansion upon the brief remarks which the President made informally to Alphand.

3. We do not fully share your argument that General should go uninformed of what his Foreign Minister and others are saying officially to us, and believe it should be helpful to say that the policy of France as stated to us in diplomatic channels has only to be clarified publicly in order to become much more helpful to the common cause on the scene.

4. President’s short meeting with Alphand took place on request of latter before Defferre meeting.4 On South East Asia, exchange was very brief. President said that as he understood it, France did not wish American forces pulled out and did not believe in this kind of neutralism which would lead to takeover of south by Communists. If this were indeed French position, President said, it would be helpful to have it publicly clarified. Alphand said he would report this view and contrive to indicate some personal sympathy with it without actually committing himself.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted in the White House, cleared by William Bundy and Rusk, and approved by Sullivan. Repeated to Saigon.

2 Document 97.

3 Document 96.

4 See footnote 5, Document 97. No record of the Alphand-Johnson meeting has been found.

99. Memorandum for the Record of the White House Daily Staff Meeting, 99. Memorandum for the Record of the White House Daily Staff Meeting,1

Washington, March 30, 1964, 8 a.m.

1. Mr. Bundy presided throughout the meeting.

2. Vietnam. The entire meeting was spent in a long discussion of our problems in Vietnam. Forrestal had sent Bundy the latest Sit Rep on Vietnam, with the comment that he was not sure our military operations in the field were in consonance with our political objectives.2 Bundy said he had found the Forrestal memorandum very interesting, and asked why the military seemed to have the impression that napalm solves everything, and why they spent so much time chasing the enemy. In fact, he said, the enemy was not as readily identifiable as those operations made him sound. He asked if I had followed these matters closely, and I replied I had not, with respect to day to day operations.

Bundy then asked Cooper what he thought, and he responded that he was very concerned because we only had two or three months left to really get things moving, and it did not look like the field operations were going as they should. I then interjected that I could see some disadvantages and difficulties in using napalm and in chasing the enemy, but wondered what alternatives the other people really had in mind.

My question lead to two different kinds of responses, one from Forrestal and Bundy, and the second from Cooper. Forrestal referred to a book by a Frenchman, Modern Warfare, by Roger Trinquier,3 which he said was a report on the French experiences in Southeast Asia and Algeria. According to Forrestal, you can see from this book that we are making the same mistakes the French did, and are forgetting to profit by their lessons. The only specific concerning Vietnam he mentioned was that unless something changes, when the rainy season sets in, RVN morale will drop so far that the army may not be able to be salvaged. Cooper, on the other hand, said that we needed some “dramatic victories” to bolster the Vietnamese people. After the meeting I asked Cooper how he could reconcile dramatic victories with no identifiable enemy. He said he was not quite sure, but that we should be able to make raids on political and military command posts and bring back some Viet Cong alive. He thought the military could think of other possibilities. Both Cooper’s and Forrestal’s comments had one thing in common: neither was sure that the present military staffs in Saigon were capable of moving fast enough to solve these problems.

Bundy again commented that the basic problem was that the military thought of the war in Vietnam too much in terms of regular conventional warfare with an identifiable enemy and specific military objectives. In fact the problem was quite different. The result of this type of military thinking was that all the Chiefs except General Taylor wanted to go north. He asked that Forrestal recast his comments in his weekend memorandum,4 raising questions on the course of operations in Vietnam in terms that Bundy could send to Secretary McNamara. Bundy would tell McNamara that these questions had been raised, and Bundy felt they should be discussed with the President. Forrestal replied that the instances he cited did not really make a strong enough case since McNamara could cite some other “Krulak statistics” to show the other side. Bundy said then that he and Cooper should get together to draft such a memorandum. After the meeting I talked with Cooper and Forrestal, at Forrestal’s suggestion, to see what assistance I can be in these conversations. Forrestal said that his basic point was that the operations the military consider important, such as the search and clear, are not the type of actions that will be most effective in achieving US objectives. He realizes that this is more an attitude of mind than anything else, but believes that it should be dealt with somehow. He is clearly groping, in a constructive way.

The military weren’t the only ones in trouble this morning. The new AID man in Saigon is not considered the best possible choice. Forrestal thinks Bell’s approach is to treat the Vietnam situation as any other bureaucratic problem. In reality, however, special treatment is called for. Bell wants to send a man named Van Dyke to Saigon, a good, capable, conservative administrator. The White House evidently is pushing Amory. Komer suggested another alternative, a Jim Killen. Bundy will see if the issue is still open.

The upshot of this discussion was that there may soon be some White House initiative to look more closely into the types of military operations being conducted in Vietnam. More important, however, to me it demonstrated the frustration of certain elements of the civilian side of the government over progress in Vietnam. If the military are frustrated and want to go north, the civilians are equally frustrated and want to do something more-they didn’t know what-in the south. The basic point is that everyone is increasingly frustrated, and this is not good.

[Here follows discussion of subjects unrelated to Vietnam.]

7. Vietnam War Game.5 I asked Bundy if the Vietnam war game next week would help deal with any of the problems with which he was concerned. He said it would not, since it properly would be dealing with higher levels of escalation. Having had no other comment from him, I take this as his concurrence of the scenario I gave him Friday.6

WYC

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers. T–217–69. Secret: Eyes Only. Drafted by William Y. Smith.

2 It was the weekly report from USMACV dated 23 May. [Footnote in the source text in Smith’s hand. Forrestal’s covering memorandum has not been found.]

3 Roger Trinquier, Modern Warfare: A French View of Counterinsurgency (New York: Praeger, 1964).

4 Apparent reference to the covering memorandum by Forrestal; see footnote 2 above.

5 Reference is to a political-military game, code-named Sigma 1–64, sponsored by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and organized by the Joint Wargames Agency of the JCS. The game took place from April 6 to 9 and had as participants most of the senior officials in the Johnson administration. The focus was the insurgency in South Vietnam and ways to combat it. The report of the war game is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Agencies’ File, JCS War Games. William Sullivan, in Obbligato, pp. 178–182, describes this war game in detail, but misdates it as occurring in the spring of 1963, not 1964.

6 March 27. The scenario for Sigma 1–64 is not printed. (Ibid.)

100. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 100. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 30, 1964.

SUBJECT

South Vietnam

Apropos of our discussion this morning,2 my thinking is as follows:

Although we have paid a lot of attention to the personnel and organization of the new government in Saigon, we have done very little to improve our own organization there. It is a full five months since the November 1st coup and two months since General Khanh’s coup. Most of the experts seem to be agreed that this dry season is critical in reversing the declining trend in the war we have been observing during the past year. Unfortunately, we have now let more than half that season go by without having shaken ourselves down in Saigon.

The warning indicators are still flashing. The MACV report3 which I have shown you over the week-end does not by itself prove that we have a military staff in Saigon inadequate for the job. All one can say (and this only at the risk of violent reaction from the uniformed side of the Pentagon) is that such a report which places such emphasis on military activities so similar to those which failed the French, suggests a lack of understanding of what the war is about.

It is extremely difficult, and probably irresponsible for civilians to second-guess military field commanders; and it is even more difficult for them to propose new tactics. Beyond recommending that Roger Trinquier’s book4 be made required reading, there is not much we can do from here. So, what it comes down to is that we simply must get out to Saigon our most imaginative military commanders and civilian administrators. This we simply have not done.

Both Bill Bundy and Bill Sullivan spoke to McNamara about this problem in Honolulu on their way to Saigon. The best Bob could offer was that he would consider relieving General Harkins no sooner than April 15 and not later than June 30. I spoke to Bob myself before the Forrestal Award Dinner, and he then told me that he plans to move Harkins when Lodge leaves. Bob thinks that Lodge will inevitably succumb to temptation in the month of June, resign, and return here for the convention. His reasons for not wanting to move Harkins now are: a. We can’t afford a change in the American organization until the Khanh Government is settled down.

b. Khanh and Harkins get along very well.

c. General Westmoreland has not been there long enough yet to be able to take over.

Sullivan believes, and I agree with him, that these three reasons merely cover Bob’s fundamental problem, which is that Max Taylor and the Chiefs will not agree to a change at this time. Sullivan is also somewhat concerned about Westmoreland. He thinks he is an able, flexible officer, but extremely ambitious and anxious to take over the complete direction of the war from the Ambassador. Sullivan is worried that unless Westmoreland gets into the habit of working for a powerful figure, he will tend to dominate any new ambassador we send out, if and when Lodge returns. For this reason Sullivan thinks it is important that there be an overlap and that any new ambassador be a particularly powerful figure.

Our record on the civilian side is not any better. You know the problems we have had finding an AID Director. On top of that, there is still no civilian in Saigon who is acting as Chief of Staff for the war in the countryside. The original theory was that Dave Nes, the DCM, would do this. But I am still doubtful whether he can do this job at all, and certainly not within the time we have left. Dave has not had experience in an insurgency situation and, like most senior Foreign Service Officers, is bound to devote more of his time to the diplomatic and housekeeping problems of the Embassy and the vast American community in Saigon. For some months I have felt that another man at Nes’s level was required-a man who would be Lodee’s Chief of Staff for coordinating all U.S. activities, military and civilian, in support of the war in the field. The ideal I have in mind is someone like Desmond Fitzgerald, and there are probably some other people like him in the CIA and perhaps in the DOD. I attach a memorandum I wrote to Bob McNamara before he went out on his trip, a copy of which I have sent to John McCone; but so far I have gotten absolutely nowhere with it.5

I had a long talk with Dave Bell about his new Mission Director, during the course of which he exposed his own theory that since the AID Agency did not actually have full responsibility for the effort against the Viet Cong, he did not see how an AID official could take over the whole job. I had been trying to convince him of the importance of getting a man like [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]. I think that Dave may be right; but the result as of the moment is that there is no one in the AID Mission in Saigon, and no prospects for finding anyone who can even do a first-class job in running the AID part of the Strategic Hamlet Program.

Finally we must face the likelihood that Lodge might leave and start looking for a new ambassador. This is going to be an immensely difficult job, since we need a man with somewhat inconsistent qualities. He has to be prestigious enough to retain civilian control of the total U.S. effort, and at the same time he has to know enough about the theory of counterinsurgency at least to be able to encourage the useful actions of the military and discourage the self-defeating ones. What I really would like to see the President do would be to appoint you and Bob as a committee of two to produce the top level personnel and effect the changes in Saigon. You could both call on the two departments, the Agency and the AID people, for nominations and suggestions; but somehow there must be a place where the brutal decisions are taken and made to stick.

Chet Cooper is completely right. This is a Greek tragedy, and the curtain is slowly descending.

MVF

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Luncheons with the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. I, Part 2. Secret.

2 See Document 99.

3 See footnote 2, Document 99.

4 See footnote 3, Document 99.

5 Not found

101. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Blouin) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton) 101. Memorandum From the Director, Far East Region, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Blouin) to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (McNaughton)1

Washington, March 30, 1964.

I–35397/64

SUBJECT

Status of Actions Approved in NSAM No. 2882

This is a summary of actions taken to implement the approved recommendations of the McNamara report.3

1. To make it clear that we are prepared to furnish assistance and support to South Vietnam for as long as it takes to bring the insurgency under control.

The White House statement of 17 March 644 included the statement that “It will remain the policy of the United States to furnish assistance and support to South Vietnam for as long as it is required to bring Communist aggression and terrorism under control.” Same point was made in Secretary McNamara’s 26 Mar 64 speech.5

2. To make it clear that we fully support the Khanh government and are opposed to any further coupe.

All Saigon agencies advised 18 Mar 64 that procedures should be established to bring coup plotting to the attention of the Ambassador for his evaluation and decision as to action (Deptel 1463).6 [7–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

3. To support a Program for National Mobilization (including a national service law) to put South Vietnam on a war footing.

Embassy, Saigon was requested 20 Mar 64 (Deptel 1490)7 to report the current status of GVN plans and CT views with regard to adoption of a National Service Act. Embassy reported 25 Mar 64 (Embtel 1829)8 that as of that time GVN seems to favor institution of a civil defense organization to supplement present regular and paramilitary forces, rather than implementation of a national mobilization plan. An interagency committee, chaired by J–1, MACV, will continue to study the problem. The GVN has been notified that the US wishes to have an opportunity to comment on any proposed plan at an early stage of development.

4. To assist the Vietnamese to increase the armed forces (regular plus paramilitary) by at least 50,000 men.

Embassy advised 23 Mar 64 (Deptel 1505)9 among other things that General Khanh’s concept for employment of forces must be refined before any firm determination is made as to the breakdown of the “at least 50,000 men” increase; that it is essential that an early determination be made as to the responsibility of the military and paramilitary (including police); that it is essential that RVNAF carry the war to the guerrillas in their base areas. Embassy was advised to refine the concept for implementing recommendations 4, 6, and 7 and to submit requirements for forces (including US personnel), MAP, and AID funding.

General Harkins reported 25 Mar 6410 that MACV, in conjunction with all other interested agencies in Saigon, was progressing well with required planning. Mission approval for the program is to be sought soon and presentation to the GVN made as soon thereafter as possible. Mr. Brent is exploring financial aspects with Vice Prime Minister Oanh.

5. To assist the Vietnamese to create a greatly enlarged Civil Administrative Corps for work at province, district and hamlet levels.

On 21 Mar 64 (Embtel [Deptel] 1492)11 the Embassy was requested to submit estimates of US and GVN personnel requirements; cost; and training schedules. Embassy was asked whether Michigan State or third country personnel would be useful.

There has been no response from Saigon and no further action generated in Washington.12

6. To assist the Vietnamese to improve and reorganize the paramilitary forces and to increase their compensation.

See summary under Recommendation #4 above.

7. To assist the Vietnamese to create an offensive guerrilla force.

See summary under Recommendation #4 above.

8. To provide the Vietnamese Air Force 25 A–1H aircraft in exchange for the present T–28s.

On 22 March 64, CINCPAC advised the JCS that he has approved a plan for delivery of 16 A–1H’s (from units in the Pacific) in Vietnam on or about 1 May and 9 from the USS Midway by 15 May.13 These aircraft constituting the third VNAF squadron will be located at Bien Hoa. A Navy unit of 4 support officers, 8 instructor pilots, and 150 men will arrive on or about 1 May. Its mission is to train the VN pilots and maintenance people until they can assume full responsibility (estimated three-six months). ODMA is handling funding.

9. To provide the Vietnamese Army additional M–113 armored personnel carriers (withdrawing the M–114s there), additional river boats, and approximately $5–10 million of other additional material.

COMUSMACV has requested shipment of 63 M–113’s in three increments with the first increment to arrive in Vietnam on or about 15 Apr 64 and the last before 1 June 64.14 This schedule was approved by the Department of the Army on 26 Mar 64. The disposition of the M–114’s that are being withdrawn is being worked out by the Department of the Army. ODMA will determine the price and funding data for the exchange as soon as the final disposition is decided. There is no resultant delay.

On 22 March 1964, CINCPAC listed his additional FY 64 requirements for Vietnam.15 They are 30 M–113’s, 84 cupolas for M–113’s, TACS, 54 AN/ARC–55 and 93 AN/ARC–45 radios, 17 loudspeaker systems, 5 30-ton cranes, transportation for CG, conversion of an LSM to a hospital ship and 500 backpack sprays. Total cost of this list is $2.65 million. CINCPAC was advised by ODMA on 25 March 1964 that these additional requirements were approved for funding and was requested to provide programming data. CINCPAC also proposed additional items that would increase the FY 65 MAP from $150.8 to $174.6 million. ODMA will respond to this request later.

10. To announce publicly the Fertilizer Program and to expand it with a view within two years to trebling the amount of fertilizer made available.

The Embassy was requested 25 Mar 64 (Deptel 1523)16 to draft a public announcement for the Ambassador’s and GVN concurrence, after which appropriate announcement is to be made in Saigon. Embassy was advised that the release should probably be deferred until week of 30 Mar to permit resolution of fertilizer procurement problems. USOM has advised AID that commercial suppliers in Vietnam can meet the requirement.

11. To authorize continued high-level U.S. overflights of South Vietnam’s borders and to authorize “hot pursuit” and South Vietnamese ground operations over the Laotian line for the purpose of border control. More ambitious operations into Laos involving units beyond battalion size should be authorized only with the approval of Souvanna Phouma. Operations across the Cambodian border should depend on the state of relations with Cambodia.

A draft telegram of guidelines to Saigon was considered by DOD 30 March 64. Its main provisions are to authorize the following: (1) Establishment of covert five-man GVN military liaison team with Laotian forces at Savannakhet.

(2) Authorization of hot pursuit.

(3) Authorization of intelligence collection operations and commando and sabotage raids by VN forces in the region south of Tchepone.

(4) Operations of not to exceed battalion size for relief and support of friendly Lao forces in border regions.

(5) Limited covert encadrement of FAR units in territory adjacent Lao Vol Bn 33.

(6) Resupply opns. (See Vientiane #1067)17

12. To prepare immediately to be in a position on 72 hours notice to initiate the full range of Laotian and Cambodian “Border Control” actions (beyond those authorized in paragraph 11 above) and the “Retaliatory Actions” against North Vietnam, and to be in a position on 30 days’ notice to initiate the program of “Graduated Overt Military Pressure” against North Vietnam.

The JCS recommended 30 Mar 64 (JCSM–272–64)18 that authority be granted to deploy 48 B–57’s and 1081 personnel from Japan to Clark Air Force Base, beginning 1 Apr 64 and at the rate of 4 aircraft every three days. If necessary, movement can be completed in 4 days.

On 30 Mar 64 the JCS approved dispatch of planning guidance to CINCPAC that requests submission of an outline plan to the JCS by 8 May emphasizing the application of air and naval power against the DRV and Communist China. The objective of the operations would be to cause cessation of any large scale aggression undertaken by the CHICOM’s, possibly assisted by the DRV, in response to US/GVN military pressures against the DRV. A series of other planning messages have been sent by the JCS to CINCPAC. The JCS were requested on 25 Mar to brief selected representatives of the Department of State as early as possible on the concepts of our plans for phased actions.

On 26 March Mr. Forrestal sent Mr. Rowen a memorandum entitled, “Political Scenario in support of pressures on the North.”19 Mr. Rowen has added material to this memorandum and prepared a new script on 28 March.20 Copies have been sent to Mr. Sullivan and Mr. Forrestal.

F. J. Blouin
Rear Admiral, USN

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 092 Vietnam. Top Secret.

2 Document 87.

3 Document 84.

4 See footnote 4, Document 79.

5 See Document 95.

6 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US/McNamara)

7 Not printed. (Ibid., POL 23 VIET S)

8 Not printed. (Ibid., POL 7 US/McNamara)

9 Not printed. (Ibid.)

10 Not further identified.

11 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23 VIET S)

12 First session of special civil administration training course for district chiefs from four provinces began 30 Mar 64. The course will be repeated once a month until all of the 237 district chiefs have a chance to attend. [Footnote in the source text.]

13 CINCPAC telegram 220026Z, March 22. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI)

14 Not further identified.

15 CINCPAC telegram 22002Z, March 22. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI)

16 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) VIET S)

17 Paragraph (6) was handwritten. In telegram 1067, March 30, the Embassy in Vientiane recommended against approaching Souvanna Phouma on the question of resupply of covert South Vietnamese troops in Laos because of his fundamental opposition to Laos becoming involved in “someone else’s war.” (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

18 Not printed. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 452.1 Vietnam)

19 Apparent reference to the first draft of Document 102.

20 See footnote 2, Document 102.

102. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 102. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, March 31, 1964.

SUBJECT

Political Scenario in Support of Pressures on the North

I attach the latest version of my political scenario for pressures on the North.2 Bill Sullivan and Henry Rowen from McNaughton’s office participated. I discussed it at luncheon today with Sullivan, McNaughton and Bill Bundy. We agreed it could go to General Taylor as a draft with no official standing. This means it will probably be taken up at the JCS meeting tomorrow.

This draft does two major violences to JCS thinking. Instead of proceeding immediately to direct U.S. involvement (which some of the Chiefs favor) it introduces a second phase of overt SVN action with U.S. covert support. All us civilians are agreed that this is the stage we should really plan for, keeping the possibility of direct U.S. action as a contingency reserved against the possibility of major escalation.

The other probable shortfall from the JCS point of view is the memorandum’s failure to concentrate on intensified border operations against Laos and Cambodia and U.S. low-level reconnaissance over these two countries, plus North Vietnam. Again the civilians are agreed that these actions would only attract a strong international protest against the U.S., without providing us with significant leverage against the North.

Finally, I am worried that too much preoccupation with a military-political scenario will detract from our regular efforts in South Vietnam, which, as you and I know, need considerable improvement. More specifically, it is hard to imagine a more dangerous course than embarking upon the attached scenario without having made the changes in “policy and personnel” in our own organization in Saigon.

Please let me know urgently if any of the steps I am taking seem impolitic to you.

Mike

[Attachment]

POLITICAL SCENARIO IN SUPPORT OF PRESSURES ON THE NORTH (THIRD DRAFT)3

This paper does not describe in detail the nature or order of specific military actions which are being devised by JCS. It is assumed, however, that there are three major categories of such actions, with perhaps some overlap between the categories: a. Covert SVN action against the North (with US covert support).

b. Overt SVN action against the North (with US covert support) including:

Aerial mining

VNAF attacks on selected DRV targets possibly including Farmgate

c. Overt joint SVN and US action including: Warning and preparatory actions US aerial reconnaissance activities

Sizeable build up of US forces

Naval displays and large scale overflights

Destructive activities Naval control measures (“selective” or total blockade, possibly including mining operations)

Naval bombardment

Air attacks on selected DRV targets.

What follows are some suggestions for political moves to set the stage and to develop support both at home and abroad for each category of action.

I. Political steps during the period from the present to the time when US and GVN decide on overt SVN actions against the North.

We are in this period now, and it is assumed that actions in Category (a) will be continued and augmented. During this period it is necessary for both the GVN and the US to make clear in each country and to the world the nature of the underlying facts and rationale which support the GVN’s efforts against the VC and our support of these efforts. There should be produced by speeches, articles, interviews and other methods, a consistent historical picture of SVN since World War II, a general description of North Vietnamese involvement in events since 1959 and a more detailed description of the desired state of affairs in Southeast Asia after control of the insurgency from North. Secretary McNamara’s speech on March 264 is an excellent start on such a program. Among the specific steps which should be prepared to follow McNamara’s speech are: 1. An article by Ambassador Lodge should appear within the next two weeks (a draft has already been prepared by Lodge, commented on here, and is being resumed to him for final revision).5

2. Another speech by General Khanh on war aims. In such a speech General Khanh should describe the specific programs and measures which his government intends to pursue in order to bring a better life to the villages of Vietnam. General Khanh has already made a strong start in his speech of March 9th.6 Subsequent speeches laying out specific programs in support of these aims should also be made by General Khanh and other members of his government. The Department of State should prepare a brochure of significant excerpts from General Khanh’s speeches for informal dissemination to interested experts in this country.

3. Material for friendly Senators and Congressmen should be prepared on the subject of neutralism, US objectives in Southeast Asia as a whole, new programs and reforms undertaken by the GVN, and a general description of NVN direction and control of the VC.

4. In addition to the above, a modest program aimed at increasing public awareness of the US interest and involvement in Vietnam should be carried out. Additional material along the lines of the recently issued AID poster7 should be developed and distributed. Public service advertisements in magazines, newspapers and radio/television should be encouraged.

5. Another diplomatic exchange with the British, and one with our principal allies to make sure that they understand our view of the war in South Vietnam and the importance of North Vietnamese involvement. We did something like this recently when Lord Home and Butler were in Washington,8 and Bohlen is currently probing the French on the subject of “neutralization.” Another effort should be made three or four weeks from now, perhaps by sending an emissary to London and Paris to report on progress made in SVN. At that time North Atlantic Council should also be given a presentation of the US view

II. Steps to be taken after decision to begin actions in Category (b): (i.e. Overt actions by SVN against the North).

Although the decision to initiate these actions will have to be taken at the highest level of the US Government, it must be remembered that political initiatives should surface in Saigon and not in Washington, so as to maintain the credibility of the sovereignty of the GVN. The nature of some operations that might be carried out in this phase (e.g., Farmgate) will make it difficult to deny US involvement. Some specific and political moves are listed below: 1. McNamara should make another trip to Saigon. His object should be to secure General Khanh’s agreement to begin overt SVN action against the North. Publicly, his trip will be explained as the next in a logical series but particular emphasis will be placed on his on-the-spot review of the problems posed by increasing evidence of North Vietnamese involvement. McNamara reports to the President on his return.

2. McNamara carries with him to Saigon some suggestions for another major speech by General Khanh. This speech gives details on NVN activity against the South and contains a demand that Hanoi cease. The speech also describes the future of Indo-China if Hanoi would cooperate. It foresees a period of two independent but separate Vietnams, gradually increasing peaceful contacts with each other followed by eventual reunification on a satisfactory basis.

3. President consults with limited number of Congressional leaders and discloses that the US has been asked by General Khanh to help the GVN bring pressures on the North for the purpose of convincing Hanoi to cease its insurgency in the South. He [1 line of source text not declassified] informs them that USG intends to give SVN covert support in these operations.

4. Speech by General Khanh.

5. Shortly thereafter, public release of Jorden White Paper9 detailing NVN involvement.

[Numbered paragraph 6 (1–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

7. Offer reassurances to SVN and Thailand (and possibly Laos) of US protection and assistance in the event of NVN retaliation by air or by stepped-up insurgency. Request permission of Philippines and Thailand to stage and deploy US forces to those countries.

8. US commences unannounced air defense capability for Saigon and takes first overt military movements to prepare for possible escalation (such as fleet movement to provide whatever cover JCS deems necessary for air operations against North). Some care should be taken, however, to avoid public appearance that US is involved in GVN action.

9. GVN begins training Vietnamese pilots for B–57’s.

10. US evacuates dependents from Saigon.

11. GVN takes first action against North (probably Farmgate harbor minings of important ports).

12. Immediately thereafter Khanh makes second speech calling on North to cease insurgency and making public the military action which has been taken.

13. US uses third country, i.e., Canada, UK or France to transmit message to Hanoi that while US deplores need for these actions, it understands their necessity and supports them in principle. US also indicates particular interest in that part of Khanh’s speech offering food to the North and wonders if negotiations between North and South might be useful. Some communication to ChiComs might also be appropriate. No approach should be made to USSR at this time.

14. President consults broader group of Congressional leaders and describes the gravity of situation, making full disclosure [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] evidence of NVN involvement with VC, and emphasizes need to support Khanh in his initiative. President does not ask for action by Congress. He also gives background briefing, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] to selected group of public opinion leaders (editors, publishers and columnists). He might also consider briefing Republican candidate.

15. On the assumption that no change occurs in NVN attitude and behavior, Khanh makes speech immediately after appropriate VC incident, i.e., cutting of rail line, killing of US personnel or destruction of POL dump; announces need to inflict appropriate type of damage on NVN. Khanh deplores necessity for taking such action and situation which makes it necessary for SVN to send military force to North, instead of food and medicine.

16. First targeted attack occurs as promptly as possible. Use of Farmgate aircraft may lead to public disclosure of US participation, either through loss of the aircraft by way of enemy anti-aircraft capability or materiel failure or through disclosures made by correspondents in SVN. Means of minimizing this possibility through improvements in SVN capabilities or through use of sheepdipped US pilots should be investigated.

17. Other overt SVN actions against North are taken accompanied by a series of SVN announcements and a call by Khanh for a GVN-DRV meeting at Hue and cessation of VC attacks. Propagandize North, by radio and leaflet, warning of the consequences and [of] continued aggression. Khanh stresses that these are not reprisals against civilians. Stresses GVN carrying out “just actions” in reply to “acts of terror.”

Farmgate-type actions should probably continue until some evidence of a favorable North Vietnamese reaction appears. We should consider at some stage precisely what we would expect them to do and inform them of this decision. We should probably not consider moving to the next phase of overt US pressures unless the ChiComs intervene or the DRV begins a full-scale assault on the South. It is important that all the possibilities of SVN overt pressures covertly supported by us be played out to the full.

III. US decides on direct US action against NVN.

The move from the previous categories of action to this one can be made either suddenly or slowly, depending upon the array of military actions from which we choose. In other words, we could proceed slowly and logically from covert to overt support of SVN sponsored actions or we might decide to move quickly and dramatically if international pressures had reached a dangerous point or if we wish to lend support to four-power conference in Geneva. The specific political steps listed below could be adjusted to either course.

1. If we have not already done so the establishment of EXCOM arrangements at this point is essential.

2. The Department of State brings SEATO allies up to date on [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] evidence of VC involvement. Though formal SEATO action will not be possible because of the probable positions of France and the UK, the US case might be based in part upon the US SEATO commitment. The North Atlantic Council should be informed.

3. Second conference between President and legislative leaders in which the President discloses full details [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], reviews histories of attacks against US installations and personnel in SVN and states arguments for necessity for retaliation directly against the North, and asks Congressional support and possibly a Congressional resolution.

4. Public speech by President setting forth US policy and explaining necessity for direct action against North. US direct action takes place in accordance with JCS plan and simultaneous deployment of US forces to offset possible escalation.

5. Assurances given to SVN, Laos and Thailand on US protection, already evident through US military deployment, against possible DRV and ChiCom retaliation.

6. Convey to North our demands which need to be satisfied in order to stop our action, expanding on points in Presidential speech. Make clear limited intentions and determinations. State actions we want taken by North and fact that compliance will have to be visible to us. Possibly identify some specific VC units we want to see comply with our demands.

7. As a supplement to what was said in the President’s speech, state privately to the Soviets and ChiComs our objectives and warn the Soviets and ChiComs against support of the North either directly or by way of arms and logistics (SAM, interceptors, trucks, POL).

8. Conference begins in Geneva and US action continues unless visible cessation of NVN action in South occurs. Note: The possibility should be considered of making the.initial US action strong, so as to permit some time to pass before second action is needed. If, as it should be, our measure of compliance is a reduction in the insurgency, rather than DRV promises, it is possible that military pressures might have to be continued over a period of several months and perhaps even longer. We will have to be prepared to deal with the international pressures which might build up during this period.

The following are some of the questions with which we must be prepared to deal at a conference and upon which we must prepare a position: Our overt goal. Geneva Accords brought up to date?

Better ICC?

Cessation of logistic support?

Reduction of VC insurgency?

The problem of dealing with the VC. Will there be an amnesty

Will we insist that the GVN be free to hunt down the holdouts?

Provisions for reimposing military pressures. US military presence in GVN?

Controls on indigenous forces?

GVN-DRV diplomatic and other contacts. North-South trade?

Treatment of Laos and Cambodia.

9. Conference reaches acceptable settlement or US actions continue and increase.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos. Top Secret. This covering memorandum is also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 002725.

2 On March 30, Forrestal sent McGeorge Bundy a copy of what he described as “a very rough draft of a political scenario for pressures against North Vietnam.” Forrestal stated that he did the original “off the top of my head” and that Henry Rowen of ISA had “tinkered with it, but not brutally enough.” The March 28 draft scenario and the covering memorandum from Forrestal to Bundy are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos.

3 Top Secret.

4 See Document 95.

5 The major substantive revision of the draft Lodge article suggested by William Bundy and Rusk in telegram 1543 to Saigon, March 27, was their desire that Lodge identify North Vietnam as the “primary aggressor” against South Vietnam rather than emphasizing China’s role. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

6 A summary and analysis of the speech are in telegrams 1711 and 1729 from Saigon, March 8 and 11. (Ibid.)

7 Not further identified.

8 Reference is to the official visit of February 12–14; see Document 41.

9 Published by the Department of State in February 1965, as Aggression From the North: The Record of North Vietnam’s Campaign To Conquer South Vietnam.

103. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 103. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 1, 1964.

SUBJECT

Presidential Luncheon on Thursday, April 22

Here is a list of matters which I think you can profitably raise at the luncheon tomorrow.

1. Replacement for Ambassador Lodge brought about by his possible resignation after the Oregon primary.

2. Reassignment of General Harkins and reorganization of MACV. (I have submitted a memorandum to you on this subject.)3

3. Follow-up action with respect to Chantrea (I have submitted a memorandum to you.)4

4. Discussion of tactical problem of clear-and-sweep plus air strikes, versus clear-and-hold operations. (I would only raise this in an elliptical fashion if the chance occurs during the discussion of Harkins or Chantrea.)

5. Cross border operations between Laos and Cambodia. Although the JCS raised this question this afternoon, they were surprisingly mild. General Taylor, however, was not present, and he may suggest early action. Sihanouk having just made another turn-about, and Souvanna being in one of his periodical states of jelly—this is not the time to press against either of these countries. This is particularly true if we have any hope of laying a political base for direct pressure against the North. It is going to be difficult enough to lay such a base without also having to face the screams of the rest of the world that we are beating on two small and supposedly neutral countries.

6. Political scenario and military planning for pressures against the North. General Taylor has the political scenario which I developed5 and he may have read it. The Joint Chiefs got an oral description this afternoon and seemed receptive. However, they will only be getting the actual copies tonight. Judging from Goodpaster’s comments, Taylor seems wedded to the idea of moving from reconnaissance and cross border operations against Laos and Cambodia, and low-level reconnaissance over all contiguous countries through retaliatory actions by both US and SVN forces to full scale air strikes against the North. But we really do not know what his position actually is. The next step in this planning should be to have the JCS designate one or two senior officers to fill in the military part of the scenario.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos. Top Secret.

2 The luncheon meeting took place from 12:35 to 2:54 p.m., April 2. (Ibid.. President’s Daily Diary) No record of the meeting has been found.

3 Document 100.

4 The Chantrea incident occurred on March 19 when South Vietnamese troops accompanied by two American advisers entered Cambodia in hot pursuit of people fleeing and believed to be Viet Cong. The Vietnamese Air Force directed napalm and machinegun fire on the village of Chantrea and a U.S. helicopter penetrated Cambodia. MACV reported that U.S. personnel did not fire on the fleeing civilians nor did they direct Vietnamese fire, but they were deficient in determining their geographical position. (Memorandum from Forrestal to the President, March 21; Johnson Library, White House Confidential File, CO 312 Vietnam) In a memorandum to McGeorge Bundy, April 1, Forrestal suggested ways to assure that this type of incident did not happen again. (Ibid., National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos)

5 See attachment, Document 102.

104. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 104. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 1, 1964.

SUBJECT

Laos/Vietnam—Cross Border Operations

I enclose a draft telegram to Saigon and Vientiane, which it is proposed be sent today to the field.2

To send this telegram without Averell’s approval is just asking for trouble in my book. Sullivan tells me that he believes that the Governor would not object to the substance; but he admits that he has never shown anything quite like this cable to Averell. I am going to urge as strongly as I can that they not dispatch this cable until Averell’s return on Friday.3

On the substance, I think this is an ill-conceived plan, which could well cut the ground out from Unger in Vientiane. Souvanna has been increasingly nervous about his relations with Phoumi and has been making real gestures in the direction of leaving Vientiane with the neutral faction and returning to the Plain of Jars. He is also about to leave for Peiping and Hanoi. The possibility that an overenthusiastic MACV might order a raid into Laos without Unger’s knowing about it could, in my opinion, really upset the applecart. Sullivan thinks that the concept of “hot pursuit” and the fact that the border regions are generally uninhabited will, in effect, result in there being no action taken under these instructions. How he can think this so soon after the Chantrea incident puzzles me. I think at the very least we must give Unger a veto on the planned operations, subject to being overridden here in Washington.4 We can keep our fingers crossed on the “hot pursuit” activities.

I am going to talk to your brother about this to get his reaction. I know that the working-level of the State Department feels more concerned about this than I do.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VI, Cables and Memos. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 002725.

2 Attached but not printed was a draft of telegram 1630 to Saigon, also sent to Vientiane as telegram 836, April 7. In substance the draft and the cable as sent were similar and they provided proposed guidelines for the types of operations in Laos by South Vietnamese forces for which the United States was prepared to provide financial and materiel support. The principal difference between the draft and cable was that the latter had an introduction that indicated that the guidelines were tentative and subject to comment by Ambassador Unger in Laos. (Department of State. Central Files. POL 27 VIET S)

3 April 3.

4 In telegrams 1116 and 1119 from Vientiane, April 10 and 11, Unger responded to telegram 836 to Vientiane and the guidelines for cross-border operations in Laos by stating that such activities would jeopardize the U.S. policy of Lao neutrality and would be opposed by Souvanna Phouma. In most areas of Laos, the presence of South Vietnamese troops would destroy existing U.S.-Lao cooperation in combating North Vietnamese presence in Laos. (Both Department of State. Central Files. POL 27 VIET S)

105. Message From the Ambassador in France (Bohlen) to the President 105. Message From the Ambassador in France (Bohlen) to the President1

Paris, April 2, 1964—8 p.m.

I spent approximately forty-five minutes this afternoon endeavoring to persuade General De Gaulle to make a statement which would clarify French policy on neutrality as a long-term policy and policy applicable in the actual situation of warfare in Vietnam. De Gaulle told me frankly that he did not think he could make any such statement since he believed in the policy of neutrality even under present conditions. The most I could get him to do was to say that if “he returned” to the subject he would state that France was against anything that would lead to the Communist takeover but he said he would probably add that this was the reason why they favored the policy of neutrality.

I began the conversation by outlining in detail your message (Deptel 4793)2 I then outlined the four possible courses of action which the US could follow: 1) withdrawal, which we had rejected; 2) enlargement of the war, which we did not seek; 3) a continuance of the present course of action and to assist the Government of Vietnam; and 4) we had even considered the policy of neutrality but had rejected it because of total inapplicability to warfare such as existed in Vietnam.

I mentioned that in effect current US policy was that of number 3, to continue our assistance to the Vietnamese Government with certain variations dictated by circumstances emphasizing that this assistance would involve political as well as military factors. I also told him that in the opinion of Secretary McNamara General Khanh had made an excellent impression upon the Americans there. He seemed to be intelligent, able, energetic, and with a clear understanding of the necessities of the situation.

I then asked General De Gaulle if he had any comments to make in regard to what I had told him. General De Gaulle said that France did not agree with the US in its analysis of the situation in that it did not consider that there was any real government in Vietnam. He pointed out that Diem, who had had a real government, had lost the support of his people and had been “eliminated”. He was succeeded by someone whose name he could not remember (presumably Big Minh), and now they had “this Khanh”. He said the war in essence was the same one that the French had been fighting since the end of World War II; that the Vietnamese had no taste for this war and that the anti-Communist forces in Vietnam were not up to the task.

I interrupted him to tell him this was quite contrary to our analysis of the situation. We felt it was quite different, one was a colonial war which came out as colonial wars always do and the other was a war against aggression directed and maintained from without. I said that I assumed that France did not wish to see the Communists take over Vietnam nor for this reason did they wish to see the US withdraw under present circumstances. De Gaulle agreed with these two statements and said they were correct. I then said that I thought France could assist the Vietnamese Government in this difficult task if it were possible to find a formulation of words which, without denying the validity of an eventual policy of neutrality, could state that neutrality is obviously not applicable under present conditions and that the first task in Vietnam is military stabilization.

De Gaulle at this point asked what would be our policy if and when a military stabilization—which he doubted—was achieved. I told him that then we could certainly have no objection to a consideration of neutrality if the military situation was stabilized to the point where the government really controlled its own territory and if it was the desire of the government. I pointed out that the US had in effect agreed to the neutralization of Laos and Cambodia but not Vietnam where circumstances were entirely different.

De Gaulle then said it was his considered judgment that the US could not possibly succeed in the course that we were on. He felt we would merely repeat the experience the French had earlier; that the Vietnamese had no stomach for the war; that in his opinion the quicker we came out for neutralization in Vietnam, possibly through the mechanism of a Geneva-type conference including the Chinese, the better it would be. He said it was conceivable that the situation might not get much worse but saw no prospect of it getting better. He said it was either this neutralization as an announced policy or a willingness of the US to really carry the war to the North and if necessary against China.

I interrupted to ask him if the French would be in favor of our extending the war. He said no, that France would not wish to see this but at least it was a clear and definite policy.

De Gaulle then in a rather reminiscent mood mentioned that the US and France had never coordinated their policies towards Southeast Asia, referring to the period during the war when we seemed to be working against France in Indochina. I told him that while this may have had some truth towards the end of the war it was not true since I was in the Embassy here (1949–1951) when we shifted over to full assistance to the French in order to help them win the war. I also reminded him that at one point in 1954 we had given serious consideration to the atomic bomb in order to help relieve the situation in Dien Bien Phu. I took advantage of the opening and said that if we could get now some moral assistance from the French Government we would be satisfied and repeated arguments in favor of clarifying statement in regard to neutrality as a long-term and not an immediate policy. De Gaulle countered by saying in effect he considered that the neutrality policy offered the only way out to the US other than to engage in a major hostility against North Vietnam and China.

He said that he felt that any military stabilization would only come about with Chinese consent and that with Chinese consent there could be genuine neutrality. He also mentioned that once China had decided in favor of neutrality he felt some time in the future the two parts of Vietnam would then come together.

I countered this by telling him our experience with Communists had shown that neutrality was a policy which the Communists would adopt only if they were avoiding something worse, mentioning in this connection the case of Laos.

I asked De Gaulle what form of pressure or inducement could be used on the Chinese for them to accept neutrality when according to his statement they were on the winning side. De Gaulle shrugged his shoulders and said this would have to be seen, mentioning parenthetically that this was one of the reasons why they had recognized China when they did in order to be in a position to ascertain Chinese views.

With further reference to his statement that we had never concerted our policies in this area I told him that I was sure the US would be more than anxious to concert with France in the present situation in Southeast Asia and if he could find it possible to make the declaration that I had referred to this would rapidly lead to a close consultation in regard to Vietnam. De Gaulle said flatly it was too late for any such concerting and repeated his view that the sooner the US went for neutralization in Vietnam the better off they would be.

He then said that the most he could do at the present time would be that if he reverted to the subject to say that France was against the Communization of Vietnam and it was for this reason that they were in favor of neutralization.

Since it was apparent that no further argumentation would be of any avail with De Gaulle I terminated the conversation with the statement that there would be a considerable degree of disappointment in Washington over his position on this matter and that I feared a good opportunity had been lost to really work closely together with France on a specific situation.

Comment:

I think that the above narrative speaks for itself. De Gaulle was courteous and affable throughout and did not appear to be irritated by my rather frank and direct comments, but showed no sign whatsoever of changing his attitude. It seems to me that what this adds up to is his firm belief that the course we are on, i.e., supporting the Vietnamese Government, is one that will only end in failure and that the best policy for the US was to opt for an immediate policy of neutralization. The only other alternative he could see would be one in which the US would enlarge the war by an attack on North Vietnam and probably China.

It was not clear to me to what extent De Gaulle was operating on genuine conviction or whether past failure and humiliation in Vietnam played a large part in determining his current attitude.

I shall merely tell press that I had not seen General De Gaulle since January and was just having a “tour d’horizon”.

I will send a further analytical message and a few more minor details tomorrow.3

Bohlen4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. III. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 4615 from Paris, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State. The Department of State also summarized this telegram as an item for the President’s evening reading, April 2. (Department of State, S/S Files: Lot 64 D 164, President’s Evening Reading File. 1964)

2 Document 96.

3 Document 106.

4 Telegram 4615 bears this typed signature.

106. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State 106. Telegram From the Embassy in France to the Department of State1

Paris, April 3, 1964—noon.

4621. For Secretary from Ambassador. The following are some sidelights of the conversation with De Gaulle which I did not consider of sufficient importance to put into the main telegram to the President (Embtel 4615).2 One very noticeable feature was his obvious contemptuous dislike of the Vietnamese and their government. At one point after he had complained about the attitude towards France of successive Vietnamese governments, beginning with Diem and with particular reference to the Khanh government, I told him that I thought the statement that we were seeking would be a great step in the direction of improved Franco-Vietnamese relations, mentioning in this connection that while we had known about Khanh’s démarche to the French Chargé in Saigon3 we had not suggested it.

De Gaulle in answer said flatly that the attitude of any Vietnamese Government towards France was a matter of complete and utter indifference. He also throughout the conversation made disparaging references to the fighting ability, morale and general character of the Vietnamese people. Some time ago Pinay in private conversation with me had mentioned that while he was in the government he too had been struck by De Gaulle’s basic dislike of Vietnam and his unwillingness to hear any rational analysis of the situation there.

De Gaulle a number of times during the conversation referred to the fact that the request I was making did not render France’s task more easy. When I inquired as to exactly what he meant he made a vague reference to his previous statements at his press conferences about France’s views on the situation in the Orient. I surmise that what he had in mind is the general plan he had for the recognition of Communist China.

One thing that can be said in regard to this conversation is that it indeed “clarified” French policy in regard to Vietnam. De Gaulle was explicit in his statement that he felt that neutralization was the only course which the U.S. could follow and “the sooner the better” unless we were prepared to carry military operations to the North against Viet Minh and against China.

You will recall that Couve de Murville made a similar statement to me about a month ago (Embtel 3968)4 in regard to the possibility of extension of hostilities. I did not gather however from De Gaulle that he really seriously was recommending this course of action but merely that it was pointed out as clear and definite policy, presumably, to contrast with the uncertainties of our present course.

I can assure you that I used every argument that I could think of but avoided any threats or implied threats as to the future effect on relations with the U.S. since I was convinced that these would merely complicate matters without producing the slightest change in De Gaulle’s attitude.

My impression was that De Gaulle will probably say nothing on the subject of Vietnam for some time to come while he watches to see whether we are able with the Vietnamese to bring about an improvement in the situation or whether as he anticipates we will be headed towards a bigger crisis later on. I would certainly recommend against any further approach to De Gaulle on this subject and that we make every effort to keep the actual contents of this talk confidential.

I don’t quite know how this problem will be handled in Saigon since Lodge apparently had already informed Khanh of my proposed talk. I would suggest that a sanitized version of this conversation be transmitted to Khanh but I feel that anything like a full account of De Gaulle’s views should not be given to Vietnam.

You will undoubtedly wish to discuss this matter further with Couve de Murville in Manila5 but I would think with the realization in the back of your mind that Couve has no authority to make De Gaulle’s policy.

Bohlen

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis.

2 Document 105.

3 See footnote 4, Document 97.

4 Dated February 25. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 See Document 113.

107. Summary Record of the 526th Meeting of the National Security Council, 107. Summary Record of the 526th Meeting of the National Security Council,1

Washington, April 3, 1964, 2 p.m.

The President opened the meeting with the Congressional Leaders by saying that his purpose was to bring them up to date on recent developments. Various Council members would report on current situations. He first called on Secretary Rusk for a summary of developments in Brazil.

[Here follow Rusk’s briefing on Brazil and subsequent discussion.]

The President then turned to a discussion of our policy toward Vietnam. He referred to his meeting with Ambassador Lodge2 in which he told the Ambassador that he was to carry out a unified policy. The President mentioned that he had made personnel changes in USIA and CIA which the Ambassador suggested. He said there were alternative policies for Vietnam but that the Administration had chosen one following a National Security Council discussion of Secretary McNamara’s report3 which he made upon his return from his fourth trip to Vietnam. The President said he wanted the Congressional Leaders to know the policy of the Administration. He was not asking those present to commit themselves on the policy. His purpose was to be certain that those present knew exactly what we are trying to do in Vietnam. He then called on Secretary McNamara.

Secretary McNamara apologized for the absence of General Taylor who he said was indisposed and obliged to remain at his quarters. He then described how the situation in Vietnam had grown worse, especially since last September. The Viet Cong controls 40% of the territory but a lesser percentage of the total population. The people of Vietnam were becoming apathetic toward the war. This had the effect in the military of increasing the desertion rate. Many fortified hamlets had been overrun or disbanded-some civil guards had turned in the weapons with which they were supposed to defend these hamlets. The security in many areas was less than it had been. The political structure in the hamlets and villages had almost disappeared. Frequent changes of hamlet leaders and village chieftains had produced a vacuum into which the Viet Cong had moved. The changes of local leaders caused by the changes of the central government in Saigon had contributed to local disorganization in village and provincial governmental life. In addition, the Viet Cong was receiving larger weapons primarily from Communist China.

Secretary McNamara then summarized the various policy alternatives for Vietnam: a. We could withdraw entirely and allow the area to be taken by the Communists.

b. We could agree to a neutralization of the area which, in effect, would mean permitting it to fall into Communist hands.

c. We could broaden the military campaign by taking the war to other areas, such as North Vietnam. This alternative we had seriously considered.

d. We could make the present program of assistance more effective. This is the course we have chosen to follow.

Secretary McNamara then spelled out the military action categories which were contained in his report but which were not recommended to the President for approval. He said that General Khanh did not favor broadening the military action at present because he felt that first priority should be given to solving the problems of security in South Vietnam.

Secretary McNamara summarized the various parts of the current expanded program. He said that the Joint Chiefs of Staff supported the program adopted, but the Chiefs felt that to be successful in South Vietnam the war would have to be taken to North Vietnam. He said that the twelfth recommendation in the report called for preparations so that we would be in a position to broaden the war if the adopted program did not succeed in solidifying the situation in South Vietnam.

Senator Dirksen asked whether General Harkins were going to be retained in Saigon. Secretary McNamara said under normal procedures General Harkins will retire on July 31st. He had performed magnificently. It may be that he would be called back to Washington in the next few months prior to the date of his retirement. The President said that the best officer in the U.S. military forces for this assignment had been sent as General Harkins’ deputy in anticipation of his taking command. He said this officer is General Westmoreland.

Senator Saltonstall asked whether, under the new McNamara program, U.S. soldiers would be participating in the fighting or whether they remained as advisers to the South Vietnamese. Secretary McNamara replied that they would continue their present role of advising.

[Here follows discussion of Panama.]

Senator Morse said that the Panamanian agreement was a great agreement and he congratulated the President and the Secretary of State. He said, however, he felt obliged to say that he disagrees entirely with the program for South Vietnam. He said that the only way to solve the Vietnam problem was by using SEATO and the UN to achieve a peaceful settlement.

The President said that there was no effort to compromise Senator Morse’s position or involve him in the Administration plan for Vietnam. Senator Morse replied that he understood, however, that Premier Khanh had called him a traitor. President Johnson replied that “no one in this room has called you a traitor.”

Senator Dirksen said he wondered whether SEATO was viable. Senator Mansfield replied that in his view SEATO was a paper tiger, adding that the President’s policy toward Vietnam was the only one we could follow.

The President said we had recently attempted to find out what De Gaulle was trying to accomplish in Southeast Asia. On the basis of Ambassador Bohlen’s talk with De Gaulle we had learned that the French have no plan or program.4 The President concluded by saying that we have now adopted an expanded program for South Vietnam and we will push it as hard as we can.

Senator Dirksen asked whether the press reports coming out of Saigon were accurate. Secretary McNamara replied by saying that there were a host of wars going in Vietnam. Each dispatch is right but covers only one facet of the problem. Therefore, it is not an accurate description of the whole problem. We tried to get as full a picture of the situation as we could and traveled widely in the area. The picture we did get was quite different from that appearing in the press.

[Here follows discussion of Panama and Africa.]

Senator Humphrey stated that the President’s statement on Panama was excellent. He said our forbearance and patience had paid off. With respect to Vietnam, he asked what would be the extra cost of the new program. Secretary McNamara replied that this was very difficult to estimate but he doubted that it would exceed $50 million additional.

Senator Humphrey asked where we expect to get the Vietnamese to carry out the new program. Mr. Bell replied that numbers of Vietnamese were going back to Saigon from exile. In addition, the program called for greatly expanded training of Vietnamese civil administrators. He doubted that there was a problem of obtaining people to take the civil training courses.

The President, noting that Secretary Rusk had to leave the meeting to keep an earlier appointment, asked Under Secretary Ball to report on his recent activities.

[Here follows discussion of subjects unrelated to Vietnam.]

Bromley Smith5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 635–637.

3 Document 84.

4 See Documents 105 and 106.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

IV. The Rusk Mission To Vietnam, April 17–19, and Planning for Pressures Against the North, April 4–May 7IV. The Rusk Mission To Vietnam, April 17–19, and Planning for Pressures Against the North, April 4–May 7

108. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, April 4, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos. Top Secret.

109. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 9, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Special Papers. Secret.

110. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, April 9, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 3. Confidential.

111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, April 9, 1964—8:37 p.m.

Source: Department of State. Central Files. ORG 7 S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted and initialed by Rusk.

112. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington. April 10, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos. Top Secret. McGeorge Bundy initialed the memorandum, and an “L” on the source text indicates that the President saw it.

113. Memorandum of a Conversation, U.S. Embassy Chancery,

Manila, April 12, 1964, 5:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Salans and approved by Rusk on April 16. The source text is labeled “Part II of II.” Rusk and Couve de Murville were in Manila as the heads of their respective delegations to the Ninth Ministerial Council Meeting of SEATO, April 13–15.

114. Memorandum of a Conversation, U.S. Embassy Chancery, Manila, April 12, 1964

Manila, April 12, 1964, 3:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, WFB Chron. Secret. Drafted by Bundy on April 13.

115. Telegram From the Delegation at the SEATO Ministerial Council Meeting to the Department of State

Manila, April 15, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3 PHIL (MA). Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon, Paris, London, and Vientiane. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State.

116. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State, at Taipei

Washington, April 16, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, Vietnam, Rusk/Lodge, WM. BUNDY Correspondence. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Personal; No Other Distribution. There is no indication on the source text how this memorandum was transmitted to Rusk in Taipei, which he visited after the SEATO Council Meeting.

117. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 16, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos. Top Secret.

118. Memorandum of a Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and Prime Minister Khanh,

Saigon, April 18, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US–VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy.

119. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 29, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US–VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State at 5:48 a.m.

120. Memorandum of a Conversation, U.S. Embassy,

Saigon, April 19, 1964, 10 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. IX, Memos. Top Secret. Drafted by John M. Dunn, Special Assistant to the Director of USOM in Saigon.

121. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, April 21, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 3. No classification marking.

122. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President

Washington, April 21, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series. Vol. VII. Cables and Memos. Secret.

123. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 22, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

124. Summary Record of the 528th Meeting of the National Security Council,

Washington, April 22, 1964, 4:45 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 9. Top Secret

125. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 24, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis.

126. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, April 24, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Exdis.

127. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State

Washington, April 24, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Sullivan. A note on the source text indicates that Secretary Rusk saw the memorandum.

128. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, April 28, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos. Top Secret.

129. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, April 28, 1964—7:02 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1791 to Saigon, which is the source text. According to a draft of telegram 1791, the message was drafted by Sullivan and revised by McGeorge Bundy. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos) McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this draft telegram to the President under cover of a memorandum, April 26, which reads as follows: “This is a draft dispatch from you to Lodge which argues out a general proposition that people should not be timid in asking for what they need. It has been cleared in substance with Rusk, McNamara, and Bell, although this draft is a revision of a State Department original. The one point of substance on which there may not be full agreement is that Sarge Shriver hates to have his Peace Corps graduates tapped for unpeaceful missions. None of the rest of us agrees with him, and I think you are safe in going ahead.” (Ibid.)

130. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, April 29, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 111. Secret.

131. Summary Record of the 529th Meeting of the National Security Council,

Washington, April 29, 1964, 5 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Tab 1. Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

132. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, April 30, 1964—6 p.m.

133. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State

Saigon, April 30, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, Rusk/Lodge/Wm Bundy Correspondence. Confidential, Nodis.

134. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 1, 1964—8:34 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Sullivan and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to Ottawa. McGeorge Bundy sent the President a copy of this telegram under cover of a brief memorandum on which the President wrote: “OK, LBJ.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 4)

135. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 2, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US–VIET S. Top Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 001242.

136. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 4, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Passed to the White House and the Office of the Secretary of Defense for McNamara on receipt in the Department of State. Also published in part in Declassified Documents, 1984. 001244.

137. Memorandum for the Secretary of State

Washington, May 4, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VIII. Top Secret. There is no indication on the source text who sent this memorandum to Rusk, but it was apparently from William Bundy. A copy of the memorandum is in Department of State, Bundy Files, Special Papers.

138. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 5, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. VIII. Top Secret.

139. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 5, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. XIII. Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 107B.

140. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 5, 1964—8:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Nodis. Drafted by Sullivan, cleared by McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Rusk. This cable was apparently discussed at the luncheon meeting at the White House on May 5. A draft with revisions by Bundy and comments by Forrestal is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V111, Memos. At 7:28 p.m. on May 5, McGeorge Bundy called Rusk and made the following suggestions: “B. said the end of the first paragraph of this draft cable to Lodge he thought ran the risk of emphasizing to Lodge that Yes indeed we want to go in the North. Both agreed to soften the line a bit and take out the last sentence of the first pare. B. and Sec. discussed further changes and Sec. told B. that his brother and Sullivan were with him and would get it out.” (Department of State, Rusk Papers: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations) The last sentence of paragraph 1 in the draft referred to above reads: “Is he [Khanh] attempting to have us commit the US to support action against North Viet Nam before he will move upon a mobilization program?”

141. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 6, 1964—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Nodis.

142. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Honolulu, May 6, 1964—9:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Specat; Exclusive. Repeated to CINCPACFLT, CINCUSARPAC, and PACAF. The source text is a copy the JCS sent for information to the Department of State Specat-Exclusive for Rusk.

143. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, May 7, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 2144 from Saigon, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 002655.

144. Letter From the Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, May 7, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, Vietnam, Rusk/Lodge/William Bundy Correspondence. Confidential. At 6:35 p.m. on May 7, Rusk called McGeorge Bundy about this letter. The transcript of the telephone conversation reads in part: “Sec said he had signed letter to Lodge today re no questions his being top but he should deal with Harkins personally and not expect him to report to DCM; McNamara agrees but has problems about saying that in a directive.” (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations) On May 11, McGeorge Bundy wrote William Bundy the following memorandum: “I quite agree that the whole business between Lodge and Harkins is childish, and I have given the President only the most general account of it telling him that we think it best for him not to be involved, and that Lodge himself has addressed his communication to the Secretary and not to the President.” (Ibid., Bundy Files, Ambassador’s Private Correspondence)

145. Talking Paper Prepared for the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan)

Washington, May 7, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VIII. Top Secret; Nodis. There is no indication on the source text that Sullivan was the drafter, but there is on an earlier draft. (Ibid.)

108. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 108. Letter From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, April 4, 1964.

Dear Cabot: I have delayed in carrying out the job assigned to me in the President’s 1484 to you of March 20th,2 because the planning documents and our whole thinking have been evolving so that it did not seem useful until now to go into the situation more deeply with you.

As you know, we carried with us to Saigon a so-called “Annex A” which was an analysis of the implications of direct US military action against North Viet-Nam.3 You saw that analysis at the time and gave your comments to Bob McNamara and John McNaughton. The latter subsequently revised it into the form which I now enclose as Tab B.4

For the first ten days after our return, we were so preoccupied with the various actions under the first 11 recommendations of the report that we did not again focus on the issue, except that the JCS in this period went forward with their examination of the implications of putting in readiness the various categories of action described in the final McNamara-Taylor report at pages 6 and 7.5 The original criterion provided that the Border Control Actions, going beyond those approved by the President at present, should be placed on a 72-hour basis, that the same should be done for the Retaliatory Actions, and that the actions falling within “graduated overt military pressure by GVN and US forces” should be placed on a 30-day readiness basis.

In their examination, the JCS worked to the categories as stated in the report, but pointed out, quite rightly, that they needed further political guidance.

Accordingly, we in the Department, with great help from Mike Forrestal in the White House, turned our attention to re-thinking the political scenario. The result is the attached Tab A,6 which has now been talked over informally with the JCS and will be the subject of further refining and inserting appropriate military actions within its framework. (It should be noted that this scenario, in Part III, goes beyond Recommendation 12 and deals with the kind of actions discussed in Tab B.)

Three conclusions stick out from the re-analysis and I think are now accepted here: 1. There would be serious domestic problems in moving directly to overt US military action, and, even more basically, if we are to focus the objective where it belongs, on North Viet-Nam, it seems to us vital that the initial acknowledged actions be carried out extensively by the GVN itself. Hence, the new scenario would call for a progression of actions that would put the GVN and Khanh right in the forefront for a period before we ourselves considered moving to overt US action.

2. The categories used in the McNamara-Taylor report seem to us more and more not to fit the most likely time sequence. In particular, we believe that actions against Cambodia and Laos are dependent heavily on the political position in these countries at the time, and that, in general, it seems more likely that we would wish to hold off in hitting Cambodia until we had gone ahead hard against North Viet-Nam itself. Serious as the Cambodian role is, if we start to take strong military action, even in the form of hot pursuit, we will perhaps be making Cambodia wholly hostile and ready to help the VC, and we would certainly be stirring up an international hornets nest that would obscure the real objective and focus of our effort against North Viet-Nam.

Laos is a somewhat different case. If we are to carry actions against Laos to the point where North Vietnamese forces would move back in, we must be prepared to deal with all the implications of upsetting the “settlement” in Laos (however precarious and unsatisfactory it is). At the very least, we should be ready at that point either with forces stationed in Thailand or to do that at once. [sic] Moreover, for a whole host of reasons, opening up a Laos theater is the least appetizing way to go about it until we have made a real attempt in North Viet-Nam. Trouble in Laos can only be dealt with with ground forces effectively, and I am sure you know that this would not be an easy move to take from a domestic standpoint nor would it be too good from a strictly military view.

In short, there appear to be reasons not to open up other theaters until we have made clear that North Viet-Nam is the main theater and have got really started on it. Obviously, we must deal in due course—once we really mean business—with the activities of North Viet-Nam in both Laos and Cambodia. But our feeling is that this would probably come later rather than sooner, and we are writing an annex to the next revision of Tab A that will cover the problem in that sense.

We have also considered the part to be played by retaliatory actions of a tit-for-tat variety. As you will see, these are woven into the present scenario, but we do not necessarily envisage them as a separate and prior category of action. Part of the reason is that they are hard to fit and to present as fitting specific actions by the Viet Cong; one can hit an oil dump in response to an attack on an oil dump, but attempts to retaliate against the far more subtle and damaging Viet Cong assassinations, for example, may be hard to rationalize. But, more basically, tit-for-tat actions, presented as such, do not seem to us by themselves to convey the picture of concerted and steadily rising pressures that reflect complete US determination to finish the job.

I state this to you frankly, knowing that you and Paul Harkins are looking at this category of action, and I do not exclude the possibility of there being individual cases where our general conclusion will yield to the attractiveness of a specific proposed operation. We will examine them too in an annex.

3. The result of the above would be to require some sorting of military and political actions and perhaps to change appreciably the readiness times applicable to each category. The Border Control and Retaliatory Actions may not need as short a fuse as 72 hours, but conversely the initiation of actions under the old category of graduated military pressure should probably have a shorter fuse than 30 days.

The re-sorting of the actions is now in process within the JCS, and will be reflected in the revised and enlarged scenario we are now preparing. It will require the careful selection of actions which would make a strong impact right from the outset and might be applied thereafter either in the form of a single large action—if and when we move to the US overt phase—or through successive, progressively more serious groups of targets. The JCS considered this informally the other day, and feel that it should be no serious problem to arrange the sequence of actions so that it could be handled in either way.

As to the problem of readiness times on the military side, the overt GVN actions are mostly ready now, since we contemplate extensive and perhaps even exclusive use of the Farmgate unit on the air side; even the insertion of B–57s, to be flown with a Vietnamese who would in fact be only a passenger, would take very little time. Thus, the whole question of readiness times is more apparent than real, except for actions to respond to possible escalation although of course we will fit this in and see if there are bugs that do need to be ironed out.

Thus, we are now working to amplify the political scenario and dovetail it with the military actions that would be taken at each stage. Secondly, we are working on an annex that would frame the possible timing and type of action in Cambodia and Laos. Thirdly, we will do an analysis of retaliatory actions. And fourthly, once these three jobs are done, we propose to refine our estimates and judgments of North Vietnamese and Chinese Communist reaction, through a comprehensive National Intelligence Estimate. Lastly, this Estimate in turn will give us a better fix on how likely the more drastic forms of North Vietnamese and Chinese Communist action really appear to be, so that we can properly advise the President, at the right time, just what the real risks of escalation are and what it would take to deal with them from a military standpoint.

This, then, is the status of our planning. I am pouching this rather detailed explanation so that you, in consultation with Paul Harkins and his senior people as you see fit, can see how our minds are working and give us your own comment back. I am hoping that this will reach you by about April 10, and, if you saw fit, I myself will be in Manila from the 12th through the 15th,7 and would welcome a discussion with whomever you might choose to send. I could make several hours available for this purpose more or less at their convenience, and we could settle time and place by cables between Manila and Saigon if this does not reach you before our departure the morning of the 10th. In order to make the consultation not too conspicuous, I would suggest that the Saigon representation be small and arrive in a discreet manner.

I need hardly add that all of this planning is on a contingency basis and does not reflect any policy decisions yet taken by the President.

I have some other thoughts that relate back to your memorandum of October 30th to Averell Harriman,8 and I will write you a separate letter on this.9 However, you will see that we have at least put in the motif of the carrot-and-stick, in the form of possible food offers. As to our negotiating position with respect to some reduction of the US presence eventually, this would take further thought, and my own inclination is that we should not raise it at an early point.

Forgive the length of this, but the subject is complex and we will doubtless need further exchanges to see if we are all thinking at least in the same general lines.

With warm regards to you and to Emily,

Yours ever,

William P. Bundy10

P.S. I have gone over this letter with General Goodpaster (General Taylor’s Assistant), with John McNaughton, and with Bill Sullivan and Mike Forrestal. However, it would not make much sense at this point to try to write you any firm views on behalf of the Department, Secretary McNamara, or the JCS. All of us tend to agree with much of the substance contained in the attached Tab A, but it has not been examined in detail and does not reflect a firm “Washington position.” On the contrary, we very much need your thinking at this point in particular.

W.P.B.11

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos. Top Secret.

2 Document 92.

3 Apparent reference to papers cited in footnote 4, Document 93.

4 Not found.

5 Document 84.

6 Not attached, but apparent reference to the attachment to Document 102.

7 As a member of the U.S. Delegation to the Ninth Ministerial Council Meeting of SEATO.

8 Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 656–659.

9 Not found.

10 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

11 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

109. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 109. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Green) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 9, 1964.

SUBJECT

Ambassador Lodge’s plan to Pressure North Viet-Nam2

1. Lodge’s plan runs counter to realities, such as: (a) Our estimate of the objectives and tactics of the various Communist groups involved;

(b) Hanoi’s outspoken denunciation of any neutralization of North Viet-Nam;

(c) Hanoi’s repeated denial of support for the Viet Cong who are depicted as an internal liberation force. (Even if, incredibly, Hanoi accepted neutralization, the VC would continue to operate with Hanoi’s support.)

2. Any US overtures at this time would be regarded by North Viet-Nam as a sign that we were becoming war weary and frustrated, and this would convince Hanoi all the more that its tactics were wearing us down and succeeding.

3. While neutralization of North Viet-Nam might conceivably have attractions to the USSR, the latter well knows that the ChiComs and the other Asian Communists would never accept this “solution”.

Incidentally, the idea that old man Ho could be bought off with any offers of rice grants is ridiculous.

In turning Lodge down on his suggestion, it might be conceded to him that, when it becomes possible to withdraw US troops, we should, as he suggests, consider means for extracting maximum benefit and concessions from the NVN.

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Special Papers. Secret.

2 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 656–659.

110. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 110. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, April 9, 1964.

SUBJECT

Mission for Secretary of State

I talked to my brother about the specific mission which you have in mind for the Secretary of State,2 and he reports the following. This has been discussed in the Department, with Ball and Manning in favor, with the Far Eastern experts evenly balanced, and with the Secretary so far not deciding to do it.

Bill himself thinks that the considerations are quite evenly balanced. On the one hand, we have had so much high level visiting at Saigon that there is always something to be said for not putting another top level mission in. Moreover, the Secretary has a very strenuous schedule already with the SEATO meeting3 and a visit to Taiwan.

On the other hand, there is some feeling in the Department that our posture is too McNamara-warlike and that it would be helpful to the Department and to the Secretary for him to spend a day with the Ambassador and with Khanh.

Bill agrees with me that the balance of considerations is tilted quite positively if the picture of this trip is that you have asked the Secretary to make it. We have to be careful not to undercut Bob in this, but I think we can manage that side with an announcement something like the following for George Reedy either tonight or tomorrow: “The President had a good discussion with the Secretary on Thursday afternoon of the issues which will come up at the SEATO meeting in Manila.4 The President also requested Secretary Rusk to extend his visit to the Far East to include a visit to Saigon as a followup to the recent visit of Secretary McNamara. The President’s desire is to take the occasion of the Secretary’s visit to the SEATO meeting to ensure continued effective consultation with General Khanh and Ambassador Lodge.”

McG.B.5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 3. Confidential.

2 See Document 111.

3 April 13–15.

4 On April 9, Rusk conferred with the President from 6:30 to 7 p.m. No record of that meeting has been found. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary)

5 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 111. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, April 9, 1964—8:37 p.m.

1653. President and I have decided that it would be important for me to extend my visit to the Far East with a two or possibly three day visit to Saigon. This would give me a full opportunity to bring you and General Khanh up-to-date on our discussions at SEATO in which South Viet-Nam will play a most important role. Further, it will give you and me a chance to go over the situation in great detail, to give me some personal feel of a country which I have not visited as Secretary of State, and another opportunity for us to reemphasize our support for our common effort there. I could arrive in Saigon in the early afternoon of Friday, April 17. I hope this will not cause you or General Khanh undue inconvenience about existing schedule commitments.

Would much appreciate your suggestions as to how to make best use of time.2 President is asking General Wheeler to proceed direct to Saigon to be there when I arrive. I do not plan to swamp you with entire SEATO delegation most of which I would leave in Manila. Names of few who would accompany me to Saigon will be forwarded later. Putting aside personal considerations I am of a somewhat divided mind as to whether to bring Mrs. Rusk since your and my time will presumably be filled with business. I would greatly appreciate your personal and frank advice on this. Please reply to Acting Secretary with Nodis relay to Manila for me. Warm personal regards.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State. Central Files. ORG 7 S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted and initialed by Rusk.

2 In telegram 1953 from Saigon, repeated to Manila for the Secretary, April 10, Lodge suggested Rusk should plan to have a long talk with Khanh and Quat, and he might consider a trip to the countryside to see how the pacification program was working. (Ibid.)

112. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 112. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington. April 10, 1964.

VIETNAM

I have reviewed the status of our record with Ambassador Lodge. There are two principal matters between him and Washington which are still open.

U.S.-French-South Vietnam Relations

After learning the results of Bohlen’s talk with De Gaulle last week,2 Lodge has said that he feels he can no longer advise Khanh to keep the French Embassy in Saigon.3 Secretary Rusk has asked Lodge to try to stall Khanh’s break with France until after the Secretary has had another go at Couve de Murville at the SEATO meeting in Manila.4

Planning for Military Pressures against the North

Bill Bundy has written Lodge (copy of letter attached)5 explaining the status of our political and military planning and sending him a copy of a draft political scenario to lay the groundwork for action against the North.

Although the Saigon Embassy has expressed interest in mounting cross-border operations into Laos, it is by no means clear that this is Lodge’s idea; nevertheless the matter is being studied both at State and in Defense. Some such operations will no doubt be part of the military plans for pressures against the North.

Follow-up

The Secretary and Bill Bundy, accompanied by General Wheeler, will go to Saigon from the SEATO meeting in Manila to discuss all of the above matters with Lodge. He will have received Bundy’s letter by then and will transmit his comments through the Secretary. The Secretary and Bundy will also be able to discuss with Lodge the French position on Vietnam, which they will have picked up in Manila. Upon their return to Washington they should be in a position to make recommendations to you.

All the other matters raised by Lodge have been or are in the process of resolution in Bill Sullivan’s committee. Lodge’s cables continue to get unusually prompt and responsive attention within the Department.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos. Top Secret. McGeorge Bundy initialed the memorandum, and an “L” on the source text indicates that the President saw it.

2 See Documents 105 and 106.

3 Reported in telegrams 1916 and 1930 from Saigon, April 7 and 8. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) Both are published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 296C and 296D.

4 In telegram 1620 to Saigon, April 7. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 Document 108.

113. Memorandum of a Conversation, U.S. Embassy Chancery, 113. Memorandum of a Conversation, U.S. Embassy Chancery,1

Manila, April 12, 1964, 5:45 p.m.

US/M C–2

PARTICIPANTS

United States The Secretary of State

William P. Bundy, Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs

Carl F. Salans, Assistant Legal Adviser for Far Eastern Affairs

France Maurice Couve de Murville, Minister of Foreign Affairs

Jacques de Beaumarchais, Director of the Minister’s Cabinet

Robert Gillet, Assistant Director of Political Affairs

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam

The Secretary asked Couve what his thoughts were about South Viet-Nam.

Couve said he hadn’t changed his mind since his last discussions with the Secretary in the autumn.2 The problem in Viet-Nam, as he saw it, was not military but rather a complete political vacuum in Saigon. The Vietnamese people do not want to fight. Couve stated that French reports are that apart from the cities Vietnamese territory is out of the control of the Vietnamese government. The Diem government, although unpopular, was at least a government. Now there is nothing at all.

The Secretary asked what France meant by “neutrality” for Viet-Nam.

Couve replied, “Quite simply, the Geneva Agreements of 1954.” Those accords, he said, provided for the division of Viet-Nam with a commitment by both sides not to accept military aid from outside (sic)3 and not to enter into military alliances—which is really neutrality. The Accords provided for independence, nonalignment and reunification. But, Couve admitted, reunification would not be possible with a Communist regime in the North which is not independent.

Couve said, if you tell me military victory, I will say that is fine. But if the war is not extended to the North and if U.S. forces do not participate, there is not likely to be military victory in Viet-Nam. The South Vietnamese people are out of the game. All you have is a professional army supported from outside. Couve stated that the situation is exactly the same as the French experienced in Viet-Nam in 1954 and again in Algeria. In 1962 in Algeria, when the French gave Algeria its independence, the French had complete physical control of the country, “but in spite of that we lost the battle. You can’t win without the people.”

The Secretary asked whether there were large numbers of Vietnamese and Algerians fighting with the French in those situations. Couve said yes—200,000 Vietnamese and large numbers of Algerians.

Couve continued. There is the game in Viet-Nam, he said, and the game in the international field, with China. North Viet-Nam depends greatly on China. China is an expansionist, imperialist country, and Southeast Asia has always been a target of China’s expansionism. All Southeast Asian countries are terrified at the thought of Chinese expansion. Is there any possibility of China’s considering it in its own interests to reach an accommodation with the West, i.e., the United States? He thought there was, that in order to concentrate on internal development and to reduce the threat to it, China would renounce its expansionist drive in Southeast Asia on the understanding that Southeast Asia would not be hostile. The Hanoi government would have to follow suit.

The Secretary asked, would North Viet-Nam agree to be nonaligned? Couve admitted it would be difficult to conceive of that at the present time. But, he said, it would be enough if North Viet-Nam would agree to let South Viet-Nam alone. National cohesion in VietNam, Couve added, depends on the Vietnamese alone. The Vietnamese don’t like the Chinese and it is not in their interest to be aligned with China.

The Secretary questioned whether the formula described by Couve would appeal to the Chinese any more than in the past. Couve said, “you omit the fact that you are there.” The Chinese are terrified by that. The Secretary said, we were not there in force in 1957. That’s not fair, Couve rejoined. Since 1954 the United States supported the Diem government. The Chinese felt that South Viet-Nam was an American sphere of influence. The Secretary pointed out that our increased presence in Viet-Nam came only after 1959 when Hanoi announced that it was after the South. Mr. Bundy indicated that before that, our presence in Viet-Nam was within the scope of the 1954 Geneva Accords. For example, we had no more than 500–600 military personnel, the number the French had in 1954. Couve replied that for China 500 French military personnel in South Viet-Nam is one thing, but 500 American personnel is another.

Couve said France was trying to find the best means calculated to keep South Viet-Nam from falling to the Communists. The Secretary asked, “Is it the heart of French policy not to have a Communist regime in South Viet-Nam?” Couve answered, “Of course. I have said it many times.” The Secretary asked, then wouldn’t it help for France to throw its support behind those who are trying to stop a Communist takeover? No, said Couve, because we don’t think you can win. The South Vietnamese think that French policy is to get the United States out of Viet-Nam and to have the Communists take over, the Secretary added.

The Secretary said we thought there was a chance for a settlement in Laos, but we haven’t seen it. Couve attributed this fact to the deterioration of the Vietnamese affair. In any case, Couve said, Laos is no longer a “crisis” and Laos is not finally divided. There is still a possibility of unification under some kind of government.

The Secretary said that when Couve speaks of the Laos agreement not having worked because of Viet-Nam, it meant to the Secretary that the Viet Minh want to continue to use Laos to push people into South Viet-Nam. That is one reason, Couve admitted. Another is that the Pathet Lao and Phoumi had no intention of implementing the Geneva Agreements. Both thought there was still something to gain. Phoumi hoped to be master of South Laos-to have a divided country.

Couve asked the Secretary how he saw things for the SEATO Conference. The Secretary said he thought there would be full discussion in the private meetings of Laos, Viet-Nam and Malaysia. He thought it important for SEATO to express interest in there being no further expansion of Communism in Southeast Asia. South Viet-Nam, after all, was one of the SEATO Protocol States. The Secretary did not think SEATO would be called upon to get into the Malaysia question.

The Secretary said he hoped he and Couve would have a further talk. Couve said perhaps something could be arranged on Wednesday afternoon.4

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Salans and approved by Rusk on April 16. The source text is labeled “Part II of II.” Rusk and Couve de Murville were in Manila as the heads of their respective delegations to the Ninth Ministerial Council Meeting of SEATO, April 13–15.

2 Couve de Murville and Rusk discussed Southeast Asia and Vietnam in October 1963. (Ibid.)

3 As on the source text.

4 April 15. No record of a conversation has been found.

114. Memorandum of a Conversation, U.S. Embassy Chancery, Manila, April 12, 1964 114. Memorandum of a Conversation, U.S. Embassy Chancery, Manila, April 12, 19641

Manila, April 12, 1964, 3:30 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. Bundy

Foreign Minister Quat, South Viet-Nam

Following the conclusion of Dr. Quat’s discussion of his plans at the Conference,2 he asked to stay on alone with the Secretary and myself.

Dr. Quat said he wanted to describe the real situation in Saigon, which he had talked about with Ambassador Lodge recently.

He said that the essential problem was that all groups should pull together to assure victory. In particular, he was deeply concerned that there was not full military-civilian cooperation. He said that Khanh knows the situation uniquely among the generals, but that some of his advisors were not so wise. He said there was presently a tendency for Khanh to draw in on himself, and likened this to an accordion which had been fully extended but was now sharply contracted.

He made clear that what he meant was that there was a tendency toward increasing military domination and military powers. This he thought might increase effectiveness in the military sense, but that the result would be ephemeral without better political understanding.

Dr. Quat said that the resignation of Interior Minister Ky3 was an “eclatement” of feeling between the military and the civilians; the implication was that he was friendly to Ky’s position.

Dr. Quat said that he himself was playing the part of an unofficial intermediary between the military and the civilians, and that in his talks with the military leaders, one or two of them had expressed what Dr. Quat regarded as dangerous ideas. Specifically, it was being suggested that if the press did not behave in a disciplined fashion, it should be suppressed. Secondly, it was being suggested that there should be anti-intellectual demonstrations, apparently by military forces (“sorties dans la rue”).

Dr. Quat thought there were two possible solutions. One would be a “real marriage” between the two groups, so that not only would there be a plan (which he conceded there was at present) but it would be carried out in unison on both the military and civilian sides.

Alternatively, Dr. Quat thought there might be a sharing of responsibilities. For example, the MRC might be taken out of political life and lay down the basic guidelines of action for the so-called “points” of the plan, and there might be a civilian government set up under the MRC in order to carry out the plan. If the civilian government then did not do its job, it might be changed.

Comment: Throughout the conversation, Dr. Quat spoke in a low, intense manner, apparently reflecting deep feeling. He was obviously trying to get across the picture that all was not well with Khanh’s handling of the civilian side, and that he himself, despite his asserted position of intermediary, was among those who were sharply unhappy with the way things were going. He did not refer specifically, except in the one instance, to the position of the intellectuals, but I should judge that this, too, is very much on his mind. (I note Khanh’s attack on the intellectuals as useless in his statement yesterday.)

I am not sure how seriously to take Quat’s expression. He himself has always been something of an intellectual, and recollection is that he expressed similar misgivings early in the Khanh regime. Nonetheless, his description does tally sufficiently with other evidences of military-civilian friction so that we should take it as not wholly unfounded.

William P. Bundy4

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, WFB Chron. Secret. Drafted by Bundy on April 13.

2 At 3:30 p.m. on April 12, Quat, accompanied by Nguyen Duy Lien, the Vietnamese Observer at the SEATO Council Meeting, and Do Lenh Tuan, the Vietnamese Charge in Manila, met with Rusk, William Bundy, and Max V. Krebs, Political Counselor at the Embassy in Manila. Rusk stressed to Quat that he should use the Council meeting to talk with each of the SEATO foreign ministers and describe the situation in Vietnam, the threat from the North, and how South Vietnam was countering it. Rusk thought it important that Quat give the impression that South Vietnam was confident of its ability to cope successfully with the situation. Quat stated that such was his intention, and the two foreign ministers discussed the best means of doing so. (Memorandum of conversation, April 12, US/MC/1; ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)

3 Ha Thuc Ky.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

115. Telegram From the Delegation at the SEATO Ministerial Council Meeting to the Department of State 115. Telegram From the Delegation at the SEATO Ministerial Council Meeting to the Department of State1

Manila, April 15, 1964—7 p.m.

Secto 49. For Acting Secretary from Secretary.

1. As expected, communiqué presented main issue. Text key paragraphs concerning Viet-Nam and Laos being transmitted septel.2 As you will see, all members except French finally supported strong paragraphs on Viet-Nam, with French submitting separate paragraph expressing their sympathy for Viet-Nam effort but saying they did not think it wise to join in declaration made by others.

2. Believe this result best we could have achieved in circumstances and at least heartening evidence of solidarity other SEATO members. Couve had resisted stoutly all efforts produce more forthcoming French statement of support during restricted session yesterday,3 and had simply gone on repeating that since French believed effort in Viet-Nam doomed to failure they considered political solution must be explored. Incidentally, in discussing escalation possibility in restricted session, Couve said that if French were consulted they would probably be “rather against” extending the war to the North, which in his view would have to include hostilities with China. This seems to clarify French thinking this point and to negate Alphand’s contrary interpretation. At same time, Couve said there certainly was no assurance Chinese Communists in fact would accept a neutral Viet-Nam (even with US forces withdrawn, which he had made clear in private conversation was what French envisaged). Comment on this position seems superfluous, but at least we are a shade clearer where French stand and they are at least willing to express their sympathy for Vietnamese effort.

3. As to impact on French-Vietnamese relations, Quat seemed both satisfied with strength of declarations by other members and even somewhat pleased that French had finally ended up with some affirmative [statement?] however mild. Couve and Quat have also had two conversations here,4 of which second was reported by Quat to be cordial and Quat considers door now open for French to initiate discussions that could include economic issues as well as restoration of Ambassadors. I will want to discuss this more fully in Saigon to assess what our next move and position with Khanh should be.

4. As communique shows, all others remained solid throughout although Pakistanis said little and Lopez5 made abortive effort find common ground between our strong position and that of French. Thanat, as expected, particularly firm. Essentially French were isolated in restricted session but were not publicly pilloried except by Thanat in opening public session, which Couve did resent. Otherwise, he probably content with result and had no latitude to go further. In this morning’s session on communique he quickly suggested solution along lines ultimately reached.

5. What French future in SEATO is or should be is a matter we should consider on my return, but there no indication here French plan withdrawal. On contrary, given probable rigidity De Gaulle’s instructions, Couve seemed to be going to some length to avoid confrontation.

6. As to greater individual contributions to Viet-Nam, I have obtained no specific promises of material significance but believe communique and atmosphere here have prepared way for us to keep pressure on.

7. In Laos discussion, French proposed text that would have blamed “factions” impartially but yielded to final text which refers “particularly” to Communist violations.

8. Other communiqué issues revolved around Pakistani effort to invoke SEATO support as between member states and non-member states, meaning of course India, and brief British effort express concern on Malaysia. We stayed out of Pakistani fight, partly in order to avoid disturbing Pakistanis and possibly upsetting their support for Vietnamese paragraphs. Believe result innocuous.

9. In sum, meeting closed on fairly high note, considering adamant French position.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SEATO 3 PHIL (MA). Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon, Paris, London, and Vientiane. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State.

2 For full text of the communiqué, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 835–839.

3 Rusk’s assessment of this restricted session was transmitted in Secto 26 from Manila, April 14. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 An account of Quat’s discussions with Couve de Murville as recounted to William Bundy by Quat is in Secto 68 from Saigon, April 19. (Ibid., POL FR–VIET S)

5 Salvador P. Lopez, Secretary of Foreign Affairs of the Philippines.

116. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State, at Taipei 116. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State, at Taipei1

Washington, April 16, 1964.

The President has asked me to emphasize again the importance which he attaches to your conversation with Ambassador Lodge and the opportunity which this conversation gives for the most candid discussion of our policy toward the struggle in South Vietnam. The President sets the highest possible importance on maintaining the effective understanding with Ambassador Lodge which has been established ever since November, and he thinks it of the greatest importance that this cooperation should be sustained, especially in the light of the possibility that others may try to inject partisan politics into the matter.

The President therefore reiterates his hope that you and Bill will examine closely with the Ambassador any recommendations which he may have which in any sense go beyond current policy positions of the USG. The President will wish to give the most sympathetic and careful study to any specific recommendation which the Ambassador makes, and will go to very considerable lengths to assure full harmony. It does remain possible, of course, that there may be some particular recommendation from the Ambassador which the Administration will not be able to accept, but in any such case the President will himself review with the Ambassador the reasons for the Administration’s decision and will do his best on his side to work the matter out amicably with the Ambassador.

In this connection President is asking Ambassador to take up with you the possibility presented in his Secret 8 of April 16 to the President.2 We need to develop before decision here a more complete picture of proposed “tit for tat” operations, as well as implications of any warning to Ho.

In summary, the President hopes that any specific new recommendations will be pinpointed, and that you will convey to the Ambassador the President’s strong desire to have a fully agreed common policy between Washington and Saigon. The President continues to recognize the distinguished service which the Ambassador is giving in this most difficult post.

New Subject: While the President has repeatedly insisted that no one in the Administration should appear to be pressing the Ambassador to give up his present post because of any domestic political involvements, George Ball and I both believe that it would be entirely appropriate for you as Secretary to ask the Ambassador to share with you his own present thinking on any possible early change in his assignment. The nomination of any possible replacement will be your responsibility and will be a matter of great importance, and in the present situation in South Vietnam any significant gap between Ambassador’s return and the assignment of his successor would be most undesirable.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, Vietnam, Rusk/Lodge, WM. BUNDY Correspondence. Top Secret; Eyes Only; Personal; No Other Distribution. There is no indication on the source text how this memorandum was transmitted to Rusk in Taipei, which he visited after the SEATO Council Meeting.

2 Reference is to telegram 8 from Lodge to the President, April 16, which reads as follows: “1. Through [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] we have had report from source judged by the police to be reliable of a VC plan bomb American community school. We can get no information as to date.” [1 line of source text not declassified]

“2. Such a terroristic act would completely justify ‘tit for tat’ retaliation NVN. There could be no target more precious and more deserving of retaliation.”

“3. It also points to desirability of notifying Ho as a preventative measure that any terroristic act against Americans will bring instant retaliation. This, however, should not be done in a way to destroy our existing sources of information.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) In telegram 1710 to Saigon, April 16, 7:14 p.m., the President informed Lodge that he was “authorized to take whatever action you and General Harkins see fit to meet the threat to the school.” (Ibid.)

117. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 117. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 16, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam Planning

Herewith a brief status report on the progress of planning for pressures against the North.

The political scenario which I developed with Bill Sullivan’s help2 has been turned over to John McNaughton for further refinement before it is presented to the JCS. Sullivan and I have tried to press John to get something simple into the hands of the JCS as rapidly as possible. We are afraid that they are going off on two politically unproductive tracks. First, they may be spending most of their time planning for cross border raids and aircraft incursions into Laos and Cambodia; and second, they may be ginning up a variety of “tit-for-tat” actions against the North. Planning on both of these tracks has been largely stimulated, I think, by General LeMay.3 In order to get the Chiefs something more politically useful to work on, we are pressing McNaughton and McNamara to get something like our paper officially into their mill before we are faced with a mass of ineffective and politically explosive planning.

I think that there is some fear at the Pentagon, among the more reasonable military as well as the civilians, that since the President will never authorize anything like the actions proposed in the political scenario, it is better to concentrate on the cross border and “tit-for-tat” approach. In short, they suspect us of putting up a straw man. There may also be an underlying worry that what we have proposed might get the U.S. involved in an unmanageable, large-scale war.

As matters stand now, John McNaughton has agreed to prepare a simple memo for the Chiefs based upon our scenario but adding some elements of cross border operations and “tit-for-tat” actions as one of several tactics we might use. McNaughton, Sullivan and I will discuss this with Bob McNamara on Saturday afternoon,4 at which time we will press him to put it to the Chiefs officially, so that we stop the growing criticism that no formal political proposal has been made to them.

What would be helpful now is a very delicate hint from the President that he has not excluded actions directed against the North before the election. I realize how dangerous this could be if any such hint got out of control; and consequently I have perhaps been overcautious in not repeating any of our conversation with the President several weeks ago, except in a very oblique way to Bill Sullivan.

We should have a chat about this and other aspects of Vietnam when you get a minute.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos. Top Secret.

2 See the attachment to Document 102.

3 An example of such planning is JCSM–298–64, April 14, in which General LeMay and General Greene advised Secretary McNamara that they were “convinced that operations in Vietnam should be extended and expanded immediately.” They recommended a plan for a series of overt and covert actions against North Vietnam and across the Lao and Cambodian borders in order to force the North to cease its support for the insurgency in the South. The other members of the Joint Chiefs dissented on the grounds that the plan was premature. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 Vietnam)

Since a majority of the Joint Chiefs dissented, McNamara took no action on JCSM–298–64. (Memorandum from the Administrative Secretary, OSD, to the Secretary of the JCS, May 5, enclosure to JCS 2343/345–4, May 7, as quoted in Historical Division, Joint Secretariat, JCS, The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the War in Vietnam, 1960–1968, Part 1, Chapter 9, p. 22)

4 April 18; no record of a meeting has been found.

118. Memorandum of a Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and Prime Minister Khanh, 118. Memorandum of a Conversation Between Secretary of State Rusk and Prime Minister Khanh,1

Saigon, April 18, 1964.

SUBJECT

Discussion of action against the North. All other topics were fully covered in the reporting cable. (Secto 71 from Saigon 4/19/64)2

PARTICIPANTS

Secretary Rusk

Ambassador Lodge

General Wheeler3

Mr. Bundy

General Khanh

Dr. Quat

The Secretary responded that there were two important considerations. First, the base here must be made firmer, as Khanh himself had indicated to Secretary McNamara in March. Secondly, the Sino-Soviet situation was not yet clear. Khrushchev appeared to think a real break could be prevented.

Moreover, the Secretary said, the United States had to study the implications carefully. The United States would never get into another Korea with large conventional forces, and enlargement of the war might mean a high level of military action in which we would have to consider using nuclear weapons. Because of these problems, we should do absolutely all we could to improve the situation here before we started actions against the North.

The Secretary further noted that some of our Asian allies had expressed opposition to the use of nuclear weapons.

Khanh responded that as far as he was concerned we could use anything we wanted against China. As long as Communist China remained “you will never have security.” Communist China was Vietnam’s hereditary enemy, and the issue must be resolved.

The Secretary said others in Asia felt the same way. He went on that there were a number of actions that might be taken that would not be likely to lead to general war. These we needed to discuss between our two governments.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US–VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy.

2 Document 119.

3 General Wheeler was in Vietnam, April 15–20, to represent the Department of Defense during Rusk’s visit and to assess air operations in South Vietnam. Wheeler’s report, April 22, is in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FR(3 71 A 3470. South Vietnam. Khanh initiated this topic. He said he agreed with the idea of carrying the war to North Vietnam, and that there were a lot of possibilities of action such as commando raids, etc. We could not stay on the defensive but must move to the enemy.

119. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 119. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 29, 1964—6 p.m.

Secto 71. Department repeat parts to other posts as needed. From Secretary for Acting Secretary. Following were highlights my talk with Khanh, supplemented as necessary by my earlier shorter talk with Quat.

1. I stressed our complete commitment to GVN and that this based on national interest. Khanh responded that struggle vital both for area and principle and that he annoyed when “some” did not understand. (I took up this cue in dinner toast, pointing out two Senators disagreed, but 98 supported US policy and both parties did.) Khanh went on to say that this new kind of war in which aggression could not be neatly proved but in which special laws applied and should not hang on exact words. Really total Communist war, with Mao following Stalin policy of biting off small nations. First Central Europe, now Southeast Asia, later Africa.

2. I strongly urged importance decentralizing authority and giving local officials initiative, asking whether he satisfied with present province chiefs. Khanh responded no magic formula and could not change old habits of society and especially officials quickly, but that he moving to bring all groups in, to provide firm and determined leadership, and to give officials responsibility. He said much talk of dictatorship, but this not at all his way and that he doing all possible to get lower levels to act on own.

3. Khanh encouraged by Manila result. I responded Quat had been most helpful to GVN cause and that this showed importance GVN getting out and selling own case, including naming key Ambassadors who might be men who for political reasons could not be used at home. (I did not refer directly to Kim and Don, but he clearly got point.) Khanh said he recognized this weak point, hard to find people, but that he would “handle this month” (meaning Kim and Don, for what this may be worth in light previous statements similar nature).

4. GVN-French relations. I said French attitude 80 percent motivated by De Gaulle’s wish to be independent of U.S., that French had no more real power or interest in Asia and that it best to ignore them. If French individuals misbehaved, then get rid of them. Cooperation of French community in VN important, and since it seemed to support GVN effort should be made to make this clear. Khanh concurred that French here anti-De Gaulle, but went on to say that he deeply concerned that document obtained by secret means from French Embassy had shown French had specific plans to supersede us in information area. I said such document hard to interpret and that French might think badly of some U.S. information efforts in their former African areas on same lines. Khanh said he would look further into this. Note: In earlier Quat talk he had reviewed his Manila talks with Couve along lines reported separately. Quat had concluded that situation not grave and that now up to French to take initiative if they wanted to discuss restoration of Ambassadors and commercial problems. He said he recommending to Khanh they play it cool, and my deduction from tone of Khanh talk is that he agrees unless specific stronger evidence turns up of French activity against GVN. Khanh did say he on watch for such evidence and that lines ran into other countries. I did not draw him out or offer our intelligence help but obviously we should watch very closely in such places as Paris and Phnom Penh as well as here.

5. Cambodia. Khanh said France dictates Sihanouk attitudes, not necessarily through Ambassador but through French advisors. Sihanouk believes Commies will win and hence threatens to negotiate with Hanoi. He said he particularly concerned latest Sihanouk talk of dealing with both Hanoi and with National Liberation Front which of course just name for Viet Cong. If Sihanouk did this, “I will no longer be obliged to respect the frontier”. He went on to cite latest Cambodian border incidents, saying that supporting fire had come from Cambodian side of border. He thought Sihanouk might be stirring up such incidents and then planning to use them to justify dealing with NLF as party really controlling border, and repeated that if he did so he, Khanh, would be compelled to counter-attack into Cambodia. He considered the situation grave.

6. I responded that Couve had assured me that the French would press Sihanouk to work out his problems by bilateral dealings with both Thailand and South Vietnam, and that we ourselves would support such efforts strongly. I urged he hold off till after Sihanouk’s visit to France. Khanh did not seem wholly persuaded and said that they had just sent a forthcoming note to Sihanouk, but that the latter had responded badly (presumably meaning the threat about the NLF). Note: I conclude we will have to watch this one very closely and consider whether there are ways to get Sihanouk to withdraw at least his NLF threat.

7. SEATO action. Khanh said the Manila communiqué2 seemed to indicate the SEATO countries were ready to move to action and asked whether the GVN should make a formal appeal to SEATO. I said that SEATO still had the rule of unanimity on military actions although the nations in fact acted under the principle of the Rusk-Thanat communiqué3 that their obligations continued even though SEATO as such did not note the action. (He at once grasped this point and showed, as throughout, great acuteness.) Thus, I said the thing was to find out what more individual nations were prepared to do, not as SEATO but under their SEATO obligations. We fully supported getting more help from such nations both for its military help and its political significance in showing GVN had many supporters. I referred specifically to the past Philippine offer of Rangers which I understood had been turned down by Diem, and urged that it be revived. I also mentioned Thanat’s suggestion about training Thai Rangers for use in Laos. Khanh asked if the use of military forces from other nations would raise international complications, and I said I thought not. (In retrospect, it occurs to me he may have had ChiNats in mind here, but I doubt if ChiNat armed forces apart from specialists are now a live issue here in light Gimo’s comments in Taipei4 and also fact General Khiem told me specifically at dinner last night that he had approached Gimo about possibility ChiNat military units and been fumed down flat)

8. Laos. Khanh said the Lao asking him to help in South Laos. He said that the southern corner of Laos was of special concern to them, showing on the map how the trails run from south Laos down into Cambodia and east to Ban Me Thnot. He had guerrilla forces who could move into this area to work with the FAR, and of course the Viet Cong pipeline ran through this area. (He seemed to focus much more on this area than on the Tchepone area.)

9. I responded that the GVN should focus on its own interests not on the struggle between the various groups in Laos. The important thing was to get intelligence on what the Viet Cong were doing. I then said that since the three factions were meeting and also we ourselves were pressing the Soviets for help, they should wait a few days and Ambassador Lodge should then talk further with the GVN. Khanh said that Moscow was far and Peking near, and he doubted if the Soviets could do much.

10. Action against North Vietnam. Khanh raised this topic. I will report fully on my return.5

11. Relations with GRC and ROK. Khanh asked what we thought of the idea of their forming a common front with these two, which would not be a military alliance but a “common moral front” to show solidarity. I said we would favor regular consultations to show sympathy, and also forms of aid short of combat forces, but that we did not encourage an alliance and believed particularly that the issue of Southeast Asia should not get mixed with the enormous issue of the basic Chinese conflict.

12. Overall. Conversation friendly throughout. He was carefully prepared, knew what he wanted to get across, and responded quickly to my points. A most impressive man.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US–VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State at 5:48 a.m.

2 See American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 835–839.

3 For text of the joint statement issued at Washington by Rusk and Thai Foreign Minister Thanat Khoman on March 6, 1962, see ibid., 1962, pp. 1091–1093.

4 In a discussion in Taipei, President Chiang Kai-shek told Rusk that the best way for the Republic of China to aid South Vietnam was by airdropping 5,000 to 10,000 Chinese Nationalist guerrillas into China’s southwestern province to encourage and promote an anti-Communist revolution and disrupt Chinese Communist supply lines to their allies in Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and Burma. Chiang wanted the United States to provide the planes for the airdrop. (Memorandum of conversation between Rusk and Chiang Kai-shek, April 16; Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)

5 See Document 118.

120. Memorandum of a Conversation, U.S. Embassy, 120. Memorandum of a Conversation, U.S. Embassy,1

Saigon, April 19, 1964, 10 a.m.

SUBJECT

Discussion of Mr. Bundy’s letter of April 4, 1964, to the Ambassador2

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. Bundy

Ambassador Lodge

General Wheeler

General Harkins

Mr. Solbert

Mr. Nes

Mr. De Silva

Mr. Manfull

Mr. Dunn

Ambassador opened discussion with summary of Mr. Bundy’s letter of April 4. He indicated that the letter and the attached scenario and rationale were impressive and interesting. He summarized the letter as follows:

Actions fall into three categories.

Category A. In essence this is what is being done now and what is projected already under OP Plan 34–A.3 It is very questionable whether these actions influence events to any important extent. There may be a training benefit which might be useful if more far-reaching actions are adopted later. Essentially, all actions under Category A are and should be covert South Viet-Nam measures with covert U.S. support.

Category B. The distinction between Categories A and B primarily is that South Viet-Nam actions become overt with U.S. covert support continuing. These actions would include both aerial mining of selected harbors and sea routes and VNAF attacks on selected DRV targets, possibly including the use of Farmgate aircraft.

Category C. Actions would involve joint overt SVN and U.S. participation. Would consist of (a) warning and preparatory actions, to include intensified U.S. aerial reconnaissance activities, sizable area build-up of naval power, and large-scale overflights of North VietNam; and (b) destructive activities, to include naval control measures (involving either selective or total blockade of North Viet-Nam through use of patrols, mines, and other measures), naval bombardment of selected DRV targets, and air attacks on selected DRV targets.

Both GVN and U.S. would prior to taking any destructive action make clear to its own people and to the world the rationale which supports such efforts against the North.

Lodge questioned wisdom both of massive publicity and of massive destructive actions before a well planned and well executed diplomatic attempt had been made (with military and economic backing) to persuade NVN to call off the V.C.

Hanoi should be told, in a way not to involve loss of face, of a carrot-stick program, aim of which would be cessation of V.C. terrorism. One element would be fear, to be produced by bombing some target. The pot could also be sweetened for Hanoi by adding the possibility of food imports (perhaps from Western nations other than the U.S.) and by some U.S. personnel withdrawal which we had decided to do anyway (none other).

To make such a statement to Hanoi the right kind of interlocutor was important. There is a fairly long list of names which Lodge had rejected for various reasons. These were UAR, Yugoslavs, Poles and United Kingdom. [8–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Lodge felt it was very difficult to predict the Viet Cong reaction to large-scale measures against the North-particularly measures involving overt U.S. participation. It is possible that the VC might react violently here. We are not at all sure that we know their full capability-how much they hold in reserve. Almost certainly, targets in the South such as dams and oil refineries, power transmission lines, generators, etc. would immediately be taken under attack. There is also a possibility that the PAVN, perhaps followed by the Chinese Communist Army, would cross the border in open invasion of South VietNam. U.S. could not match Chinese millions of men. If so, would the defense of the South necessarily involve U.S. use of nuclear weapons?

For us to make such a statement to Hanoi through an interlocutor is neither a negotiation nor a dialogue. It is more nearly an ultimatum.

Certainly no Geneva-type conference should be considered unless and until we grow much stronger here than we are now.

General Discussion Followed

The Secretary raised the question as to what the attitude in South Viet-Nam would be toward another Geneva Conference for Laos. Lodge indicated that it would be bad, that a proposal for such a conference inevitably would have a bad reaction here. Consternation reigns even when the New York Times, for example, speculates on the possibility of a Geneva Conference. This is because the Vietnamese feel the subject of Viet-Nam necessarily will come up in any Geneva Conference. Embassy representatives indicated, however, that there is a difference, which can be drawn distinctly, between a conference called on Laos to settle specific points which arise on an urgent basis and one called for the general purpose of considering the situation in Southeast Asia or the Protocol States.

Mr. Bundy commented generally on the rationale of his paper. The paper represents an effort to pull together a political scenario which would at least represent a useful beginning. The basic premise is that we must first state our objective-getting Hanoi and Peking out of South Viet-Nam. While the paper does not make explicit the possibility of American troop withdrawal from the South, some change in our military posture here would result if Northern and Chinese involvement is discontinued. Implicit in our whole stand is the fact that the U.S. military presence here would be very different if the war became a case simply of counter-insurgency. It is, in any case, very difficult to play the card of promised troop withdrawal, since we don’t know yet how many and what types of military men are needed here. We may, in fact, require American troop increases in South Viet-Nam. We can and will, of course, provide economic aid of some type from the West if North Viet-Nam cooperates. Rice imports, for example, could be scheduled in a manner similar to the wheat now going into Communist China.

Lodge indicated that it would be very hard indeed for Ho Chi Minh to provide a salable package for his own people and for other Communist nations unless we can do something that Hanoi can point to, even though it would not be a real concession on our part.

The Secretary indicated that he was not too concerned about the possibility that any withdrawal from the South on the part of North Viet-Nam and the Chinese might be temporary. He indicated that, in his opinion, we can rebuild our strength here faster than they can if this becomes necessary. He stated his concern that the extent of infiltration and other provision of support from the North be proven to the satisfaction of our own public, of our allies, and of the neutralists. Mr. Bundy stated that Mr. William Jorden’s draft paper on this subject is coming along nicely,4 that he feels unit strengths can be projected from individual POW reports, and that aerial reconnaissance has been and will continue to be particularly useful. [2 lines of source text not declassified]

General Harkins stated that the VNAF now has two prisoners definitely identified as coming from the North Vietnamese 325th Division. The prisoners are now on their way up for interrogation at the National Center. Important evidence should result.

A discussion of the efficacy of aerial photography flights ensued: Mr. De Silva indicated that his understanding was that present U–2 flights had produced no evidence of infiltration. It was decided that for low-level reconnaissance U.S. planes would be preferable, but that their use even over Laos raises many political problems. Ambassador Unger, for example, feels strongly that any air reconnaissance involving U.S. aircraft should not be performed below 10,000 feet. It was agreed that the psychological value of U.S. low-level reconnaissance could be great and should be considered when weighing such a program.

The Secretary then raised the possibility of a U.S. naval presence at Tourane or Cam Ranh Bay. He also suggested the possibility of nibbling on North Viet-Nam shipping above the Demarcation Line. He asked about the possibility that the junk fleet might pick up some North Vietnamese small vessels above the parallel and whether air cover would have to be provided for such an operation. General Wheeler did not feel that aerial attack was a problem, but that the Swatow-class gunboats would make it impossible for junks to operate in that area. He feels that the Nastys will be more than a match for the Swatow boats when they become operational and should be used for such purposes. General Harkins indicated that even the very limited naval operations undertaken to date have had considerable impact on the North. There is, for example, considerable evidence of increased defensive measures already having been taken all along the coast.

[1 paragraph (3–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

The availability of other Asian troops to fight here then was discussed. The Secretary stated that we are not going to take on the masses of Red China with our limited manpower in a conventional war. While China’s Chiang Kai-shek is adamantly opposed to America’s use of nuclear weapons in Asia, the Chinats do not offer the kind of conventional forces that would be useful here or probably even on mainland China. Ninety per cent of the enlisted men now are Formosans and not particularly well motivated to fight outside Formosa (or perhaps the off-shore islands) where they may be reasonably expected to give a good account of themselves. The use of individuals from Taiwan as cadre and advisers, and of some special units such as UDT and the like is, of course, a different matter.

[4–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] General Wheeler agreed that the Chinese solders are used to getting along with a great deal less than we are and that it would be very difficult to interdict from the air [less than 1 1ine of source text not declassified]. Mr. De Silva suggested that the principal question which must be considered before undertaking such a program is whether the Chinese feel themselves capable of taking on the U.S. at this time. The Secretary indicated that he felt this was primarily a question of Chinese-Soviet relations. If the Chinese do not feel they can count on Soviet support, it is highly questionable whether they would want to face our power. He feels that a great deal can be done with the Chinese based on the fact that their trend in trade relationships has shifted over the past few years from the Red Bloc to the West in greater measure. The Australians and Canadians, for example, could bring great pressure on Red China by withholding wheat and other grains. If we go much further with the plans under discussion, we must consider approaching our allies along these lines.

The Ambassador indicated that he was very dubious about what might happen to the Viet Cong here in SVN if we took out the industrial targets in the Haiphong-Hanoi complexes. They have ample weapons and a base from which to recruit and supply themselves with food and other necessities. It is entirely possible that we would have forfeited the “hostage” which we hold in the North which provides a certain amount of security to some of our more sophisticated and complex installations here without markedly affecting the fight against the Viet Cong, at least in the short run. The basic problem was still the creation of a proper political atmosphere. He stated that he found the idea of a naval presence in Tourane and Cam Ranh Bay very attractive. This would provide feasible evidence of American strength for both the South Vietnamese and the North. The Secretary stated-that he would couple such a presence with intensified civic action projects to be launched in the immediate area to give the Vietnamese people an added stake in the American presence.

The Secretary raised the point of our intelligence operation and its apparent inadequacies here in the South. He finds it difficult to understand how VC forces of the strength of two battalions can literally “spring from the ground” and launch a coordinated attack without prior detection. Mr. De Silva stated that a great deal more can be done if present restrictions on the Cambodian and Laotian side of the border are removed. General Harkins feels that the key point is to obtain intelligence from the people who at the present time simply won’t provide information in certain areas either because they are terrorized or committed to the VC. These are the very areas in which, because of the geography and vegetation, the VC can move readily and stealthily. For example, in the lower Camau Peninsula, they can use the canals virtually without fear of detection.

The Secretary indicated that we should go ahead with our plans to use a Canadian as intermediary and begin the groundwork now to obtain such a man and station him here.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. IX, Memos. Top Secret. Drafted by John M. Dunn, Special Assistant to the Director of USOM in Saigon.

2 Document 108.

3 See footnote 2, Document 4.

4 See footnote 9, Document 102.

121. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 121. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, April 21, 1964.

You decided yesterday to call Mike Pearson and to say to him that Dean Rusk will be bringing an important personal message1 from you when he goes up to the Ministerial discussions on U.S.-Canada relations next week. You may or may not want to indicate to Pearson that this message deals with our view that the very best possible Canadian should be assigned to the ICC team in Vietnam with the specific mission of conveying to Hanoi both warnings about its present course and hints of possible rewards in return for a change.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 3. No classification marking.

1 The message has not been found, but see Document 134.

122. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President 122. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President1

Washington, April 21, 1964.

SUBJECT

Information-Psychological Warfare Program in South Viet-Nam

During the recent trip to Saigon with Secretary Rusk, I came to the conclusion that the weakest part of the war operation, both on our part and that of the Government of South Viet-Nam, is in the field of information and psychological warfare. According to a report by the Military Advisory Commission as well as information gathered by USIS, this is true on both a nationwide basis and a province-by-province basis.

It is my judgment that the Viet-Namese people will never give sufficient support to the war effort until certain glaring gaps are closed in the information-psychological campaign.

In view of the importance of public opinion in Viet-Nam, in this country and in the world at large, I believe that top priority should be given to a large scale United States program to improve the GVN ability to win the support of the people and to tell its story abroad.

Two steps are urgently required: 1. We must place informational-psychological advisors into every major area, just as we have placed military and economic development advisors throughout the GVN organization.

2. We must begin a crash program to train promising South VietNamese personnel in radio, motion picture, publishing and other techniques crucial to any program of psychological warfare. This is essential because it is unanimously agreed that the GVN is sorely lacking in personnel with the motivation and training to do the job required.

I found Prime Minister Khanh and Minister of Information Pham Thai extremely forthcoming in talks about a new information program, and both expressed eagerness to have United States assistance-a sharp improvement over the attitude of the Diem government. This Agency already has submitted to the GVN a detailed proposal of steps needed to improve its psychological warfare performance. The GVN has promised to respond with a detailed proposal of areas in which it wishes our immediate assistance.

While in Saigon, I also held sessions with the representatives of CIA, MACV, USOM, the Embassy political section and my USIS staff. We agreed on steps now underway, or soon to be gotten underway, which require no action from Washington. (For example, a small group of key Americans and a few top Viet-Namese officials Monday held the first meeting of a joint psychological operations committee which had been set up some time earlier but had never gotten together.)2

If the proposed program is to succeed, it will require a modest outlay of U.S. funds and some increase in personnel from USIA and perhaps other U.S. agencies. I recommend also that we explore the possibility of third country contributions to the information program. U.S. expenditures in the information-psychological field are now quite small, relatively speaking. In fact, I was informed that the program is a failure in several provinces because of the lack of small bits of money to pay for such things as the running of a projector, or paper on which to print leaflets.

I emphasize strongly my belief that the information effort will fail, no matter what resources we pour into it, unless it has the clear direction of a single individual capable of formulating the program required and of guiding it to success. For many reasons, I believe that the control should be civilian and that Barry Zorthian, the Country Public Affairs Officer and one of the most capable men in this entire agency, should be given this responsibility.

I further recommend that a top USIA officer be included as an official part of any subsequent missions from Washington to study the development of the Viet-Namese operation. Likewise, if Mr. Zorthian is to have a chance at success, USIA must be represented on all committees in Washington which are mapping plans to carry us to victory in VietNam.

In a few days I shall submit for consideration by you, the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense a detailed plan to meet the objectives spelled out above.3

Carl

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series. Vol. VII. Cables and Memos. Secret.

2 No record of the meeting on Monday, April 20, has been found.

3 Apparent reference to a memorandum from Rowan to Sullivan, April 28. (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA Psychological Operations Files: FRC 68 A 4933, INFO–PSYCH Operations, 1964)

123. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 123. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 22, 1964—7 p.m.

2033. CINCPAC for POLAD.

1. General Minh, on the occasion of Secretary Rusk’s call,2 exclaimed to me that he never saw me anymore. When I said that I would gladly come whenever he would see me, he said he did not wish to summon me, but hoped he could see me nonetheless. Accordingly, I called on him late Monday afternoon3 at his home.

2. He says the Buddhists are turning against Khanh. The newspaper Tin Sang, which he suspects is backed and managed by the Buddhist clergy, has openly attacked him in two editions in a row on the ground that Khanh is appointing “bad Diemists”.

3. Khanh is making the same errors as Diem. He puts people at the head of key posts because he trusts them rather than because they are capable people.

4. The man who is now chief of military security, Col. Phuoc, was a key member of Nhu’s secret service and had arrested many Buddhist professors and students.

5. Khanh badly needs to win more confidence than he has. Minh had gone to the movies incognito the other night, and when Khanh’s picture came on the screen, he could discern the discontent. He felt Khanh was unpopular throughout the country. When I asked him what he meant by unpopular in a country where there is really no public as we know it, he meant the businessmen, intellectuals, and the professional classes in the big towns.

6. Khanh sees Minh as a rival. When I asked why Minh didn’t go around the country making public appearances and shaking hands, Minh said: “I withdraw voluntarily because I don’t think he wants me to be active.”

7. I said that if he made a public appearance somewhere, I would be delighted to go with him, and that I intended to say to General Khanh that it was a pity that General Minh was not out making public appearances. The job of getting the Vietnamese Government before the people was bigger than any one man.

8. Minh said that Khanh had made the fallacious declaration that General Minh is not Chief of State because of not being elected and that he is only “carrying out the duties of Chief of State”.

9. Minh had a low opinion of Khanh’s advisers. He said there were 17 advisers talked of in the press, but he only knew of 2. One was Tuoc, Khanh’s brother-in-law whom Minh described as a “bandit”. The other was Hong, the Secretary to the Presidency who is a dishonest lawyer.

10. Vice Prime Minister Hoan is insisting on government employees joining the Dai Viet Party.

11. Khanh promised elections too soon before the people were ready for them.

12. There should be no public spectacle about Ngo Dinh Can. The national interest does not require his death.4 The whole matter could be indefinitely postponed. There are 1,600,000 Catholics in the country who could easily become upset.

13. Apparently irrelevantly, he then said it is not yet time to put outside people in the saddle. By this he meant the Vietnamese of real merit who are in Europe and in the United States, and who should at some time be brought back.

14. When I asked what I could do about all of what he had said, he said that I could do nothing, that it was all an internal matter.

Comment: I really do not take any of this very seriously in a country where the people are so firmly committed to the ideal of every man for himself and devil take the hindmost. I cannot imagine any head of government who would get anything less than this in the way of criticism.

I do intend, however, to continue to try to get Minh out on the stump because I am sure it would help the effort against the Viet Cong.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Apparent reference to a courtesy call on Minh by Rusk when he was in Saigon, April 1 7–19.

3 April 20.

4 Ngo Dinh Can, the brother of the late President of South Vietnam Ngo Dinh Diem, was the unofficial governor of Central Vietnam during the Diem years, although he held no government position. In the coup of November 1, 1963, Can unsuccessfully sought refuge in the U.S. Consulate in Hue, and was taken into custody by coup forces. Lodge received assurances from Minh that Can’s physical safety would be assured and he would receive a fair trial; see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 427 ff. Can was found guilty of murder, extortion, and misuse of power by a revolutionary tribunal on April 22, 1964, and was sentenced to death.

124. Summary Record of the 528th Meeting of the National Security Council, 124. Summary Record of the 528th Meeting of the National Security Council,1

Washington, April 22, 1964, 4:45 p.m.

Secretary Rusk chaired the meeting in the absence of the President and reported on his recent trip.

a. The SEATO meeting in Manila—French Foreign Minister Couve de Murville made clear in bilateral conversations that the French have no specific plan for the neutralization of Southeast Asia. The French are convinced that our policy in Vietnam will not succeed but they don’t want South Vietnam to fall into the Communist camp. The French think we must either enlarge the war, which they oppose, or negotiate a settlement. Therefore, French policy aims at keeping flexibility so that it can promote negotiations at the earliest possible moment. Couve did not veto the SEATO communiqué but merely added his disagreement with the conclusion reached by all the others with respect to the importance of defeating the Communists in Vietnam.

b. Discussion with General Chiang Kai-shek—The most interesting point was Chiang’s passionate statement that nuclear war in Asia would be wrong. Chiang does not think that the U.S. will put only conventional forces on the Mainland and that, therefore, his military capability is limited to that under his control in Formosa. However, Chiang thinks that disorders on the Mainland would break out when he invades, thus, making it possible for his forces to defeat the Communists. U.S. military advisors in Formosa are not certain how Chiang’s army would react if it were ordered to invade the Mainland because 90% of his army now consists of Formosans.

c. South Vietnam—Most of the recommendations he has made on South Vietnam are being worked on. (1) Khanh is a very impressive person who realizes fully that his problem is not just military.

(2) We need to get more flags flying in South Vietnam. We need to help persuade other countries to provide assistance to Vietnam, not only for the value of assistance, but also because of its importance to Vietnamese morale.

(3) The Vietnamese need to fill diplomatic posts in several major capitals so that their point of view can be put across to other countries.

(4) The relationship between Khanh and Big Minh is not entirely satisfactory. Ambassador Lodge is trying to bring these two men closer together. If some of Minh’s followers are taken care of and put in jobs abroad or in Vietnam, it is possible that Minh will actively support Khanh

(5) Khanh needs to seek a broader civilian base for his government. A non-governmental organization has been formed to try to produce greater unity among the civilians.

(6) Psychological warfare in Vietnam is very spotty. Mr. Rowan studied this problem and has made some recommendations as to what should be done.2

(Mr. Rowan, in response to the Secretary’s request, commented that the critical information need is to train South Vietnamese. The Vietnamese information service is very weak in the provinces. Limited physical facilities exist but maintenance is very poor. A great improvement can be made with the expenditure of a very small amount of money. The USIA in Vietnam is now working on a joint basis with the Vietnamese and it is hoped that progress will result from the joint effort.)

(7) Limitation of funds-we may not be doing some things that we ought to be doing in Vietnam because we still think we must limit expenditures. As compared to the cost of a war or our withdrawal, the amount of money we are spending in Vietnam is small. Ambassador Lodge says he has enough U.S. funds but this may not be so. We should look again at our programs and examine all ideas without thinking whether or not they can be done without increasing our expenditures.

(8) The Defense Department is studying several new military recommendations made by the group.

(9) We are anxious to get a new Canadian member on the International Control Commission. This Commissioner would be visiting Hanoi and seeing Ho Chi Minh every few weeks. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

Secretary Rusk asked Assistant Secretary William Bundy to comment. Mr. Bundy said that we are now getting good reporting in both the political and military fields. Newspaper reporters have been misleading us. Unrest within the South Vietnam government has been exaggerated. The security situation is much better than as reported in the press. In the most recent large engagement. the Vietnamese stood and fought very well.

General Wheeler said he agreed. He called attention to a page one story in the New York Times which was quite misleading in that it left the impression that the Viet Cong had achieved a major victory over the Vietnamese. Viet Cong losses in this battle were sizable. A1though the week has been bloody, it has been pretty successful for the Vietnamese. Among the military advisers there is a growing sense of accomplishment even though the war is hotting up. The Viet Cong forces are tending now to stand and fight harder but the Vietnamese are also fighting much better. We should be encouraged by the progress which was being made.

Secretary McNamara said he was impressed by two things, one, our restriction on funds, and two, our restriction on people. As to funds, he thought we were unduly conservative. We are keeping the Vietnamese under too much financial pressure by insisting that they pay for certain projects, They are not doing things they should be doing because they do not have sufficient funds. This is especially true in the difficult areas where we should be building the infrastructure, such as schools and roads, because the Vietnamese cannot do so. As to the restrictions on people, we do not have enough U.S. civilian advisers to show the Vietnamese how to do some of the things they should be doing.

Secretary Rusk said that because of the critical security problems in many areas, we have been concentrating on military activity. The result is that we tend to take for granted the provinces which have been pacified. We should be building up the pacified provinces and exploiting our opportunity to carry on activities helpful to the people, such as providing doctors and schools, etc.

Secretary McNamara said that to accomplish its task AID had one-fourth of the people that the military had to accomplish its objective. We may be wasting some people and some money in Vietnam, but this is unimportant because of the critical nature of the task. The country team is too restrictive. AID is doing a great job and the AID people are true heroes, but there are too few AID people.

Director Bell acknowledged that neither money nor people should stand in the way of our achieving our objectives in Vietnam. However, AID officials in the provinces are not asking for more U.S. citizens, but they want people from third countries, especially Filipinos. AID is trying to get in third country people and is currently engaged in recruiting many of them. However, Ambassador Lodge has limited the number of people that AID could send.

Secretary McNamara acknowledged that Lodge had done this and it was an attitude of mind of his. Despite this, we need many more people in Vietnam.

Assistant Secretary Bundy interjected to say that Lodge had recently changed his mind on this point.

Director Bell said that he had instructed American officials to ask for what they need. He added, however, that the Vietnamese must do the job. What we need is more Vietnamese who exercise leadership rather than more Americans. We must keep the heat on the Vietnamese to do the job themselves.

Secretary McNamara said we can’t find enough Vietnamese. He said we need a great deal more training by USIA. We need an increased program for the civil administration school. Director Bell said that in addition to numbers we need Vietnamese leaders and administrators. Secretary McNamara said there appeared to be a new mood in Saigon which would result in Vietnamese being used more extensively.

Secretary McNamara said we were right on the margin in Vietnam and that he could not guarantee that we would still be there six months or twelve months from now. Therefore, we should pour in resources now even if some of them are wasted because of the terrific cost that would be involved if we had to use U.S. forces. He said the Defense Department, with its $50 million budget, must somehow be used effectively in Vietnam.

Mr. Rowan commented that there was a joint U.S.-Vietnamese plan which called for a field service center. Nothing had been done because more people were required to organize this center. USIA is now sending people to help the Vietnamese organize radio programs aimed at North Vietnam.

Mr. Rowan said he had had long discussions with U.S. correspondents in Saigon. He asked why they did not write affirmative stories and why their leads could not be on Viet Cong losses rather than on Vietnamese losses. He said the correspondents complained that they were not being helped; for example, that military information officers are not even in their offices on weekends. Mr. Rowan added that the USIA chief there could not be very helpful because he had been told by Ambassador Lodge that he should have no contacts with the press since the Ambassador would handle all such contacts, as he had always done in his long government experience.

Secretary McNamara said that we were just now getting organized to aim black broadcasts into North Vietnam. White broadcasts were not yet being made. He expressed irritation at the length of time that it took to get these broadcasts organized primarily because of a lack of radio programmers and Vietnamese technicians.

Director Bell said that up until recently he had been unable to use former Peace Corps Volunteers in Vietnam. He had just succeeded in reaching agreement that former Peace Corps Volunteers could be recruited by AID and used throughout the world, including Vietnam.

Secretary McNamara said we need up to 200 more civilians in Vietnam now. He was prepared to take out one military person for each civilian added. He has made military personnel available to AID, allowing them to work in civilian clothes. In his view, only one-fourth of the civilians needed by AID in the provinces are now there.

Secretary Rusk called attention to the importance of providing basic health services for the Vietnamese. He cited simplified methods being used successfully by AID and suggested that military health officers and doctors be allowed to work with the Vietnamese.

Mr. Sullivan commented that we are asking our allies, especially the Filipinos, to make available civilians for service in Vietnam.

Secretary McNamara said he wished to cite another illustration, namely, the Vietnamese coastal railroad. If we spend enough money we can get this railroad running even though the Viet Cong continues to sabotage it. We are pouring money into Korea which is not now critical and we are not spending enough in Vietnam.

Secretary Rusk agreed that we need a rapid expansion of our programs and should not consider a money limitation.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy suggested that a telegram containing the new proposals be sent to Ambassador Lodge.3 So far, we have asked for his approval on all matters and have been successful in persuading him to go along with Washington proposals. We should continue our method of persuasion.

Secretary Rusk noted that if we go in with new expanded programs we might prompt the French, as well as Sihanouk, to change their attitude of pessimism.

General Wheeler said he wished to comment that in his view more military personnel would be required in Vietnam shortly. More air forces will probably be required as well. We will have to train more people and this is difficult to do.

The President joined the meeting. Secretary Rusk suggested that Assistant Secretary Bundy report on his trip to Laos.

[Here follow William Bundy’s briefing on Laos and discussion of cutbacks in nuclear production.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 1, Tab 9. Top Secret

2 Document 122.

3 Apparent reference to Document 129.

125. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 125. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 24, 1964—3 p.m.

2045. Called on General Khanh at 9 am Friday.

1. I expressed concern about his health, having seen a story in the papers and also having reports from other quarters that he had been ill. He made a very full disclosure, treating me like a friend and uncle. He had been having indigestion, difficulty in sleeping. I gave him the best advice I could and told him that he had to learn to live with his responsibility and not think he could be in a perpetual state of crisis all the time. I urged him to eliminate all unnecessary activity, including superfluous American visitors, if any.

2. I said that as regards the VC victory in Long An on April 8,2 it was evident to me that the VC had penetrated the GVN forces, and I suggested using a polygraph to find out who the traitors were. I also said it was apparent that in Long An there was a failure of leadership. He did not disagree and said that to remedy this would involve changing the province chief once again, and there had been too many changes already. He thought well of the province chief, but also said that he was not in good health, that there was something “in his insides which didn’t work”. In other words, he admitted that the man was not doing his job.

3. I then said that I felt he could get a great deal more value out of General Minh than he was getting, by having Minh get out on the stump, shake hands and show himself around the country. Khanh agreed and said that if Minh did not do this, it was because Minh did not want to. I said that Minh had told me that he, Minh, feared that Khanh did not want him to be conspicuous. Khanh said this was not true. I said: Can I say to General Minh that you would like to have him go around, and he said: Yes, and I will tell him so myself.

4. I then brought up the case of Ngo Dinh Can and said that I hoped he would be given executive clemency and that he not be executed, and that he be allowed to wither away and die in peace.3 Khanh agreed but said that this was one case in which Minh had a very great deal of real power. If he did nothing, Can would under the law die in five days, although there was a possibility of extending this because of Can’s involvement in other litigation. Nonetheless, it was up to Minh to act affirmatively to give Can clemency. He hoped I would speak to Minh about this, which I agreed to do.

5. Khanh was mobilizing all of the different religious groups in Viet-Nam, the Hoa Haos, the Cao Dais, etc., and the Buddhist leaders, in favor of clemency. It was going well with everyone except Tri Quang, who wants vengeance. He hoped I would see Tri Quang in view of the great favor which the US Embassy had done him, and tell him it was not good for Buddhism and not good for Viet-Nam for Can to be executed. I agreed to do this.

6. I then said that I thought Minh would be in much better humor if the cases of Generals Don and Kim could be disposed of. Khanh said I was misinformed, that the only person in whom Minh had a strong friendly interest was Tho. Actually, General Don disliked General Minh intensely. Khanh knew this to be the case as he saw Don frequently.

7. He said the case of the four Generals would be dealt with before the end of April. He was going to convene a “court of honor” and oblige all of them to justify themselves. The “court” would be composed of the commanders of troops and other officers and would number about ten. The four imprisoned Generals would be called upon to admit their misdeeds and volunteer to make amends. They would then be freed and given work to do either at home or abroad.

8. This would inevitably mean that General Don would have to explain why he signed a travel order for a man named Huan, a member of the Council of Notables, to travel to France to contact a large number of French persons interested in “neutralism”. General Don would have to state that General Minh had ordered him to do this, and this would inevitably bring Minh himself before the court. Minh would have to justify the money that he obtained with which to buy “villas” in France and would have to account for his action in sending Huan to France. It would inevitably come out that Minh was a long time friend of Tran Van Huu, the Vietnamese leader who lives in France, is General De Gaulle’s trump card, and who talks with the Viet Cong, etc. Khanh said he very much feared this would be the end of General Minh.

9. I was flabbergasted by this revelation and said that it was, first of all, important for Minh to act on Can’s clemency first, and then when the “court of honor” convened, to dispose of Don, Kim, Xuan and Dinh first. It was also vital that at no time would it appear that Khanh was taking any initiative against Minh at all. Khanh agreed and said that this would not come from any initiative of his, that he, Khanh, had gone out of his way to be nice to Minh and to bring him into the government, but that this would inevitably flow from the statements which the other Generals would make.

Comment: A. I will, of course, see Minh4 and Tri Quang5 as soon as possible in the interest of Can.

B. Obviously, the case of the four Generals has been hanging over us ever since Khanh came to power, and once their cases are disposed of, I hope that Khanh can devote himself to the pacification effort. It is at first blush very regrettable indeed that the proceedings involving the Generals should tear down “Big” Minh. We will have to follow the facts closely.

C. Khanh said there was much evidence that Kim was “up to his neck” in intrigues with the French.

D. Perhaps we are on the edge of getting some solid information about the French operations against the RVN of which so much has been said. Secretary’s statement to Khanh about this eventuality comes to mind.6 The sending of Huan looks as though it might be the clincher.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis.

2 On April 8, the Viet Cong launched a company-sized attack on a training center in Long An Province. Apparently aided by agents from within the garrison, the Viet Cong killed 28 government defenders, wounded 36, and captured 112 weapons and 5 radios. (“The situation in South Vietnam,” Weekly Report, April 15; Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VII)

3 See footnote 4, Document 123.

4 See Document 126.

5 On April 25, Lodge made a special trip to Hue to talk to Tri Quang about clemency for Can. Lodge noted that Can might become a symbol of persecution of Christians in Vietnam. Lodge thought that an appeal by the Buddhist clergy for compassion in Can’s case would have a beneficial “world-wide impression.” Lodge’s report of their meeting in telegram 2055 from Saigon, April 25, reads in part as follows:

“[Tri Quang stated] that I should realize that the Khanh government was unpopular, particularly with Buddhists. If Can were not executed it would be accepted as evidence that the old Diem crowd including particularly Catholic leaders and clergy, with all its money and weapons, were still in control. This would injure the struggle i.against the Communists which was still not going well because the people did not believe in the government’s sincerity for freedom. Clemency for Can would weaken the faith in the United States, because many would think clemency was due to US influence. If it were known that I had come to see him to intercede for Can, my popularity in Vietnam would be seriously injured.”

“He agreed to think over what I said and stressed that he was not asking for Can’s death. (But he did not warm up to the idea of life imprisonment as an alternative. Evidently in this country you either get it or you don’t.)” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

6 See Document 119.

126. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 126. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, April 24, 1964—3 p.m.

2046. 1. At 10:45 am I called on Minh, pursuant to Khanh’s request, and told him how serious it would be if Ngo Dinh Can became a martyr and gave the GVN the reputation throughout the Christian world to be anti-Christian. This was not a remote contingency. I reminded him of the uproar in the United States last year when it appeared that the GVN was anti-Buddhist. If there could be a reaction like this in a country where there were no Buddhists, he could imagine what the reaction would be in a country which was predominantly Christian. A situation would arise in which it was politically well nigh impossible for the US Govt to support the GVN if it wanted to. I therefore requested him in clear-cut language to give executive clemency to Ngo Dinh Can.

2. After a long silence, he said in a very emotional tone as though on the verge of tears: “The Ngo Dinh family has paid enough. The coup of November 1 was not made for hatred of anybody, but for the good of the country. I still very much regret the death of Diem. It was Nhu who was bad. Can is a pathetic specimen, insufficiently educated. It was the regime which made him bad. He would not have acted as he did if he had not been the President’s brother.”

3. “Khanh should not have formed revolutionary tribunal. By its very terms, it was inevitable that it should sentence Can to death. When I was running things, I temporized and tried to give time for the people to calm down. Now the people are super-excited. I am in an extremely difficult position. I must answer yes or no in writing. Khanh sets a five-day limit on me.”

4. I interrupted to say that I understood this was the law, which Khanh had told me was the case, to which Minh replied: “Yes, but Khanh makes the law. Why does he set a five-day limit? He always tries to put me in a difficult position. I must find a solution for Can. I will be hated and denounced from one end of the country to the other if I give him clemency.”

5. I then suggested that Minh take the position that Can’s presence was essential for possible testimony and evidence in further litigation.

6. Minh said: “That’s it, I will reprieve him on the ground that he is going to be needed in other litigation in the future.” He distinguished between this procedure and clemency. He added: “I had a long talk with my family last night. We agreed that I should be prepared to sacrifice all my popularity, which is what I do if I give clemency to Can. I know I will be denounced.”

7. He then said: “I want to ask you a question about a money matter. Did Conein ever give General Don money for the November coup?”

8. I said: “Definitely not. Had he done such a thing, I would certainly have known it.”

9. Minh continued: “I am surrounded by traps. I may be accused of taking money to give clemency to Can. It is said already that Can’s friends are very rich, and that many are at large. It will be said that they are bribing me to prevent Can’s execution.”

10. “I am also very unhappy that General Khanh said that when I was in power, I had only prepared a three-page indictment which would only have given Can five days of punishment.”

11. “What we need in this country is to have good feeling between Catholics and Buddhists. That is what I have always tried to get for national unity.”

12. I then said that I knew that General Khanh would be glad to have Minh go out on the stump and make tours in the country, and that Minh was in error in thinking that Khanh did not want him to do so.

13. Minh changed his ground. He said everything [sic] he had friends who were also friends of Generals Don and Kim, and they ask him “why have you done nothing for our mutual friends?” “They accuse me of disloyalty. It is so disagreeable that I do not want to make any trips in the country.”

Comment: A. From all this I get the impression that he will not allow Can to be executed. I am sure I have pushed him as far as I can today. I would bet that he would prevent Can from being executed. But he has not yet really signed on the dotted line in a way so that he cannot wiggle out of it.

B. Clearly Khanh is rigging matters so that Minh will bear all obligation for not executing Can.2

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Exdis.

2 Can was executed on May 9.

127. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State 127. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, April 24, 1964.

SUBJECT

Actions on Your Recommendations Affecting Viet Nam2

This is an interim report on the actions which we are taking to implement the recommendations which you have made concerning Viet Nam. For the sake of easy reference, we will run down the list in accordance with the numbered sequence you have laid out in your own summary of those recommendations.

A. Actions presenting no substantial policy problems: 1. Increase in Sources of External Assistance.

The Department of Defense has been directed to send a message through military channels to MACV instructing the latter to indicate the types of assistance that can best be integrated into the current US military efforts. MACV has been directed to discuss the problem with the Ambassador before answering. As far as other types of assistance are concerned, AID/Washington has been asked to compile a list of desirable economic and technical projects which could be provided from national resources other than the US. We had already undertaken efforts for increased medical assistance and have suggested to USOM in Saigon that they send a representative to Manila to investigate the Filipino potential.

2. GVN Diplomatic and Foreign Information Activity.

Lodge has spoken once again to General Khanh on this subject and has been once again assured that Khanh will give it urgent attention.

3. Enlistment of General Minh.

Lodge has talked with both Khanh and Minh about getting Minh more actively involved in support of the current government. Lodge seems to be fully convinced of the need for this and has pursued it with imagination and vigor.

4. Support from Civilian Groups.

We have sent our Regional Buddhist Advisor, Mr. Gard, from Hong Kong to Saigon to assist in obtaining Buddhist support for the regime. We are bringing Mr. Buu, head of the Trade Union Movement, here to the United States and we hope to be able to provide him with certain material incentives such as fertilizer to be distributed through his rural organizations. We have assigned two officers from the Embassy to conduct regular contact with the local French community in order to develop ways in which they can be better enlisted behind the Government.

5. Psychological Warfare.

Carl Rowan has agreed with our suggestions that we send Ambassador Lodge a copy of his memorandum to the President3 on the deficiencies in the Psychological Warfare effort. Carl is also preparing a more detailed recommendation on this matter. In the meantime, we have used MAP funds from the Department of Defense to purchase a new 50 kw. transmitter to be located in Viet Nam for Voice of America broadcasts to the North. The negotiator for this installation left for Saigon yesterday. We sent his instructions to the Post last evening.

6. Expulsion of Undesirable Characters.

This is one on which we are having to move cautiously. However, there are at least two members of the USOM whom we are going to have removed in the near future. One has been a constant source of bellyaches to the press and has been an irritant inside US Mission operations. There is also a Defense Department team in Saigon now investigating certain reports concerning problems in one element of our military establishment.

7. Promotions for US Civilians.

We have begun discussions with the personnel people to determine the procedures for carrying out these on-the-spot promotions.

8. Money.

The draft Presidential telegram which you cleared has now also been cleared by Secretary McNamara, Dave Bell and Carl Rowan.4 It has been sent to the White House this evening.

9. Special Services.

The Defense Department is looking into the possibility of providing additional services to its more remote units in Viet Nam. In the meantime, USIA is investigating the availability of current American entertainment films to be shipped in on a regular basis for Lodge to use at his own discretion within the American community.

B. Actions presenting policy problems: 1. Provincial Programs.

This matter is touched upon in some detail in the draft telegram from the President. If Lodge answers in a positive vein the message which you sent on the subject of the Pacification Committee, we can follow up further in that series. This will require continued attention by State and AID.

2. U.S. Naval Presence.

The Pentagon has been in touch with CINCPAC, and Admiral Felt, who has been here in Washington for the last two days, has been consulted. The Department of Defense members of the Coordinating Committee will have a memorandum in a few days giving the JCS views on what could be done with respect to a naval presence without handicapping the general readiness posture in the area.

3. Junk Operations North of the Demarcation Line.

This, too, is being discussed in the Pentagon and a similar memorandum will be prepared. There is some reluctance to undertake operations which would pit Swatow boats against Nasty crafts. The Swatows are more heavily armed.

4. Improved Intelligence in Laos and Cambodia.

Alex Johnson will discuss this whole matter in the Special Group 5412.

5. Canadian Contacts with Hanoi.

In coordination with EUR, we are preparing for you a talking paper5 to be used with Mike Pearson when you meet with him on April 30.6

6. Economic Interdiction of North Viet Nam.

We have prepared for your signature a letter to the Secretary of Treasury asking that foreign assets control be applied against North Viet Nam.7 We will undertake more extensive discussions within the Department to determine how best to have the same sort of action undertaken by other friendly countries. We have already approached the Japanese with a brief message and have spoken to the British concerning their shipping. Our intelligence estimates indicate that the problem is a very limited one, with most ships of the Free World arriving at North Vietnamese ports in ballast. Cargo carried out of North Viet Nam consists almost entirely of anthracite coal.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Sullivan. A note on the source text indicates that Secretary Rusk saw the memorandum.

2 For Rusk’s recommendations, see Document 124.

3 Document 122.

4 Apparent reference to Document 129.

5 Not found.

6 See Document 134.

7 The draft letter as approved by McGeorge Bundy is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos.

128. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 128. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, April 28, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

The attached memorandum from Bill Sullivan results from my request for a status report on our responses to Lodge’s suggestions.

Bill’s memorandum is somewhat cryptic, because the actions which Lodge has suggested have been incorporated into a political-military scenario, which is now in the hands of the Joint Chiefs. I sent you yesterday the latest version of the political half of the scenario.2

I would suggest that the President see the narrative part (not the charts) of the scenario and consider whether it isn’t time for you and him (and perhaps Rusk and McNamara) to discuss future moves in Vietnam at one of your lunches. The point to keep in mind is that almost any of the actions suggested by Lodge, but not yet implemented, could start a chain of escalation for which we are not yet prepared.

Mike

Attachment

Washington, April 27, 1964.

Memorandum by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan)3

There are three categories of action in which Ambassador Lodge has made certain recommendations which we have not as yet fulfilled. These are (a) cross border probes into the Laos corridor; (b) hot pursuit into Cambodia; and (c) tit-for-tat raids on North Vietnamese targets in the event of terror against Americans.

All of these recommendations have involved certain contingencies. For example, the tit-for-tat suggestion was first made as part of a political-military scenario which involved covert diplomatic contacts with the North Vietnamese, offers of food and partial withdrawal of US forces, etc., etc. The Cambodian hot pursuit suggestion was in the context of further action by Sihanouk detrimental to the legal status of the Saigon Government. The operations into Laos were recommended if we considered current intelligence operations unsatisfactory.

Therefore, although we have not responded positively to these proposals from Lodge, it should be understood that the proposals themselves were in one measure or another designed to be part of a larger schematic view of our political and military posture in Southeast

Asia as a whole. On the other hand all of Lodge’s recommendations have in one form or another been incorporated into a planning document which has been roughed out on the political side here in Washington and is currently under study in the Joint Chiefs of Staff to examine its military consequences. Therefore. we have given positive consideration to these recommendations.

The basic question of course is whether the planning document can be considered a “live” plan directed toward ultimate accomplishment in the forseeable future, or whether it is a contingency arrangement which will always remain on the shelf. If it is the former, we can categorically state that we are acting on all of Lodge’s recommendations. If it is the latter, that statement would need considerable qualification.

W. H. Sullivan

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos. Top Secret.

2 Reference is to an April 20 draft of a three-part political/military scenario with the narrative portion also summarized in tabular form. (Ibid.) For an earlier draft, see the attachment to Document 102.

3 Top Secret.

129. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 129. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, April 28, 1964—7:02 p.m.

Dean Rusk has reported fully to me and to the National Security Council on the encouraging impressions which he has brought back from his recent visit to Viet Nam. He made a number of recommendations which he had already discussed in general terms with you, and as soon as they have been studied and reviewed by appropriate departments here in Washington, we will be sending you separate messages on them.

Meanwhile I would like to raise with you one general question that has come out of our most recent discussions here. Dean Rusk has reported that he gets a strong impression both here and in Viet Nam that our plans and recommendations are often inhibited by a feeling that resources available for this struggle are closely limited, so that there is no room for bold new efforts. Bob McNamara has reported a similar concern. So I have told them both what I want to repeat to you and to all members of the country team—that in our effort to help the Vietnamese to help themselves, we must not let any arbitrary limits on budget, or manpower, or procedures stand in our way. We can do extraordinary things within the limit of our current appropriations and we can, if necessary, seek emergency appropriations if they are needed for success in Viet Nam. We all recognize that a prompt and clear success in Viet Nam would be worth a very large amount to us; and we should not shrink from using the necessary funds to obtain the result.

Both Dean Rusk and Bob McNamara, for example, wonder whether we have committed enough Americans to assist on a crash basis in the development of civil administrative services in those areas of Viet Nam which have already been partially pacified and where the “holding” process must now be pressed forward vigorously. There is a danger that the Vietnamese Government, because of a shortage or an absence of its own resources, may rest on its oars once an area has been militarily cleared and fail to carry through the civil efforts needed to win the population in that area. We know that Vietnamese resources for such leadership are woefully short, but relative to their needs, our own resources are large.

I have authorized Dave Bell to recruit as many highly motivated young men as he may need to help train the Vietnamese to provide civil services in these cleared areas. Our civilian staffing in the Provinces still seems too thin in many areas. I understand that our military often have 10 to 20 times as many field personnel assigned to provincial pacification work (excluding tactical advisors and support personnel) as does USOM—yet the largest job in cleared areas is surely civil. I have suggested to Bell that young people emerging from two years’ service in the Peace Corps would represent an ideal source of experienced and motivated assistants for this work, and I have asked Sargent Shriver to cooperate in supporting such recruiting if it proves necessary.

Carl Rowan has given me a carefully prepared report2 on deficiencies which he found in the informational-psychological operations of both the Vietnamese Government and our Mission. He has strongly endorsed proposals originating within the country team to train Vietnamese for these operations and to provide more US guidance, both in Saigon and in the provinces. These proposals will involve a small increase in USIA personnel, and perhaps from other agencies, as well as a modest outlay of US funds. Rowan is in the process of detailing a plan to improve the overall psychological effort, so we should soon have specific ideas on which to act.

I have been informed of your energetic and highly commendable efforts to maintain the size of your Mission at the minimum necessary. I thoroughly endorse your views in this regard and think particularly that frugality and economy of manpower should be applied above all with respect to the headquarters and home office staffs in Saigon, which are reported to have shown the usual tendency to mushroom. I hope, however, that you share our feeling that we should take a different attitude out in the countryside because it is so important that we get the job done there where the war is actually being fought. I know that one of your concerns is to keep the American presence in Viet Nam from becoming excessive, but we all believe here that the need for effective leadership on the civilian side out in the country is overriding, and for this reason Bob McNamara has agreed that if you think it necessary any civilian increases on this side can be matched by reductions of up to two or three hundred military personnel, so that we could say flatly that there was no net increase but merely a shift of effort towards the arts of peace.

All in all the guidance I would like to give to your entire Mission is not to let your thinking be limited by possible budgetary or personnel restraints upon the resources at your disposal to execute our policy. As far as I am concerned you must have whatever you need to help the Vietnamese do the job, and I assure you that I will act at once to eliminate obstacles or restraints wherever they may appear.3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1791 to Saigon, which is the source text. According to a draft of telegram 1791, the message was drafted by Sullivan and revised by McGeorge Bundy. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. VII, Cables and Memos)

McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this draft telegram to the President under cover of a memorandum, April 26, which reads as follows:

“This is a draft dispatch from you to Lodge which argues out a general proposition that people should not be timid in asking for what they need. It has been cleared in substance with Rusk, McNamara, and Bell, although this draft is a revision of a State Department original. The one point of substance on which there may not be full agreement is that Sarge Shriver hates to have his Peace Corps graduates tapped for unpeaceful missions. None of the rest of us agrees with him, and I think you are safe in going ahead.” (Ibid.)

2 Document 122.

3 Telegram 1791 does not bear President Johnson’s signature.

130. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 130. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, April 29, 1964.

LAOS CROSS BORDER OPERATIONS

There will be raised with you this afternoon at the NSC meeting2 the question of authorizing military operations from South Vietnam across the border into Laos for the purpose of gathering intelligence on the Ho Chi Minh Trail. The issues are as follows: 1. Recent high level photographic surveillance has revealed a new truckable road between Route 12 and the area of Tchepone in central Laos, together with some apparent supply bases. There is a feeling in the JCS that we should take direct ground and air action against these targets if intelligence proves them out.

2. Ambassador Unger discussed this problem with Assistant Secretary Bundy in Saigon.3 He is very much opposed to any kind of cross border operation into Laos which would be internationally visible, particularly at a time when Souvanna Phouma’s position in Vientiane is not secure.

3. The Department of State will suggest a compromise designed to reduce the risk of causing trouble in Laos. They would permit small-scale, carefully controlled intelligence sorties into Laos organized in such a way as to avoid, to the maximum extent possible, creating an international hue and cry. State will probably recommend against direct involvement of U.S. personnel, except for emergency air transport to the intelligence teams. They will also recommend low level reconnaissance by U.S. aircraft. You may wish to ask what Ambassador Lodge’s position is on this question, since it is not clear from the cables.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 111. Secret.

2 See Document 131.

3 Reported in a memorandum by William Bundy, April 29. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 092 Laos)

131. Summary Record of the 529th Meeting of the National Security Council, 131. Summary Record of the 529th Meeting of the National Security Council,1

Washington, April 29, 1964, 5 p.m.

U.S. POLICY TOWARD LAOS

Director McCone introduced Mr. Ray Cline who read a paper2 on the intelligence now available which indicates greatly increased use of Laos for infiltration of men and materials from North to South Vietnam.

Mr. Cline reported that there had been an expansion of Pathet Lao forces in Laos. In addition, the North Vietnamese appear to be strengthening the Pathet Lao forces. There are no regular Chinese forces in Laos as far as we know. The Pathet Lao alone have only a 50–50 chance of overrunning all other non-Communist forces in Laos. However, if the Pathet Lao forces were joined by pro-Communist forces and Communist forces from Vietnam, they could overrun all Laos quickly without warning. The Communists appear to be moving to clear out rightist forces which are now in Communist controlled areas in Laos.

Mr. Cline read the Watch Committee conclusions (copy attached).2

The President was shown numerous aerial photographs which revealed major improvements in road networks, the effect of which is to improve Hanoi’s ability to back up forces in Laos or in South Vietnam.

Under Secretary Harriman told the President we are attempting to get the International Control Commission to send inspectors to the Plaine des Jarres in the hope that their presence would halt the fighting which apparently is now going on there. The situation in Laos is not clear but we are making an effort to force Siho,3 one of the rebel generals, to support continuation of Souvanna’s coalition government. Governor Harriman stated a requirement for low-level reconnaissance in Laos and favored sending non-U.S. patrols into Laos to try to find out the size of the military buildup.

The President asked whether Ambassador Lodge favored these proposals. Secretary McNamara said that Lodge did favor the suggestions but actually they would have little effect in South Vietnam. He added that Ambassador Unger opposed the proposals when asked about them some days ago.

Mr. McCone said the photographic intelligence shown the President was so new that there had been little time to analyze it. He said that neither the Secretary of Defense nor the Joint Chiefs had seen the pictures and asked for more time for the intelligence community to analyze the new information.

Under Secretary Harriman said the situation was urgent and he asked for authority to explore ways of finding out what was actually going on. Mr. Colby acknowledged that the pictures of the staging area in North Vietnam indicated a buildup but we do not know whether the additional forces are headed for South Vietnam or Laos. Secretary McNamara thought that it was essential for us to obtain additional information on the military buildup.

The President asked that the proposals be presented to Ambassador Unger again in the light of current developments so that he could give his best estimate of the political effect in Laos if the reconnaissance actions were taken. Mr. McCone was asked to present the new evidence to his evaluators and return with an intelligence community view. Further discussion of the subject was scheduled for Friday.

Bromley Smith4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Tab 1. Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

2 Not found.

3 General Siho Lamphouthacoul.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

132. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 132. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President1

Saigon, April 30, 1964—6 p.m.

1. Your 17912 with its proposal for (A) Americans to “assist on a crash basis in the development of civil administrative services” in “partially pacified” areas and (B) its proposal for “more US guidance” on information-psychological operations is of major significance.

2. It involves, first, finding out GVN general reaction and, secondly, deciding best recommendations to you.

3. By noteworthy coincidence, General Khanh today asked me to provide one American expert each in the fields of finance-economics; foreign affairs; and press relations who would be assigned to him personally and would have their offices “in a convenient villa”, perhaps the one in which General Khanh lives. He also made this statement: “We Vietnamese want the Americans to be responsible with us (he stressed the words “with us”) and not merely be advisers.” He freely recognized that the trained personnel which is utterly indispensable if he is actually to run the government simply does not exist.

4. As the Department knows, I have opposed our seeking to fasten American personnel onto the GVN because of obvious colonialist overtones, because it would cause resentment, because it would mean a lessening of effort by the GVN and a placing of the blame for everything that went wrong on us. As the impotence of the bureaucracy has become increasingly evident, I have been hoping that General Khanh would ask us for help. Now it has happened, and it has been caused by the conviction of urgent necessity. It is a real breakthrough, and I welcome it. Believe we have right people here to take care of Gen. Khanh’s request. Experience acquired in Viet-Nam most useful, if not indispensable.

5. With all of this as the background, I told him of your proposal for civil administrators on a crash basis in the partially pacified areas. His quick reply was: “Yes—if you will accept the losses”. He stressed that in districts and villages there was risk of getting shot and that “Americans seemed to get very upset” when anyone was killed in that way. As regards your proposal in the psychological field, he said: “I think so” but wanted more time.

6. My own recommendations are as follows: There should be an individual civil administration adviser to join the other three advisers mentioned in paragraph 3; action on my proposal for four civil-political advisers, one for each corps area, now under consideration in AID, should be expedited; there should be a few people well qualified in civil administration who could be available for assignment in the critical provinces, as the corps area advisers recommend; and we should continue the effort in training the Vietnamese. But I do not think that we should dump a large number of persons on a crash basis. There is no use in having several hundred persons out here as not enough areas are being cleared fast enough to give them things to do. As it is, I suspect that we have too many military personnel in a number of places. The situation calls for a qualitative, rifle-shot, precision approach rather than a quantitative buckshot saturation approach.

7. As regards psychological operations we are moving ahead on basis of plans Rowan presented to you. Glad we can call on you for more help, but feel we are progressing now.

8. In view of the above trail-blazing development, I believe it will be extremely useful if you could send a member of your staff for conference with me, possibly Forrestal.

Lodge3

1 Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19–9 US–VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 2089 from Saigon, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State.

2 See Document 129.

3 Telegram 2089 bears this typed signature.

133. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State 133. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State1

Saigon, April 30, 1964.

Dear Dean: The following is in furtherance of the conversation which we had in my office recently on the subject of the post of U.S. Ambassador to Viet-Nam:2

1. Everything that I have read, reamed and observed brings me to the conclusion that the wisest thing which has been said about VietNam was Bedell Smith’s statement in 1954 that “Any second rate general should be able to win in Indo-China if there were a proper political atmosphere”.

2. The creation of this atmosphere is still the essential aim and everything else that we do must contribute to it. The AID program does so through its economic and social program. MAC/V does so by helping to bring about order, so that people can sleep at night. The USIS in a very obvious and utterly essential sense contributes by helping saturate the minds of the people, giving them the idea, based on practical achievement, that it is to the government-and not the communists-that people must look to bring about the much needed social revolution. The Embassy leads and coordinates the entire effort.

3. We have given much more time, attention and money to the military than to the civil. Had we developed the civil side as much as we have the military, we would be well on our way to a solution, because once the people really like the government, the Viet Cong’s days are numbered, and the military job is well nigh done.

4. For the future, therefore, the United States must organize itself to help to create this “proper political atmosphere”. The Ambassador as the leader of the U.S. effort should, therefore, be a man to whom civil-political factors are very real indeed, possibly from actual experience. He should also have a well known record of achievement. It is not in the interest of the military for the Ambassador at this stage to be a military man. The military’s best interests are served by having the civil-political side energetically and expertly developed.

5. The Ambassador, contrary to the understanding in very high quarters, has not got authority over all military activities of the U.S. Government in Viet-Nam. Two papers govern. A.) One is the President’s letter of May 29, 1961,3 which puts the Military Assistance Advisory Group under the Ambassador, but specifically excludes “United States military forces operating in the field where such forces are under the command of the United States area military commander”. When MAAG and MAC/V were consolidated, all U.S. military ceased to be members of the country team. B.) In addition is a memorandum4 of which I do not possess the date, but which embodies the terms of reference signed by the President and agreed to by Secretary McNamara and Secretary Rusk, and given to General Harkins personally, paragraph 2 of which says: “Commander, United States Military Assistance Command will:”

“(a) have direct responsibility for all United States military policy, operations, and assistance in that country and the authority to discuss both the United States and Vietnamese military operations directly with the President of Viet-Nam and the leaders of the Government of Viet-Nam.”

This clearly means that the military commander has direct access to the chief of state and that the Ambassador does not control all U. S. access to the chief of state and therefore has no way of assuring that all Americans speak with one voice.

Is this special status truly to the advantage of the military? Does it contribute to creating the “proper political atmosphere”?

With warm regards,

As ever yours,

Cabot L.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, Rusk/Lodge/Wm Bundy Correspondence. Confidential, Nodis.

2 No record of this conversation has been found, but see Document 116.

3 See Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. I, p. 655, footnote 5.

4 See ibid., vol. II, pp. 111–112.

134. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 134. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 1, 1964—8:34 p.m.

1821. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. I flew up to Ottawa yesterday to talk with Mike Pearson and Martin concerning the Canadian presence in Hanoi. I found our Canadian friends in close concert with the thoughts you and I discussed in Saigon and they assure me that they are most willing to cooperate with us.

Their new ICC Commissioner will be J. Blair Seaborn, an expert in communist affairs, who has recently returned from an assignment as Counselor of the Canadian Embassy in Moscow. The exchange with Cox in Saigon has been scheduled to take place some time this summer, but they agreed to attempt to step this up by a few weeks.

They readily agreed that Seaborn should plan to spend much more time in Hanoi than have his predecessors in this assignment. They also accept as part of his mission an effort to establish ready access to and close contact with senior authorities in Hanoi, beginning with Ho Chi Minh. We discussed several points which we would like Seaborn to undertake for us. I am having talking papers prepared here in the Department and will send an officer to Ottawa in the near future for further development of this matter directly with Seaborn.

Following are some of the matters which we roughed out in Ottawa and which I will have further developed here. I would appreciate your comments on these points together with any additional suggestions for talking points which we can give to the Canadians: 1. Seaborn should start out by checking as closely as he can what is on Ho Chi Minh’s mind. We want to know whether he considers himself over-extended and exposed, or whether he feels confident that his Chinese allies will back him to the hilt. We want to know whether his current zeal is being forced upon him by pro-Chinese elements in his own camp, or whether he is impelled by his own ambitions.

2. Seaborn should get across to Ho and his colleagues the full measure of US determination to see this thing through. He should draw upon examples in other parts of the world to convince them that if it becomes necessary to enlarge the military action, this is the most probable course that the US would follow.

3. Seaborn should spread the word that he is puzzled by Hanoi’s intentions. The North Vietnamese should understand that the US wants no military bases or other footholds in South Viet Nam or Laos. If Hanoi would leave its neighbors alone, the US presence in the area would diminish sharply.

4. The North Vietnamese should understand that there are many examples in which the Free World has demonstrated its willingness to live in peace with communist neighbors and to permit the establishment of normal economic relations between these two different systems. We recognize North Viet Nam’s need for trade, and especially food, and consider that such needs could be fulfilled if peaceful conditions were to prevail.2

Pearson also agreed to instruct Seaborn and his people in general to work more actively on trying to break the Poles off from constant and active espousal of North Vietnamese aggression. He felt, however, that the Poles are playing something of a middle role in Sino-Soviet matters these days and doubted that there would be much profit in this.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Sullivan and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to Ottawa. McGeorge Bundy sent the President a copy of this telegram under cover of a brief memorandum on which the President wrote: “OK, LBJ.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 4)

2 In telegram 2110 from Saigon, May 4, Lodge stated that he approved these points, but added the following suggestions:

“1. Under your pare 1, it is not clear exactly how Seaborn would get the information. He should also, I think, try to find out how interested Ho is in playing an independent role of any kind.”

“2. In your pare 2, I would add this for Seaborn to tell Ho: if the United States has to choose between enlarging the war and withdrawing, we will enlarge. We intend to stay. We expect to win; we will retaliate for every terroristic act against us.”

“3. Under pare 3, I would have Seaborn make this point: it is in North Vietnam’s best interest to have as few Americans here as possible, and their behavior has great influence on this particular question. Why do they not behave in such a way as to achieve the end which they state is their end?”

“4. Under pare 4, Seaborn should try to enlist the Poles with us and with North Vietnam, so as to detach them from China.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

135. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 135. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 2, 1964—7 p.m.

2101. 1. Herewith my comment, as requested, on your 1815.2

2. It does not seem to me that proposed action3 would add much psychologically to what we have now, and evidently that is the purpose. Those who are interested in such things assume that 7th Fleet is always just over the horizon and that Marines from Okinawa are not far away. Doubt whether suggested air operations would achieve much psychologically. Actual recon flights over NVN would be needed to do that.

3. I suggest consideration of establishing what the layman would call a “U.S. naval base” at Cam Ranh Bay. There need not-should not-be an expensive shore installation. But the flag should fly, the U.S. presence there should be known and a generous and deep beachhead should be provided.

4. I think, but am not sure, that land area around Cam Ranh Bay is not heavily populated, and I plan to look at it on the ground next week. I understand it is the driest land in all SEA.

5. A generous expanse of empty land should make the base readily defensible on the ground. Outside of the beachhead USG might have a “show place” model community for Vietnamese.

6. I understand General Khanh would approve.

7. Establishment of such a base would do the following: A. Establish a U.S. presence in a way which is defensible without depending on Viet-Nam and without political complications or involvement of dependents.

B. It would enable us to derive maximum benefit from Navy, Air power [Force], and Marines. Obviously, in the interior of Viet-Nam the Army plays the dominant role, and it is full of strong and subtle complications and tied to many factors outside military control, yet having a strong effect on military operations.

C. But a U.S. Naval presence at Cam Ranh Bay would be purely U.S. and purely military-not dependent on Viet-Nam, and without hampering influence of civilians. Practically no construction would be involved, therefore, with little effect on the gold flow.

D. Possession of this base could be a useful trump card at a diplomatic conference when, as, and if one should ever be held. It would be something we could readily withdraw if the price were right.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US–VIET S. Top Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 001242.

2 In telegram 1815, May 1, the Departments of State and Defense informed Lodge that the desirability of maintaining a U.S. naval presence in or near South Vietnam had been reviewed. The conclusion was “that such a presence intermittently introduced into that area, would give increased evidence of US determination, would provide warning signal to North Vietnamese, and, because of its ambiguous nature, would offer certain operational positions we might find useful at a later date.” (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 US–VIET S)

3 In telegram 1815, the Departments of State and Defense also proposed moving Task Force 77.4 (carrier Kitty Hawk and 3 destroyers) into a 200-mile circular operating area, where it would conduct air operations offshore and over South Vietnam. Subsequent operations could be carried out by Task Group 77.6 (carrier Midway and escorts). It would also be possible to conduct small amphibious training exercises in South Vietnam with or without South Vietnamese participation. The Joint Chiefs of Staff first proposed these operations in JCSM–356–64 to Secretary McNamara on April 25. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, Vietnam 092)

136. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 136. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 4, 1964—3 p.m.

2108. For the Secretary, McNamara, Harriman, and Bundy from Lodge.

1. Just as I was leaving the house this morning, I received the unusual message to call on General Khanh at 10:00 AM. When I came in, he said he had asked me to call partly because “I always feel better after I talk with you” and partly to put to me the following question:

2. Should he make a declaration that he was putting the country on a war footing?

3. This would involve many things at home and abroad. At home it would involve getting rid of the so-called “politicians” and having a government which would frankly be a government of technicians. It would involve, as had been the case under Lincoln in our Civil War, the suspension of certain civil rights. There would be a curfew; Saigon would cease to be a city of pleasure; evacuation plans would be made which would be capable of being carried out in three to four months to evacuate all of the two million people in Saigon. Under these plans the government with the diplomatic corps would leave Saigon, and American dependents would be evacuated.

4. Announcement would be made to Hanoi that any further interference in South Vietnam’s internal affairs would lead to reprisals, and he specifically asked if the United States would be prepared to undertake tit-for-tat bombing each time there was an interference in the internal affairs of South Vietnam.

5. Cambodia would be told: We have done what we could to have good relations with you, but we will not respect anything you negotiate either with Hanoi or with the Viet Cong.

6. A declaration of a state of war obviously would have to be accompanied by actions to prevent the French subversive activities here which he was sure were going on. For one thing, there was no doubt at all as to their activities in Cambodia. Their purpose obviously was to get the United States out of the whole of Southeast Asia. Colonel Lan, General Vy, and Huan, the former manager of the Caravelle, had made declarations under the polygraph in response to questions both direct and indirect which established beyond doubt that Generals Kim and Xuan were [garble—paid to?] make the neutralist coup. There was a letter which Van Tam, the well-known French cat’s paw, had written to Big Minh but which was apparently “lost”. He envisioned breaking diplomatic relations with France but keeping the Consul.

7. He asked me what my personal reaction was. I said, speaking purely personally and directing my remarks to the internal changes, that, given the state of the country, winning the war must come first. After the war was won, there would be plenty of time to go ahead with democratic forms.

8. He said that he could not enthuse about just “making the agony endure”, that it was fundamental common sense and logic to try to move ahead and get a real victory, otherwise, it was inexcusable to take 2,000 casualties and lose five airplanes, as they had done, simply in order to stand still.

9. Before making a declaration that he was putting the country onto a war footing, he would tell the people and the world why war had to be waged. He would say that at the time of the November first coup the GVN had “lost control” of some seven million people. In the last three months, the GVN had “gained control” over two million people, leaving five million who were still not under GVN control. Each week, in addition to the regular military operations, the GVN was gaining control over more and more people. Last week they gained control over 60,000. It was indispensable to regain control over the whole country, and this was why the war had to [garble—waged?].

10. I asked him the specific question whether he thought there was any possibility at all of a Communist victory similar to that which had been won at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, that is, a key battle somewhere which would have a totally demoralizing effect and cause capitulation to the Communists.

11. Speaking again to him personally, I said that I thought anyone contemplating steps of this kind would have to figure out where it all might lead and what reprisals the enemy might take. It was one thing for the US and the GVN to bomb North Vietnam but how would they retaliate? If we blew up their gasoline refinery, we should expect them to blow up ours. If we destroyed their power dam, they would destroy our power dam. Was it certain at this time in such an exchange we would come out ahead?

12. Then I said that if NVN undertook to invade SVN with its army, that would raise a host of new questions of very acute interest to the United States. The possibility of the Chinese Army itself coming in had to be considered. He asked whether the United States would be prepared to follow through with all the consequences which might very well involve China. Ultimately, NVN would have to be liberated from China.

If the Chinese Army came in, said I, the question arose as to whether this army could be prevented from functioning by bombing its supply lines and this in time raised the question in my mind as to whether the supply lines could be effectively interdicted with conventional bombing or whether nuclear weapons would be necessary. I did not have the answers to these questions, but obviously they were ones that any sensible person would ask. He agreed.

13. I said these were very large questions involving the highest level in the US Government, that I did not pretend to have the answers, that I personally had been brought up on the idea, so often voiced by General MacArthur, that in Asia the United States could have great influence with its air power and its navy and in working in support of Asiatic armies but that it was out of the question for the United States to commit a large land army to the mainland of Asia. For example, I did not visualize the United States ever putting an army into Asia comparable to the army it had put into Europe during World War II.

14. He appreciated this; but he hoped that we would consider the big things which could be done with an “army corps” of US Special Forces. He thought that any “army corps” of Special Forces numbering 10,000 men could do in Asia what an army group had done in Europe. He said one American can make soldiers out of ten Orientals. If an army group in Europe could cover a hundred miles, he thought an army corps of Special Forces could cover the whole Cambodian-Laotian frontier.

15. He thought it was illogical, wasteful, wrong to go on incurring casualties “just in order to make the agony endure”. He felt that the show of determination which he was outlining would make the Viet Cong change and that it would not be necessary to go to the ultimate limit, but he wanted to be honest and candid and have us face up to these ultimate limits.

16. I asked whether he wanted to continue with the present plan of concentrating the effort in the provinces around Saigon, and he said by all means but that much more than that ought to be done in order to develop a real show of determination and an offensive spirit.

Comment: This man obviously wants to get on with the job and not sit here indefinitely taking casualties. Who can blame him?

His desire to declare a state of war, leaving out specific details such as the plans for evacuating Saigon, seems wholly in line with our desire to get out of a “business as usual” mentality.

He is clearly facing up to all the hard questions and wants us to do it too.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Passed to the White House and the Office of the Secretary of Defense for McNamara on receipt in the Department of State. Also published in part in Declassified Documents, 1984. 001244.

137. Memorandum for the Secretary of State 137. Memorandum for the Secretary of State1

Washington, May 4, 1964.

SUBJECT

Lodge’s Conversation with Khanh Re Mobilization and Pressure on the North2

It is suggested that you raise the report of Lodge’s conversation with Khanh during the luncheon session with the President and Secretary McNamara.3 Khanh has touched upon several points which are difficult to answer by telegram and it would seem that the best means of bringing this conversation into focus would be to have McNamara prepared to discuss it with Lodge upon his arrival in Saigon May 12. Therefore, if your luncheon discussion produces a consensus we could send Lodge a brief message from you stating that McNamara will raise the matter with him.

Khanh’s motivations in raising these points are not entirely clear. However, coming through his talk there is a quite clear sense of his conviction that he must move soon to take action against the North. He has swung around to this position more forcibly in the course of the past months and this conversation is by far the most positive exposition of that conviction.

Secondly, there may be some sense of pique that we are pushing him too actively to declare national mobilization and to put the country on a war footing. Khanh seems to be telling Lodge that mobilization of the type which has been suggested to him would make sense only if there were to be action against the North; and in time that action would make sense only if the United States would fully support it.

Thirdly, and perhaps most disturbingly, there is a certain sense of despair and perhaps some trace of panic in Khanh’s presentation. His plea for an attack on the North, and particularly his request for the intervention of American ground forces are inconsistent with his statements that the current activity of the GVN is reclaiming population which had previously been lost to the Communists.

Khanh therefore seems badly in need of some type of reassurance. This could take one of several forms: a. We could encourage him by saying that we will support him in action against the North, and agree to initiate joint planning with him.

b. We could assure him that we will support action in the North, but stipulate a specific date before which we would not consider such action politically feasible.

c. We could suggest a phased mobilization program which would move somewhat more gradually toward the more Spartan measures which Khanh has outlined, making it clear that these would be moving toward a basis for more vigorous action to the North, but at the same time making it clear that an improvement on the ground in the South was an essential element to progression through these various phases.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VIII. Top Secret. There is no indication on the source text who sent this memorandum to Rusk, but it was apparently from William Bundy. A copy of the memorandum is in Department of State, Bundy Files, Special Papers.

2 See Document 136.

3 At the luncheon meeting on May 5, beginning at 12:55 p.m., Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Taylor, and McCone discussed seven foreign policy items of which Khanh’s suggestion of a war footing for South Vietnam was the first. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary, and memorandum to Rusk, May 5; Department of State, President’s Reading File, Lot 74 D 164) No record of the meeting has been found.

138. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 138. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, May 5, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

I attach a memorandum I just had from State2 on Lodge’s recent cable report of his conversation with Khanh (Saigon 2108).3 I agree that probably both Lodge and Khanh are somewhat shaken by events of the last few days.4 At your lunch today,5 however, you might want to make the following points:

There may well be a need to put Vietnam in general, and Saigon in particular, on a “war footing” and try to create throughout the country the impression that the GVN and the U.S. are determined to press the war against the Viet Cong to as rapid a conclusion as possible. There is no doubt that people in Vietnam are getting tired and probably we need to give them some hope that they will not indefinitely have to endure the casualties that are inflicted upon them by the guerrillas.

Mobilizing the country is fine, especially if the mobilization effort is designed to put the cities more on a wartime footing and give to the countryside a sense immediately of hope. One idea that has occurred to me is that in connection with a mobilization speech, Khanh should announce a very specific program to bring quickly and efficiently to the peasants in those areas which are relatively free of the VC as many of the aspects of the better life as we and the GVN can contrive. The point is to emphasize as dramatically as we can the difference between life in a government cleared area and life in a VC dominated area. At the same time we should encourage Khanh to bring the capital city more into the war, perhaps by introducing there some of the spirit of sacrifice which is continuously being demanded of the peasants.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. VIII. Top Secret.

2 Document 137.

3 Document 136.

4 Apparent reference to the explosion during the early morning of May 2 which damaged USNS Card, a converted aircraft carrier used for aircraft and cargo transport; a terrorist attack wounding 8 U.S. military personnel also on May 2; and the generally increased tempo of Viet Cong attacks over the last 3 weeks. (Weekly Report of the Intelligence and Reporting Subcommittee of the Inter-Agency Vietnam Coordinating Committee, May 7; Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol V111, Memos)

5 See footnote 3, Document 137.

139. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 139. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, May 5, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

This is to remind you that I have delayed execution of the Secretary of State’s suggestion that aircraft from the carrier “Kittyhawk” overfly a region of South Vietnam around the city of Hue and the area between that city and the 17th Parallel. The Secretary proposed that this be done in connection with the move of the carrier and its escorting vessels to a point off Hue which would enable its aircraft to patrol a circle which would extend from the South Vietnam coast to a point approximately 30 miles off Hainan Island.

You may wish to raise this at the meeting tomorrow2 in the event that no one else does. Lodge does not think that this sort of action will accomplish much, and it is technically a violation of the 54 Geneva Accords, which generally provide that no outside power will introduce military forces into North or South Vietnam. I don’t see any particular objection to our planes overflying international waters, even so close to Hainan Island, although again I worry about the kind of signal this represents to Peiping.

A related subject is the proposal which emanates from Lodge and is concurred in by the Secretary of State (Saigon’s 2101)3 that we construct a naval installation in Cam Ranh Bay, about midway up the coast of South Vietnam. Lodge’s arguments are set forth in the attached cable. I think this is an idiotic notion.

Such a base would serve no useful military purpose and would only provide another tempting focus for Viet Cong attacks against U.S. installations. It would have to be defended, and I am very much afraid that we might be forced out of there before we could give it up gracefully.

I probed the Sullivan Committee this afternoon on the proposition, and no one is in favor of it. I also understand that the JCS doesn’t particularly like the idea. You don’t have to do anything about it until it comes to the President’s attention, and I will make sure that in one way or another it does.

Mike

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. XIII. Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 107B.

2 Reference is to a meeting of the NSC Executive Committee on May 6 in the Cabinet Room of the White House. Vietnam was one of four topics on the agenda. The meeting lasted from 5:45 to 6:21 p.m. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary; and agenda, May 6; ibid., National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V111)

3 Document 135.

140. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 140. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 5, 1964—8:51 p.m.

1838. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Your 21082 has been considered carefully at the highest level. It raises extremely grave issues and we feel that our reactions must be developed with care. We will be meeting with the President again tomorrow afternoon3 on this matter prior to departure of McNamara (who will be taking up these issues with you) and would like to have your answers to the following questions before Noon, Washington time, May 6 if possible: 1. What is your assessment of Khanh’s motivations? He obviously entered on this train of thought after considering the problem of issuing a mobilization declaration. Do you detect any pique because we have been urging him to place the country on a more austere war footing? Do you feel that he believes such a mobilization program would make sense only as a prelude to military action against North Viet Nam?

2. We detect a trace of despair in Khanh’s remarks. Has he reached the conclusion that he cannot successfully win the war in the South unless he undertakes military action against the North? There is, of course, a distinct inconsistency between his statements about “making the agony endure” and his claim to be systematically regaining control over the entire population.

3. When Khanh discussed action against the North with McNamara,4 he spoke of the need to consolidate his base in the South before he acted. When he talked with me recently5 he spoke about the political nature of counterinsurgency and the need to undertake a long slow struggle. Do you feel that he has changed his view on these matters and that he wants to move now regardless of the progress in the South? Experience in Greece, Malaya and Korea demonstrates the need for a sound structure of support before active advances can be made, and this would seem to mean genuine progress in South Viet Nam itself before action against the North.

4. Khanh’s description of the mobilization program, and especially the talk of evacuation plans for all 2 million people in Saigon seem to take on exaggerated proportions. Is this merely his way of telling us that he does not have the administrative machinery capable of carrying out any mobilization which he should declare?

5. Were his remarks concerning warnings to Hanoi and to Cambodia, as well as the actions to be taken against the French all part and parcel of mobilization, as he envisages it? Or would this merely indicate the course of events which he would expect to ensue if air strikes were mounted against North Viet Nam? Of course, if Khanh has convincing evidence against French nationals, he should move now to have them expelled rather than having to wait for a mobilization program. Similarly, with respect to Cambodia, it would be logical for Khanh to react if Sihanouk actually carries out his threats; but for the present we are inclined to regard them as needling gestures which the Vietnamese have very sensibly ignored to date.

6. Do his remarks concerning “an army corps” of US special forces represent, in your opinion, a genuine desire on his part to have US or other foreign combat forces introduced into Viet Nam? Or, was he merely illustrating the contingent use of such forces in the event of Chicom or DRV conventional intervention?

7. Finally, do you consider that there is any sort of limited mobilization program, within the capacity of the GVN to administer, which Khanh could put into effect with good results as a step toward the elimination of a “business as usual” mentality without necessarily moving to the more spartan extremes which he has suggested?

We are earnestly attempting to gauge our view of the issues raised in your cable both on the basis of Khanh’s needs as well as your own assessment of his state of mind. It becomes most important to us to know whether this conversation represented an accumulation of frustrations which Khanh sees in facing up to all the hard questions or whether it is a forced effort to determine the ultimate US intentions if he asks us to assist him in carrying the war to North Viet Nam in the near future. Obviously, Khanh’s attitude has a bearing on the Canadian matter, but I am confident we should not discuss this with him at this time.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Nodis. Drafted by Sullivan, cleared by McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Rusk. This cable was apparently discussed at the luncheon meeting at the White House on May 5. A draft with revisions by Bundy and comments by Forrestal is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. V111, Memos. At 7:28 p.m. on May 5, McGeorge Bundy called Rusk and made the following suggestions:

“B. said the end of the first paragraph of this draft cable to Lodge he thought ran the risk of emphasizing to Lodge that Yes indeed we want to go in the North. Both agreed to soften the line a bit and take out the last sentence of the first pare. B. and Sec. discussed further changes and Sec. told B. that his brother and Sullivan were with him and would get it out.” (Department of State, Rusk Papers: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

The last sentence of paragraph 1 in the draft referred to above reads: “Is he [Khanh] attempting to have us commit the US to support action against North Viet Nam before he will move upon a mobilization program?”

2 Document 136.

3 See footnote 2, Document 139.

4 See Document 77.

5 See Document 118.

141. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 141. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 6, 1964—4 p.m.

2125. For the Secretary from Lodge. Your Flash 1838.2 Herewith my best answers to your questions: 1. Your para 1—I believe Khanh is thinking much as any professional soldier would think whose whole training is to get a victory as expeditiously as possible. I do not detect any pique. I think he honestly is trying to answer the questions in his own mind how far he should go in putting the country on a war footing. Obviously, there are many variants in doing this, and he was in a sense thinking out loud with me.

2. Your para 2—I don’t think he has reached the conclusion that he cannot win the war in the South without military action against the North. And, you are, of course, right that there is an inconsistency between his statements about “making the agony endure” and his claim that he has regained control over two million people, which he repeated to me again last night. This last is a very interesting point for many reasons, including public relations. I understand MACJ J–2 will try to plot these two million on the map. Also last week’s 60,000.

3. Your para 3—I don’t think he wants to move regardless of progress in the South. He is too intelligent for that.

4. Your para 4—I agree that a plan to evacuate two million people from Saigon seems utterly fantastic. Moreover, I think Saigon has value as a showcase of what life in a non-Communist state can be. In the whole “clear-and-hold” concept, Saigon is the biggest example of “hold”, and I would hate to see the people leave it. Of course, if it were to be bombed, a regular civil defense evacuation plan would have to be considered. I do not think he wants to evacuate Saigon, but he wants us all to think through what is involved in possible Communist retaliation on Saigon. He also thinks there should be a civil defense plan and that the public should know that there is such a plan. It might sober them.

5. Your para 5—I believe that the answer to your question is “yes”. I told him many times and again last night that he should try and get convincing evidence against French nationals. Many things could be done by him and by us that are not now possible if he had such evidence.

6. Your para 6—I wouldn’t say he was asking for an army corps of US Special Forces now. We were discussing the possible consequences of action against the North, both from North Vietnam and Communist China, and this led him to ask me what we could do. When I expressed great lack of enthusiasm for a large US ground force in Asia, he brought out the idea of an “army corps” of Special Forces.

7. Your para 7 is a puzzler. I have not been able to figure out a way to get rid of “business as usual” thinking without doing at least some of the things which he wants to do.

8. I don’t think Khanh is becoming pessimistic, but he is realizing what a hard job he has, which is why he has asked us for advisers. I agree we should not discuss the Canadian matter now.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Nodis.

2 Document 140.

142. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 142. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Felt) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)1

Honolulu, May 6, 1964—9:45 p.m.

070745Z. Exclusive for Gen Taylor, Gen Waters, Gen Smart, Adm Sharp. War in Vietnam. A. Saigon 2108 to State.2

1. Following are comments on ref A as requested by CJCS: A. Khanh’s remarks to Amb Lodge reveal a temporary (I hope) breakdown under pressures which have been applied by both Communists and the U.S. Small countries under tremendous pressure are unable to take the same long view of tensions which we can take. Things look different to those who are pressed to perk up to a long dirty war when they have been fighting one for 20 years. Their impatience sometimes approaches that of Americans—though not expressed in the same way.

B. It is not desirable to go to a full-scale war footing unless there is assurance that the GVN can carry out effectively the necessary controls. It is premature to entertain seriously thoughts of declaring war on NVN. There should not be undue haste to escalate to a different type of war footing in SVN divorced from the problems of Laos and Cambodia.

C. Policy for the Protocol States will not stay compartmented before escalating in NVN directly. We should move up the ladder via a series of steps in Laos as we are commencing to do.

D. However, I suggest that Khanh should redeclare a state of emergency, reaffirming if he will the declaration made by Diem in October 1961. Khanh would then have a proper umbrella for civil control actions similar to those taken in Malaya such as curfews, registration, search, and control of movement.

E. Evacuation of Saigon is desperation talk and should be ignored as a passing mood.

F. Khanh knows it but it needs to be repeated. Real victory comes when the people are convinced that his government can protect them and give them social improvement and justice. Confidence of a population is not gained quickly in one glorious battle or assault. It comes from a series of events governed by Vietnamese themselves. It swells and floods if earned by a Govt of RVN. It does not grow from white troop invasion of their land. Khanh needs another pep talk, encouraging him to carry on with implementing good plans and programs, bolstered as suggested above by issuing a govt edict that the country is in a state of emergency.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Specat; Exclusive. Repeated to CINCPACFLT, CINCUSARPAC, and PACAF. The source text is a copy the JCS sent for information to the Department of State Specat-Exclusive for Rusk.

2 Document 136.

143. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 143. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President1

Saigon, May 7, 1964—7 p.m.

1. I have been asking myself whether another Dien Bien Phu is possible in South Vietnam today; that is a really big defeat in 1964 which would end the struggle and bring Communist victory, as Dien Bien Phu did in 1954.

2. I do not anticipate a concentration of GVN troops comparable to the concentration of French troops in 1954 and therefore do not expect a wholesale defeat of the GVN army.

3. But I do think a massive Communist success is possible which could end the war as a Communist victory if the US were not to react promptly. I think it may be possible for North Vietnam to seize the northern provinces. The Viet Cong have a very strong hold on Quang Ngai now. In this regard, see General Westmoreland’s statement at Mission meeting—Embtel 2142.2 If there were no US reaction to such an event, there is no doubt that morale would drop to the bottom in Saigon.

4. I assume that if this were a clear-cut invasion by the North Vietnam army in uniform with flags flying that the US would react immediately.

5. But we must expect that NVN is crafty enough to fuzz the whole operation so that in Washington it will not look clear-cut. Whether a lot of men dressed as farmers will swarm in through the forests and suddenly appear and how it would be done, I do not know. A plausible effort might be made by “agrarian reformers” to invite us to leave. It is under such circumstances as these that a foothold at Cam Ranh Bay—see my tel 21013 —could be valuable.

6. The above unpleasant possibility is something you should have in mind because it may create a situation in which quick action by the US Government could actually make all the difference between either holding or losing South Vietnam.4

Lodge5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 2144 from Saigon, which is the source text. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 002655.

2 At the regular weekly Mission meeting on May 7, Westmoreland raised “the possibility that General Giap, whom he described as a master strategist whose stock in trade is deception, might secretly build up a formidable Viet Minh force just north of the DMZ, perhaps in Laos along Highway 9. Then, if another coup were to occur or the Geneva Accords were to collapse, such a force could move quickly to seize the northern provinces, including the city of Hue which is a cultural and religious center of great importance, and perhaps the entire I Corps area. The GVN would then be confronted with a very serious situation, since such an overt move would certainly be complemented by the more than adequate guerrilla force available in the South.” (Telegram 2142 from Saigon, May 7; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 Document 135.

4 Because President Johnson was away from Washington on May 7, McGeorge Bundy sent the following response to Lodge in White House telegram CAP 64139, May 7:

“The President will see your 2144 promptly, but in his absence I can assure you that he will share your view that any NVN attempt to achieve rapid control of important SVN territory would present most serious contingency for U.S. President knows you and your advisors will keep Washington fully informed if hard evidence of any buildup aimed at northern provinces is developed. In meantime I am sure you and McNamara and Taylor will discuss contingency planning already undertaken here and any other we should be doing in the light of this possible new threat.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 Telegram 2144 bears this typed signature.

144. Letter From the Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 144. Letter From the Secretary of State to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, May 7, 1964.

Dear Cabot: I have your letter of April 23 enclosing in turn a letter from General Harkins and raising the issue of his directive and its relation to your own memorandum of April 21.2

As we see it here, General Harkins’ authority to discuss military matters with the top Vietnamese officials, including in present circumstances both the “Chief of State” (presumably General Minh) and the Prime Minister, is not in conflict with your over-all supervisory authority, and under the latter you are entitled to receive advance notice of all such contacts, to know what will be discussed, and to provide policy guidance as required for over-all reasons.

At the same time, I wonder if you would not consider amending your memorandum, at least in practice, to provide that General Harkins will consult personally with you about his visits to General Khanh, and would not be subject to clearance with your DCM. I think you can understand that General Harkins would have some sensitivity about appearing to report to the DCM in an area where both his directive and the continuing necessities of the situation have required him to have top-level contacts over a long period. I do not think the same difficulty would exist for your other agency heads, but General Harkins’ position does seem to us special to this extent.

As a practical matter, we would hope that your consultations with General Harkins would in any event be so frequent that the question of calls by him on General Khanh would simply fall into place alongside the other important business that you and he should be transacting on a continuing basis. Such an informal relationship is surely easier and more effective than written communication in almost all cases.

With warm regards,

Sincerely,

Dean

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Intelligence File, Vietnam, Rusk/Lodge/William Bundy Correspondence. Confidential. At 6:35 p.m. on May 7, Rusk called McGeorge Bundy about this letter. The transcript of the telephone conversation reads in part: “Sec said he had signed letter to Lodge today re no questions his being top but he should deal with Harkins personally and not expect him to report to DCM; McNamara agrees but has problems about saying that in a directive.” (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

On May 11, McGeorge Bundy wrote William Bundy the following memorandum: “I quite agree that the whole business between Lodge and Harkins is childish, and I have given the President only the most general account of it telling him that we think it best for him not to be involved, and that Lodge himself has addressed his communication to the Secretary and not to the President.” (Ibid., Bundy Files, Ambassador’s Private Correspondence)

2 The documents referred to in this paragraph are ibid., WPB Chron File. They relate to the ongoing controversy between Harkins and Lodge over Lodge’s insistence that all agency heads in Saigon, including Harkins as head of MACV, check with the Deputy Chief of Mission of the Embassy, David Nes, before meeting with Khanh.

145. Talking Paper Prepared for the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) 145. Talking Paper Prepared for the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan)1

Washington, May 7, 1964.

SUBJECT

General Khanh’s Conversation with Lodge

In the conversation which Lodge reported in his telegram No. 2108,2 Khanh touched upon but did not fully explore a great many matters of fundamental significance affecting the future of US policy in Viet Nam. Because of the growing intimacy of US relations with the Vietnamese Government, it seems advisable that Secretary McNamara and Ambassador Lodge should take advantage of the Secretary’s forthcoming visit to Saigon to explore these matters in greater depth. The nature of our relationship with the Diem Government over the years has never permitted a full and frank exchange of US-Vietnamese views.

The Secretary and the Ambassador should try to find out why Khanh made the statements which Lodge has repeated. Does Khanh believe his current program will not succeed and does he believe that he is merely “prolonging the agony by this program. Although the issue which precipitated Khanh’s discourse was the question of a mobilization declaration, it is clear from Lodge’s report of the conversation and from his subsequent reply to our questions that Khanh is searching for some basic understandings with the US about the immediate and long-run future of his Country. He wants and needs to know more explicitly about the nature of our commitment.”

“In their public posture, the Vietnamese must naturally continue to assume the position that they ultimately wish the reunification of their Country. We, ourselves, can lend moral support to this ultimate objective. However, we must make clear to the Vietnamese and they must fully accept the fact that we do not intend to provide military support nor undertake the military objective of rolling back” Communist control in North Viet Nam. Our purpose is to force the North Vietnamese to cease their ambitions to extend their control both in South Viet Nam and in Laos. Complementary to that, our purpose is to provide enough strength in both South Viet Nam and in Laos that those countries will not offer temptations to the North Vietnamese as opportunities for subversion.

Once this is understood, Khanh should be assured that our commitment has no artificial limits. We are prepared to provide whatever assistance is needed in whatever form is considered most effective to assure the attainment of our objective. This commitment does not rule out the use of US force either directly or in association with South Vietnamese force against North Viet Nam. Our purpose in employing that force, however, should be understood by General Khanh in the context of its contribution to his ultimate success in gaining control over the population of South Viet Nam and eliminating the Viet Cong menace. In that sense, as Secretary McNamara has previously said publicly, such actions must be supplementary to and not a substitute for successful counterinsurgency in the South.

It, therefore, becomes important for us and for Khanh to gauge the ability of the South Vietnamese Government to move successfully in extending its protection to increasingly large portions of the population in South Viet Nam. We believe the program which Khanh has laid out in the “oil stain” pacification plan is sound. We believe that the actions he has taken in seeking to reorganize his military and paramilitary establishment for the execution of that plan are correct. We believe that the effort to decentralize authority down to the Corps and Province level represents steps forward which we have been long urging upon previous Vietnamese Governments. In brief, we believe that Khanh has made a good beginning and that shortcomings in the execution of his plan derive from the weakness of human and material resources rather than from its concept.

Fortunately, the provision of temporary human and material resources to assist Khanh and his Government are well within our capabilities. We have made available military advisors and military support units. We can make available additional civilian elements both as advisors and as practitioners who can act in support of Khanh’s Government.

Khanh has recently indicated his acceptance of the fact that the US advisory and assistance effort is fully integrated into his Government’s efforts and that the relationship should be an intimate one. We do not wish to seek command and would not accept command of either the military or civilian components of his Government even if he attempted to thrust it upon us. However, our personnel are willing and ready to become an integral part of his organization and to work as closely with his people as he wishes them to.

We recognize that the immediate question of mobilization and the problem of converting Viet Nam to a more active war footing pose serious questions for Khanh. We know that he does not have the administrative machinery to establish total mobilization in the sense of our own war time experience without at the same time hampering greatly his ability to conduct counterinsurgency operations in the countryside. We realize that, within the framework of Vietnamese experience, the countryside is already mobilized. The question of the war footing therefore becomes largely a matter of bringing the impression of the conflict more dramatically to the urban centers of population, and particularly Saigon.

We wonder whether such measures require many of the proposals which Khanh discussed. We would want the Secretary particularly to examine the need to eliminate the politicians from the Government, and whether there is any requirement at this stage to curtail civil rights beyond the current arrangements. We would want to know if there is any justification to consider the evacuation of American dependents, the diplomatic corps, and to plan for the evacuation of the total population of Saigon.

On the other hand, we believe there are many things which could be done. National service requirements for people in the city whose talents are not being currently used in the counterinsurgency program would be drawn upon. This is particularly true in the civilian sector where engineers, health workers, teachers, and general administrators could be recruited for work in the countryside. The pattern of the economic burden and the economic benefits would be consciously shifted. American assistance could be consciously and conscientiously headed toward the improvement of welfare in the country rather than the embellishment of luxury in the city. Taxation and other measures reflecting a contribution to the war could be brought to bear on the urban population so that the sense of “business as usual” would be dissipated.

As for the stance which Khanh should take toward Hanoi, it does not seem necessary at this time for him to begin threatening specific retaliatory military action against their interference in South Viet Nam. What is more important at this stage is that Khanh and his Government systematically and aggressively demonstrate to the world that the subversion in the South is directed from Hanoi. Tao much of the world’s population, including that of the US, has the impression that this is a “civil war” and a spontaneous uprising in the South. Khanh and his ministers must make it indelibly clear that the action is directed and controlled from the North. Khanh must send out capable ambassadors to the important capitals of the world to convince governments of this fact. He should realize that his own propaganda position throughout the world is weak and that the US alone cannot compensate for this weakness.

While he should tolerate no nonsense from Cambodia, he should recognize that his primary problem is with North Viet Nam and that the Viet Cong, who infest the Cambodian border reaches, are there because of the weakness of the Cambodian Government. Sihanouk is a nuisance but Khanh should not waste his energies or divert his attention by skirmishing either diplomatically or militarily. The real menace is in Hanoi and Khanh must constantly make that clear.

Similarly, Khanh must not be diverted by the annoyances that originate in Paris. Aggravating as these are to all of us, they do not represent a substantive menace. The French have no territory and no military power in Asia. They can only create annoyances, not policy. On the other hand, Khanh should keep a close surveyance [surveillance] upon French activities and should not hesitate to expel any French Nationals who are participating in actions contrary to interests of Viet Nam. Before contemplating the rupture of diplomatic relations with France, however, Khanh should estimate clearly what the consequences would be and whether the satisfaction he would receive from this step would be worth the difficulties he would experience.

Khanh’s claims to have brought two million people under his Government’s control in the past three months and his need to bring only five million more under his control seem overly optimistic to us. On the other hand, this does indicate that he has fastened on the right objective in his military and political efforts-the control and protection of Viet Nam’s population. We should use a discussion of these claims to work out with Khanh a manner in which a careful plotting of the progress of the counterinsurgency can be calculated. We should be able to do it graphically as the British did in Malaya so that we and the world will know that the Government is progressing in its fight against the Viet Cong rather than vice versa. A conviction of this progress would be the greatest morale factor that can be introduced in South Viet Nam and the greatest incentive for those who are sitting on the fence to join up in the war effort.

As far as the question of US ground forces in Viet Nam is concerned, Khanh should understand that we do not consider manpower is the limiting factor in the success of Vietnamese efforts. US ground forces deployed along the border of Viet Nam as he has suggested, would hardly make any contribution to the type of counterinsurgency in which he is engaged. In fact, such a deployment of forces would make the US look ridiculously impotent because we could expect that a continuing rate of incidents would take place behind those forces and in spite of their presence. He should be made to understand that we have the highest respect for the fighting quality of the Vietnamese soldier and that his need is for organization, leadership and executive control not for personal courage. Insofar as the US can supply or inspire those qualities we stand willing to do so. The basic and enduring strength, however, must be implanted in the Vietnamese military and civilian hierarchy.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. VIII. Top Secret; Nodis. There is no indication on the source text that Sullivan was the drafter, but there is on an earlier draft. (Ibid.)

2 Document 136.

V. The Second McNamara-Taylor Mission To Vietnam And Planning Discussions, May 8–26V. The Second McNamara-Taylor Mission To Vietnam And Planning Discussions, May 8–26

146. Editorial Note

147. Memorandum of a Meeting

Saigon, May 11, 1964, 11 a.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 333 Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive. The source text is Enclosure A to an undated memorandum from McNamara to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of DIA.

148. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) and the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan)

Saigon, May 11, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. IX, Memos. Top Secret. Drafted by Sullivan on May 14. Copies were sent to Rusk, Ball, McGeorge Bundy, McNamara. McCone, and William Bundy.

149. Memorandum of a Meeting

Saigon, May 11, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, Vietnam 333. Top Secret; Sensitive. The source text is Enclosure B to an undated memorandum from McNamara to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of DIA.

150. Memorandum of a Meeting

Saigon, May 11, 1964, 5 p.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers. Top Secret; Sensitive. The source text is Enclosure C to an undated memorandum from McNamara to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of DIA.

151. Memorandum of a Meeting

Saigon, May 12, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, Vietnam 333. Top Secret; Sensitive. The source text Enclosure D to an undated memorandum from McNamara to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of DIA.

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 14, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis.

153. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 14, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

154. Notes Prepared by the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, May 14, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 4370, South Vietnam-Statements and Supporting Papers. Secret. According to the President’s Daily Diary of May 14, Johnson met with McNamara, Taylor, McGeorge and William Bundy, Bell, and Colby from 10:40 a.m. to noon. Sullivan was not listed as a participant at the meeting. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary)

155. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, May 14, 1964—8:04 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent as telegram 1942 to Saigon, which is the source text. The message was drafted in the White House and, according to a May 14 note from McGeorge to William Bundy, it was approved by the President and McNamara. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IX)

156. Summary Record of the 532d Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, May 15, 1964, Noon.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 11, Tab 4. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. A list of attendees is ibid,. Memos to the President. McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 4.

157. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, May 15, 1964—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 2212 from Saigon, which is the source text. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1982, 002002.

158. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 15, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, WPB Chron. Confidential.

159. Memorandum Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency

Washington, May 15, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IX. Secret. A covering memorandum from McCone, May 16, brought this memorandum to President Johnson’s attention. (Ibid., SEA Special Intelligence Material, Vol. I) Also published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 21C. At 1:03 p.m., May 16, McCone called Rusk to discuss this memorandum: “M said he thought the situation in Viet-Nam was much more serious than Bob’s report; we are trying to deal with it isolated from Cambodia, Laos and M thought the situation there was really serious. M said that was why he produced the paper this morning, the May 15 appraisal; he thought the Sec should read it; the Sec said he had not seen it. M said we are hanging on a thread of two people—Khanh and Phoumi. M said also the great emphasis was on the military and none on his building a government, which he did not have. Sec said he was working this week end on a long message from him to Lodge; probably President, McNamara and M would see before it went out.” (Department of State, Rusk Papers: Lot 72 D 172, Telephone Conversations) For McNamara’s report, see Document 154

160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 16, 1964—6:59 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 8 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Stoneman, cleared in substance by Bell and in draft by Poats and Blouin, and approved by Sullivan.

161. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, May 19, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 300, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 North Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive. A summary version is printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 511–512.

162. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 20, 1964—8:50 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 8 VIET S. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Sullivan, cleared in draft by Stoneman, and initialed by Rusk.

163. Memorandum From William Y. Smith of the National Security Council Staff to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)

Washington, May 21, 1964.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–248–87. Top Secret. Drafted by Smith.

164. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 21, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

165. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 22, 1964—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 22, 1964—7:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret: Priority; Nodis. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared by Sullivan, and approved by Rusk.

167. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, May 22, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Vol. IV. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 473A.

168. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 23, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Negotiating Files: Lot 69 D 412, Vietnam Negotiations, Seaborn. Top Secret.

169. Draft Congressional Resolution Prepared in the Department of State

Washington, May 24, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting, May 5, 1964. Top Secret. According to a note on an agenda for the meeting on May 24 (see Document 172), this and other papers prepared for the meeting were “all working papers, no official standing.” (Executive Committee Meeting on Southeast Asia, May 24; Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on SEA, Vol. 1)

170. Draft Memorandum for the President Prepared by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan)

Washington, May 24, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting, May 24, 1964. Top Secret.

171. Draft Memorandum for the President Prepared by the Department of Defense

Washington, May 24, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. X, Memos. Top Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Attachment A, “Possible SEATO Nation Contributions,” and Attachment B, “Major Forces Deployed and Alerted on D–12,” are not printed.

172. Summary Record of the National Security Council Executive Committee Meeting

Washington, May 24, 1964, 11 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on SEA, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

173. Draft Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, May 25, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Luncheon with the President, Vol. I, Part 1. Top Secret Sensitive. Also published in Declassified Documents, 2979, 473B. Bundy sent this draft memorandum to Johnson under a covering memorandum with the explanation that it was his effort to put in one document both Rusk’s and McNamara’s thinking. He concluded: “There are several holes in this discussion, most notably on action in South Vietnam and on precise U. S. objectives, but there is more thinking on these topics than this particular paper shows.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Meetings on SE Asia, Vol. I)

174. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, May 25, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. X, Memos. Top Secret; Limited Distribution; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the CIA, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. This estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board, with the Directors of INR, DIA, and NSA concurring and the representative of the AEC and the Assistant Director of the FBI abstaining on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 30A.

175. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, May 26, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Top Secret. Sent to the Office of the Secretary of Defense on receipt in the Department of State.

176. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State

Saigon, May 26, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192. Correspondence—L. Top Secret.

177. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President

Washington, May 26, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol X. Secret.

178. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, May 26, 1964.

Source: Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia-Vietnam, 1964 General, 3/64–5/64. Top Secret. A covering note from Forrestal to Bundy reads as follows: “Herewith the main thoughts I brought back. I’ve not sent this to anyone and will rely on your judgment as to who should see it.” Forrestal also sent Harriman a copy of this memorandum and appendix on June 1. McGeorge Bundy apparently sent this memorandum to the President under cover of a memorandum of May 27. Bundy wrote: “Here is an important memorandum from Mike Forrestal which may help you as you think about the basic problem in Southeast Asia.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy—Memos to the President, Vol. 4) A signed copy of Forrestal’s memorandum, but not the appendix, which Forrestal sent to McNamara, Ball, McNaughton, William Bundy, and Sullivan is in Department of State, Bundy Files, Special Papers.

179. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington. May 26, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President, Vol. 4. Top Secret.

180. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, May 26, 1964—8:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Sullivan, cleared by William Bundy, and initialed by Rusk.

146. Editorial Note 146. Editorial Note

After meeting in Bonn with the leaders of the Federal Republic of Germany, May 9–11, Secretary of Defense McNamara and two aides traveled to Saigon for brief consultations and an assessment of the situation. General Taylor, William Sullivan, and Michael Forrestal flew from Washington and arrived in Saigon on May 11. McNamara arrived on May 12 and the group, with the exception of Forrestal, returned on May 13. According to Taylor, President Johnson was “impatient” with the lack of visible progress in the war against the Viet Cong and in implementation of plans to strengthen the South Vietnamese Government. There was also a general feeling in Washington that Khanh had rather too abruptly changed directions on the question of taking the war to North Vietnam. Therefore, McNamara, Taylor, Sullivan, and Forrestal were to take a second look at the situation. (Swords and Plowshares, pages 311–312)

147. Memorandum of a Meeting 147. Memorandum of a Meeting1

Saigon, May 11, 1964, 11 a.m.

SUBJECT

Conference with Ambassador Lodge Prior to SecDef Arrival (111100 May 1964)

PRESENT

Ambassador Lodge

General Taylor

General Harkins

Mr. Sullivan

During the discussions, the following points we reopened: a. The Ambassador is not particularly afraid of a military coup to oust General Khanh. He does regard the Buddhists as a possible source of danger to the government. In particular, he thinks that Tri Quang, the Buddhist leader, is a potential trouble maker. Having overthrown one government, he may feel like trying again against Khanh. He has indicated to the Ambassador that he does not regard Khanh as a “good Buddhist”—meaning, presumably, that he is a Buddhist who does not follow Tri Quang’s direction.

b. From a discussion of a possible coup, the Ambassador expressed the view that we should be giving serious consideration to our course of action if Khanh were ousted or assassinated. He suggested the possible need of a US presence to take over and run the government. In such a case, he thought a naval base at Cam Ranh Bay might be used as a US headquarters external to Saigon. He apparently feels that in a situation of civil turmoil, the US facilities in Saigon would not be available.

c. In discussing the famous interview with General Khanh,2 he explained Khanh’s frame of mind as one of frustration at recent heavy losses and the inability to bring the VC to bay. He is not happy in contemplating a long drawn out guerrilla war offering no decisive victory. Hence, he looks to the North as a battlefield offering more attractive targets.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 333 Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive. The source text is Enclosure A to an undated memorandum from McNamara to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of DIA.

2 See Document 136.

148. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) and the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) 148. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) and the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan)1

Saigon, May 11, 1964.

SUBJECT

Additional Pressures on North Viet Nam

After the initial call which General Taylor and I, accompanied by General Harkins, made on the Ambassador,2 I stayed behind at the Ambassador’s invitation for further discussions. After reviewing a number of immediate issues, we turned to a review of the Ambassador’s thinking with respect to additional pressures on North Viet Nam.

The Ambassador opened the discussion by referring to the cables which had been exchanged between himself and Secretary Rusk concerning the Canadian interlocutor.3 I said that because I would be traveling to Canada to discuss this matter with the Canadians, it became important that I have a clear and precise idea of the Ambassador’s views.

The Ambassador began by indicating his belief that there should be a steady escalation of the clandestine operations now being conducted under Plan 34–A.4 At an appropriate point, he believed these operations should include air strikes. He was not certain what targets should be involved in the air strikes but did mention such things as railway bridges.

I asked whether he expected these air strikes to be carried out by Vietnamese or by Americans. He said that he considered it a matter of indifference whether the pilots were American or Vietnamese so long as they were proficient and capable of pinpoint accuracy. I then asked who would accept the credit for these actions. He said that he believed that they should be disavowed entirely by both the Vietnamese and the Americans. He would envisage them as taking place “in the dark of the night” and that no one would admit responsibility for them.

He said he thought that they should be carried out with unmarked planes and that one arrangement we might consider would be a volunteer squadron such as the Flying Tigers. However, he was emphatic in his statement that neither we nor the Vietnamese should admit responsibility for the actions.

I asked him how he viewed the Canadian intercession in this respect. The Ambassador said that he would expect the Canadians to tell the North Vietnamese that they could continue to expect this sort of action so long as they harassed South Viet Nam. They could particularly expect retaliation whenever they committed an especially grievous offense in South Viet Nam. In making these statements, the Canadians would be talking entirely in confidence and would not assign responsibility for the retaliatory acts either to the South Vietnamese or to the Americans.

When I expressed some doubt that this position of disavowability could be maintained, the Ambassador insisted that maintenance of such an attitude was something the United States needed to learn and to practice. He said that in the United Nations he had practiced the policy of “no comment” for several years on certain key issues. It was valuable to keep our mouths shut. He himself had relearned this lesson recently. He had said absolutely nothing in the last few months and had received surprising political support in the New Hampshire and Massachusetts primaries.

I then gave the Ambassador a copy of the scenario which had been presented to the Joint Chiefs of Staff as a military planning document for action against North Viet Nam.5 I told him that I would not leave the paper in Saigon but hoped he had a chance to read it and return it to me before I left. Within a half hour the Ambassador sent for me again, said he had read the planning document and was entirely opposed to the approach which it was taking. He said that it was in effect a repetition of the program which had been contained in Bill Bundy’s letter.6 He said he had made clear to Secretary Rusk and Bill Bundy when they were here that he did not concur in that approach. He particularly objected to the idea of the Government of Viet Nam or anyone else accepting responsibility for the actions against the North. He reiterated the need for disavowable actions which would not be acknowledged. He showed me a copy of Mike Dunn’s record of conversation with Rusk and Bundy to demonstrate that he had opposed this position in the past.7

I then asked for further clarification on the manner in which he wanted this entire matter discussed with the Canadians. He referred to his telegram on this subject and pointed to the sentence which stressed the need for advising the North Vietnamese that there would be retaliatory action against the North on a tit-for-tat basis.8 I asked whether he wished this made clear to the Canadians when I saw them in Ottawa. He said as far as he was concerned that was the main point of the arrangement with the Canadians.

In discussing this point further, he said it might be useful to let a few of these occur in the North before the Canadian actually delivered his statement to the North Vietnamese authorities. I asked what, therefore, he contemplated as a time frame. He said as far as he was concerned, we should be able to do this some time this summer. He was not sure what the military requirements for protection against DRV retaliation would be, but he saw no reason why these measures shouldn’t be initiated as soon as we felt competent to mount the initial actions.

I said that my discussions with Secretary Rusk and Bill Bundy did not indicate to me that there was a meeting of the minds on this whole approach. The Ambassador expressed some surprise at this and said that he felt he had made himself explicitly clear in the conversations which had been held in Saigon. I therefore closed the conversation with the assurance that I had a clear picture of his views and would take them back to Washington for further discussion with the Secretary.

Later that evening after dinner, the Ambassador again reverted to the need for military measures. He said that General Khanh was under great strain and that perhaps only by the introduction of action along these lines could Khanh rally the support of the population which he needed to be successful in the South. I said that Secretary McNamara would be prepared to discuss this whole question of General Khanh’s attitude as reported in recent cables when he arrived. The Ambassador felt it would be useful for the Secretary to get a first-hand view of this from Khanh and that he thought this would clarify the way in which both he and Khanh viewed the problem. I did not pursue this line any further at that session.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country Series, Vol. IX, Memos. Top Secret. Drafted by Sullivan on May 14. Copies were sent to Rusk, Ball, McGeorge Bundy, McNamara. McCone, and William Bundy.

2 See Document 147.

3 See Document 134.

4 See footnote 2, Document 4.

5 Apparent reference to a later, April 20, draft of the attachment to Document 102. The April 20 draft is in Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, Vietnam 092.

6 Document 108.

7 Document 120.

8 See footnote 2, Document 134.

149. Memorandum of a Meeting 149. Memorandum of a Meeting1

Saigon, May 11, 1964.

SUBJECT

Conference with COMUSMACV and Staff Prior to Arrival of SecDef (11 May)

1. Saigon to State 2108.2 At a recent Embassy meeting which General Westmoreland reported on,3 it was the consensus that subject conversation reflects Khanh’s basic dissatisfaction with the present level of the war effort (i.e., the Pacification Program in RVN). He was unhappy with the humdrum, nasty nature of the affair and would prefer to have some glamorous, dramatic victory.

2. The nation-wide Pacification Program will not be in full gear before 1 September 1964. The preparations to expand capabilities against North Vietnam will all be ready by 1 September except the round-out of the Second A1E squadron for the Air Commandos. The capabilities created will include those for air strikes by VNAF and Farmgate aircraft against North Vietnamese targets, aerial mining (ready by 1 June), and parachute saboteur drops [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Also, the Nasty boats will be capable of interfering with fishing activities and can engage small craft of the North Vietnamese Navy. The C–123 will be capable of various forms of air activities outlined in the 34A program.

3. General Taylor stated it was his impression that the 34A program in relation to CINCPAC 37–644 should be reviewed. Many of the 34A actions such as air attack on POL facilities are not plausibly deniable by the South Vietnamese government and should be taken out of the 34A program if it is to remain covert in the sense of being plausibly deniable.

4. General Taylor then asked the opinion of the assembled group as to the time required to establish sufficient control in the South to warrant a consideration of operations against the North beyond the scope of covert sabotage operations. General Harkins expressed the view that by 1 January 1965, acceptable control will have been established everywhere except in the Delta which will require the entire calendar year of 1965. General Westmoreland is far more conservative. He says that it will take a year from now to establish acceptable control north of Saigon and two to three additional years to clear up the Delta.

5. No one in the conference showed enthusiasm for taking action under OPLAN 37–64. The most they were willing to consider was an escalating application of 34A. The thought seemed to be to get things going favorably in the Pacification Program and then add blows against the North to accelerate the trend against the enemy. General Harkins feels that it would be dangerously easy to divert the South Vietnamese from the main job of internal pacification by the attractiveness of a venture directed against the North. According to General Westmoreland, when ARVN Generals use the expression “march North”, nine out of ten of them mean full scale attack.

6. J–2 MACV made the points that the VC are growing in sophistication, better weapons (including antiaircraft), and that battalions in the Delta are tied up by the Number One problem, to ferret out the covert VC (Fifth Column) in the villages, etc., in RVN.

7. Need for a third squadron of A1Es. General Taylor expressed the view that it was premature to expect approval for the third squadron of A1Es. He stated that we should proceed with the organization of the two approved squadrons and meanwhile, develop data for the need for the third squadron.

8. Progress in setting up a reporting system on combat effectiveness and morale of RVNAF based on use of US advisers. It was established that MACV had not understood the requirement to develop a US adviser reporting system on the effectiveness of the RVNAF. General Harkins expressed some concern lest it involve critical reporting by advisers upon their opposite numbers and that the substance of such reports might get back to the Vietnamese. General Taylor reiterated the purpose of the report and told General Harkins it was the responsibility of his headquarters to work out a system to accomplish it. He stated further that it was his feeling that every person in uniform should be an eye for MACV to report on such matters through military channels. 9. Causes of the Vietnamese manpower shortages. Explanation of working of the conscription system. Desertion problem. a. The GVN policy is to have at least 80 per cent volunteers and not more than 20 per cent conscriptees in combat divisions. The stated military reason for failing to recruit and induct sufficient numbers during 1964 was budgetary. Additionally, the various military and paramilitary organizations and the VC compete for recruits. The paramilitary is more popular now because recruits can remain at home. General Harkins has repeatedly pressed to bring units up to strength. Some drain-off of manpower is caused by excessive overhead at headquarters and maintenance of security at excessive [levels at?] rear area bases. Advisers are constantly pressing for elimination of these excesses. During the visit, remedial action was in process by virtue of an order issued by General Khiem, CINCVAF as follows: (1) Retains conscripts due for discharge in June, July, and August. Releases them in October and November.

(2) All conscript training can be done at Quang Trung and National Training Centers.

(3) A study should be made to reduce manning levels of Central Agencies (High Command Headquarters), Corps area logistic centers and combat support units. It is expected that people from the above will begin shifting to combat units by 1 June. As a part of the MACV proposed augmentation, RVNAF rifle companies will now have a 25-man replacement company.

b. The training establishment has been used at about 30 per cent of capacity for the past three months. The efforts of the GVN to bring the RVNAF up to strength should be reflected by an influx of conscriptees into training centers. A general conclusion reached is that there is no short term correction of the Vietnamese manpower problem because of the ineffectiveness of the conscription machinery. Also there is some hesitation to use conscripts generally for fear of introducing VC sympathizers into the Vietnamese Armed Forces.

c. Factors affecting the desertion rate are: (1) Statistics reflect AWOLs which occurred 30–60 days before the date of the statistics. (Therefore, rates now are in part reflection of the Tet Holiday.)

(2) Lack of ordinary leave.

(3) Heavy casualties coupled with understrength in the units.

(4) Although there is little effort to round up deserters, some are found when looking for VC.

(5) Very little punishment is meted out to deserters.

10. Cross Border Operations. With regard to cross border operations into Laos, General Harkins and his people are satisfied with the limited approval which they have just received for two areas of patrolling. They stated that even though the operations are limited, their approval justified the establishment of a joint mechanism for planning and preparation. An estimated two to four weeks will be required before implementation. (General Taylor cautioned that sufficient time should be taken for preparation to ensure success.) They are generally against harassment and sabotage measures using Hard Nose, fearing that the main contribution of intelligence from these patrols would be jeopardized.

11. Westmoreland-Moore5 Committee on air support. No Ad Hoc committee has been set up. However, General Harkins stated he would be glad to have them restudy the air support situation. Concerning recent improvements, General Moore described the progress made on the quick response net to be established in the 7th Division, III Corps: a. Eight (8) VNAF ALOs trained.

b. Seven (7) VNAF ALOs started training.

c. Hardware (i.e., communications) for net is on hand.

d. US ALOs are in position.

e. Hardware for all Corps is on order.

12. Introduction of B–57s into RVN. In discussing the possible use of B–57s in RVN, General Taylor expressed the opinion that they would never be admitted unless required for use under OPLAN 37–64. General Moore pointed out the awkwardness of requiring Vietnamese in all planes involved in Farmgate operations. General Taylor replied that this presence has been a prerequisite for conduct of Farmgate operations and probably would remain so.

13. Low-level reconnaissance over Laos and Cambodia. Although all parties present favor low-level reconnaissance into Laos just as soon as possible, General Taylor stated that it was not permitted for the present in deference to Ambassador Unger’s wishes to withhold it until the situation jells in Laos. It was revealed that reaction would be almost immediate if authorized. Possible areas are Route 9, Kontum, and along the DMZ. Results are used to improve target folders for future plans. Readout on U–2 photography is about 48 hours and pictures are produced the following day. Reaction time is such that missions could react to Hard Nose intelligence.

14. Length of tour of US advisers. General Harkins feels that length of tours of US advisers is about right. Normally, advisers are with battalions roughly six months, then go to training centers. Some sector advisers represent the only continuity because of the great number of changes which have been made in province and district chiefs.

15. Austere naval base at Cam Ranh Bay. There is limited enthusiasm over the concept of an austere naval base in Cam Ranh Bay. It was agreed that a survey should be made to determine the nature of the problem. The Cam Ranh Bay locale is presently a secure area.

16. Policy on foreign military observers visiting RVN. There was a discussion of visits of foreign military observers to RVN arising out of the Argentine request. Several patterns were considered for permitting such visits. MACV was requested to recommend a policy.

17. There was a brief discussion of Secretary Rusk’s proposals made following his visit to RVN. There was general agreement with his ideas except with regard to anti-junk operations north of the 17th parallel. It was felt that little would be gained by hit and run actions whereas a considerable increase in GVN naval strength would be required to permit sustained naval operations.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, Vietnam 333. Top Secret; Sensitive. The source text is Enclosure B to an undated memorandum from McNamara to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of DIA.

2 Document 134.

3 See footnote 2, Document 143.

4 CINCPAC OPLAN 37–64, “Military Action To Stabilize the Situation in the Republic of Vietnam,” March 30. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, ICS Files)

5 Major General Joseph H. Moore, Commander, 2d Air Division and component U.S. Air Force Commander in Vietnam.

150. Memorandum of a Meeting 150. Memorandum of a Meeting1

Saigon, May 11, 1964, 5 p.m.

PRESENT

General Minh

Ambassador Lodge

General Taylor

1. General Minh feels we have been losing ground since January. The reason is that the government has lost the confidence of the people. General Khanh has brought back into the Army bad officers who had been dismissed by the Junta. What is needed is a popular leader.

2. General Taylor pointed out that it was difficult to be popular in time of civil war, that there were times when Lincoln’s popularity was very low in the United States during our civil war. He insisted, however, that something had to be done to attract the people to the side of the government.

3. Speaking of neutralists, Minh said that Diem used to see communists everywhere; now Khanh sees neutralists everywhere. The fact is that many friends are neutralists and anti-American. However, their political influence is not important.

4. The Buddhists do have a political importance. They have been infiltrated to some extent by communists. Tri Quang may become dangerous.

5. General Minh sees no present likelihood of a coup but he is quite sure that victory is not in sight.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers. Top Secret; Sensitive. The source text is Enclosure C to an undated memorandum from McNamara to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of DIA.

151. Memorandum of a Meeting 151. Memorandum of a Meeting1

Saigon, May 12, 1964.

PRESENT

Country Team Ambassador Lodge

General Harkins

Mr. Nes

Lt. General Westmoreland

Mr. Manfull

Mr. Brent

Mr. De Silva

Mr. Dunn

Visitors Secretary McNamara

General Taylor

Mr. Sylvester

Mr. McNaughton

Mr. Sullivan

Mr. Forrestal

Lt. Col. Berry

1. Appraisal of Khanh’s progress or lack thereof in strengthening government: a. Central Government: Administrative mechanism of government has not [been] and is not functioning smoothly. Greatest psychological weakness in SVN is attitude of “every man for himself”. Khanh centralizes authority in himself to detriment of efficiency of government operation. Lodge is encouraged by Khanh’s request for American advisors to assist his government. Given time, inter-governmental relationships may work out, but prospects are not good.

b. Provincial Government: Remains weak. Uncertainty as to Corps Commanders’ responsibility handicaps administration. Khanh’s 23 new province chiefs and 80 new district chiefs on the whole have improved quality of administration.

c. Central Pacification Committee: Lacks number and quality inspection personnel to be effective.

It is of major importance to seize one place (Long An, for instance), conduct intensive economic-political campaign, and publicize success.

2. Khanh’s support by various groups, particularly Buddhists.

Buddhists are fragmented. Tri Quang is “nearest thing to a political animal” Lodge has seen in RVN. He is ambitious, anti-Christian, full of hatreds, and agitating against Khanh. Because of Buddhist agitation, particularly that led by Tri Quang, Catholics are about to withdraw from Army all Catholic chaplains. Country Team does maintain close contact with Tri Quang. Some communist infiltration of Buddhists exists. Labor unions have, in general, avoided communist infiltration. Students generally support Khanh. Intellectuals oppose Khanh, as they have opposed everything else.

3. Extent to which increased U.S. aid can strengthen GVN counterinsurgency program. a. Existing U.S. program “is about right size”. Skill, energy, leadership is what is needed.

b. Lodge is anxious to have a civil advisor added to each Corps Area. Qualifications: fluent in French, about 45 years old, 2–4 year tour, bring family, live in capital of Corps Area, have assigned air and ground transportation, be under Ambassador.

c. U.S. should not increase number of American families in RVN.

4. Creation of Administrative Civil Corps. a. GVN is underdeveloped government. Much progress has been made. USOM fears putting too much pressure on government or it might shatter.

b. USOM is short 25% of authorized strength (about 1/2 for expanding rural affairs staff).

c. Mr. McNamara was greatly disturbed over this shortage and suggested consideration of use of active duty military personnel, Foreign Service officers or Peace Corps people to fill this shortage. Sec/Def requested Mr. Forrestal to look into this problem, collect facts, and make recommendations upon his return to Washington.

d. National Institute of Administration is short of faculty members for two reasons: (1) Seven instructors are assigned elsewhere in government; and (2) an inadequate budget.

e. Current plans call for training of 7,000 hamlet cadre personnel for three weeks and 235 district officers by end of 1964.

f. USOM stated that the most important thing to do is to develop a plan for organization and operation of GVN.

g. Sec/Def directed Mr. Forrestal to follow this item and to check on usefulness of Michigan State work bearing on this.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, Vietnam 333. Top Secret; Sensitive. The source text Enclosure D to an undated memorandum from McNamara to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Director of DIA.

152. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 152. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 14, 1964—7 p.m.

2203. For Rusk and McNamara from Lodge.

1. Herewith report McNamara-Khanh conversation,2 attended also by Lodge, Taylor and Harkins.

2. General Khanh began by reviewing the recent course of the war. He noted that over the past three months, the GVN had reestablished its control over some 3,000,000 Vietnamese citizens. He said that while there was obviously much that still had to be done, he was satisfied with the rate of progress. He said that an obvious problem was the danger that Communists would reinfiltrate into or otherwise reassert their control over the areas that had been made secure. The GVN was taking appropriate measures to assure that this did not happen.

3. General Khanh then said that his biggest problems and most time-consuming preoccupations were political. He protested that he was unskilled in political matters and wanted to lean heavily on Ambassador Lodge. He said that in addition to the normal political problems of a post-revolutionary situation, he had to cope with serious religious problems. It happened that almost any political question included a religious question. There were two major areas of religious conflict: that raging between the Catholics and the Buddhists, and that raging within the Buddhist movement. He said there were Catholics who dismissed all Buddhists as Communists, and Buddhists who made similar allegations about the Catholics. While the two religious groups were fighting, the GVN was in the middle and was receiving the blows each camp aimed at its adversaries. The Catholics accused him of being pro-Buddhist and the Buddhists accused him of being pro-Catholic.

4. The worst thing about this religious problem was that feelings were beginning to run so high that the religious dissension could spread to the army and completely shatter its unity. The importance of the religious problem could not be exaggerated. He felt that the best way to cope with it was to get authoritative spokesmen for the moderate tendencies in each religious group together, and let them work out the agreements and reconciliations that were in the manifest interest of both.

5. The real troublemaker in all this was Thich Tri Quang. General Khanh said he discussed the problem at length with the Ambassador, and hoped that the Ambassador would use his influence on Tri Quang to get him to adopt a more moderate position. The Ambassador remarked that he had tried this, that he was nevertheless prepared to try again, and would make another effort to influence Tri Quang to take a more conciliatory attitude towards the Catholics. The Ambassador added that Embassy officers frequently saw Tri Quang, and that perhaps they could influence him. General Khanh said this latter approach might be the better one; he felt that Tri Quang might respond better if approached at a working level, because if the Ambassador sought him out too often, there was a danger that this fact would go to Tri Quang’s head and make him more difficult than ever.

6. In addition to the religious problem, there was also the problem of the press. General Khanh remarked that more often than not the main purpose of a newspaper in Vietnam was to support specific financial or commercial interests, and that the press tended to be defamatory. Further, it got involved in the intrigues of those whom he called “parlor politicians”—those Saigonese who had had no contact with the war whatsoever, who knew nothing of the sacrifices that it entailed for the rural populations who lived in the midst of it, who had never struck a blow for freedom but who nonetheless set themselves up as the champion of freedom, often in opposition to the government and to the detriment of the war effort and whose sole interest was power and preferment for themselves.

7. All things considered, General Khanh was not displeased with what had been accomplished in recent months. There was no escaping the fact that the mobilization, induction and training of recruits and the mounting of operations had all suffered and been set back as a result of the two coups of last fall and winter. There had been no effective government in Vietnam since last May, but GVN was extending its authority, and there was good reason to believe that it would do so at a more rapid rate in the future—the progress of consolidation would not only be an oil spot, it would also snowball.

8. General Khanh said he was a soldier and not a politician, and that he wished he could spend more of his time on mounting military operations, on assisting the pacification program, and in thinking a bit about longer-term strategy and the international relations of his country, rather than spending so much time on internal political squabbles. He said these squabbles were like stomach troubles: they caused him considerable discomfort and served no useful purpose.

9. He had to think of the security of his regime. He said the Americans, and especially the Secretary and the Ambassador, had gone all-out in support of him. He wanted to be worthy of this American commitment and make it prove to be worthwhile. To do this he had to protect his regime from any divisive tendencies or attempted coupe. That he was doing, and he felt his prospects of success in that particular effort were good.

10. After he had completed this general expose of his thoughts and hopes, Khanh asked if his guests had any questions. The Secretary suggested that General Khanh go on and outline any specific points he had in mind. The Secretary said that he had noted in one of the Ambassador’s reports (Embtel 2108 of May 4, 1964)3 that Khanh had said he did not want to prolong “the agony” and wanted to push on with a more vigorous prosecution of the war. The Secretary said he would like to hear Khanh’s thoughts in this connection.

11. Khanh said that when he spoke of not wanting “to make the agony endure”, he did not want to give the impression that he would lose patience in a long, grinding struggle of the sort that doubtlessly lay ahead in this kind of a war. But he did think the process could be speeded up by something like the following: the proclamation that South Vietnam was on a war footing and was being attacked from the North; that if this attack did not stop within a specified period of time, which could be six weeks, a month, or two weeks, South Vietnam would strike back and carry out attacks on the North comparable to those the North had been carrying against the South. These countermeasures would be comparable in degree and importance and extent, although not necessarily identical in form, “whereas the North attacks us with guerrillas that squirm through the jungle, we would attack them with ‘guerrillas’ of our own, only ours would fly in at tree-top level and blow up key installations or mine the port of Haiphong.”

12. The Secretary asked General Khanh if he thought it would be wise to undertake such operations now. Khanh replied that before starting such operations, we had to think about what the enemy reaction would probably be. It could well be that the North would attack in strength, perhaps even with Chinese Communist assistance or direct participation. This would rapidly become America’s problem, so it would have to be for the Americans to decide on timing or whether attacks against the North were to be undertaken at all. Having said this, he said, he would like to note that the NFLSVN and the VC were but the arms or legs of the enemy monster; its head was in Hanoi—“and maybe further North;” and to destroy it properly and quickly, a blow at the head was needed. The purpose of putting the country formally on a war footing would be to set the stage, to set a proper frame of reference, for the ultimate extension of the war that would follow.

13. General Taylor asked how General Khanh thought he could best attack the North. Khanh replied by air or by sea but not by land. It was noted that some small-scale infiltration operations had been tried or were in progress, but it was generally agreed that these had not been successful and were unlikely to make any decisively significant contribution to the war effort. When the question of the material capabilities of the Vietnamese Armed Forces to mount such attacks came up, Khanh replied that they either were ready or could quickly be brought to a point of readiness. This was not the problem. The problem was to be certain that the GVN would continue to enjoy full American support in connection with a strong attack by the North in reaction to what the GVN had done. Khanh noted that there were always unknowns that must be taken into account. He recalled the parts played by comparable “unknownsv in the French war in Indochina-the decisive role played by a Viet Minh division that had been grouped and held secretly just over the Chinese border for a sudden and decisive intervention in the fighting in the Tonkin. The French had known nothing about it. He would point out the risks and the prospects for gain, but the Americans would have to make the basic decisions.

14. General Taylor recalled that at their last (March) meeting,4 General Khanh had said he would prefer to hold off on attacking the North until he had established a better and sounder base in the South. General Taylor asked if we now had a stable base. Khanh indicated that there was much more to be done in this area, but that it was almost impossible to describe the problem or his approaches to it in absolute terms. He said that the very fact that the base in the South was not yet satisfactorily solid might be a reason to strike against the North at once, rather than wait for the weakness to be corrected, because it could be, in a certain international conjuncture and set of circumstances, that the best cure for weakness in the South would be an attack on the North. He saw some merit in drawing clear lines of battle and thereby engaging men’s hearts and their all-out efforts. That would be the advantage of proclaiming a war footing: it would increase people’s awareness of the war and of the fact that they had to take a position and play their part. It could be that an attack on the North would galvanize opinion in the South and speed up the successful prosecution of the war considerably.

15. Furthermore, General Khanh said, we had to be mindful of the diplomatic and international consequences of our acts or possible courses of action. For example, there was the problem of the French. When Secretary Rusk had spoken with him a few weeks ago, the Secretary had urged him not to break relations with France. When Khanh asserted that he knew that certain Frenchmen were involved in subversion, Secretary Rusk had said to expel them selectively and for cause, but not to break off diplomatic relations with France. This Khanh had done yesterday: three Frenchmen had been expelled on security grounds. This was just the beginning. He was going to expel any Frenchman who spread neutralist doctrine or otherwise threatened the security of the government, the state, or the war effort. Khanh said this with considerable force and pride, in the manner of a man who felt he was getting underway and enjoyed the feeling of motion and concrete achievement, and looked forward to more of the same.

16. General Khanh then asked the Secretary for his views. The Secretary recalled their conversations of last March and the increases in levels of forces upon which they had then agreed. Notably, there was to be a 72,000 man increase in the ARVN and another 72,000 increase in the paramilitary forces, to replace casualties, separations and to raise the level of forces to something like 238,000 for the ARVN and 98,000 each for the Civil Guard and the SDC. The Secretary noted that the figures for what had actually been accomplished in these areas in April and May did not suggest that we were on schedule. The Secretary emphasized that he was making the observation only to introduce his main point that the USG was willing to help in any way it could to get this program back on schedule. If more money or materiel was needed, it would be made available whenever a real need could be demonstrated.

17. The Secretary then produced a chart showing what should have been accomplished over the past few months and what had actually been achieved. The Secretary and Khanh went over these figures carefully. After this study of detailed specifics was completed, Khanh asked the Secretary what general observation he would like to make on the war effort to date.

18. The Secretary noted the limitations of his vantage point as compared to that of General Khanh, but gave a clear and concrete listing of important points. First of all, he said, he would emphasize strength levels.

Second, he said, the Vietnamese Air Force needed more fighter-type aircraft. These could be delivered over here within three or four months. The Secretary indicated which aircraft types should be substituted for which types currently in use.

Thirdly, the Secretary said, there was the matter of the budget. This was very important. Delays in the granting of budgetary approval seemed to be holding up progress of the pacification effort. The Secretary emphasized that the GVN could count on the USG to supply any funds that were clearly needed, and to cover any shortfall that had been occasioned by worthwhile activity.

The GVN must emphasize, particularly in the provinces, that it is a crime not to disburse funds one is supposed to disburse. Khanh said he had recently gotten this message across to a large group of province chiefs at Cap Saint Jacques; he was going to talk to the remainder of the province chiefs within a week or so. He said jocularly that he was going to tell them that he would cut off the head of anyone who put money into his own pockets, but would also cut off the head of anyone who sat on money he was supposed to disburse. All present expressed satisfaction at Khanh’s having accepted this important point of speeding up disbursements and removing obstacles to adequate funding of key projects. Khanh explained that many of the GVN’s difficulties in this area stemmed from their heritage of French budgetary practice and its particularly formidable system of controls.

19. At Khanh’s request the Secretary offered more detailed points of advice. He said once again that he could not emphasize too strongly the importance of raising forces to the agreed levels. He felt still more effort should be made in the strategic provinces. There was also the problem of replacing incompetents. The Secretary said that in every relevant report, he had heard that the commander of the 5th Division was incompetent. He must be replaced quickly. The same applied to the province chief of Hau Nghia Province.

20. General Khanh said he agreed regarding the incompetence of these two individuals. They would soon be replaced. The case of the commander of the 5th Division presented something of an internal problem, but it would be arranged.

21. The Secretary then noted that the GVN was failing to receive much support that it might get from third-country nations interested in its struggle simply because it was inadequately represented abroad. The GVN must send out many more able Ambassadors. Ambassador Lodge remarked that he knew of several Vietnamese available in Saigon who would make excellent Ambassadors. The Secretary pointed out that the GVN could do much good for its cause by being properly represented at the UN, in a number of African and South American countries, and in Europe, especially in the Federal Republic of Germany.

22. General Khanh replied that he had this problem very much in mind. He said that an Ambassador, unlike a province chief, cannot be assigned quickly and then withdrawn if he does not work out well. A very careful selection must be made in the first place. There were, to be sure, many able men available, but there were also many problems. Ambassadors had to be representatives-nationally, socially and politically. They had to be worthy of the trust imposed in them. There were many otherwise suitable men who had family problems that complicated their cases; the wives of some were unsuitable for a diplomatic assignment. He was moving as fast as he could on this.

23. Finally, the Secretary said there must be a more effective administration of the pacification program. Those running it must be pushed to higher levels of effectiveness, and any obstacles in their paths must be removed. General Khanh said he hoped in the near future to be able to spend much more time on military and pacification matters, if only this political “stomach trouble” that took so much of his time could be quieted.

24. General Taylor, in a very serious and deliberate manner, said there was one problem of which he wished to remind General Khanh: the matter of proper supervision of communications security, this was extremely important. The fate of a nation could hang on communications security practices, and General Khanh would have to insist on higher standards. Khanh acknowledged this.

25. Ambassador Lodge said he had a problem too: he had just learned that Major Dang-Sy5 was soon to be brought to trial in Hue and on a date (May 21) that was psychologically extremely dangerous. This trial could only exacerbate the religious strife of which General Khanh had earlier complained. Khanh said the date was May 18 and assured the Ambassador that Major Sy would not be executed. Khanh said, with some determination and inflexibility in his voice, that Sy would be tried. But he added with equal firmness and as a firm and personal commitment to the Ambassador, that he would not be executed. The Ambassador warned him that with religious feeling running as high as it was, any mishandling of the Sy trial could even start a religious war. Khanh acknowledged the Ambassador’s points. He objected, however, that he had recently received a letter from Monseigneur Binh, the Bishop of Saigon, which was little less than an ultimatum. Khanh repeated again that Tri Quang was stirring up trouble, this time in connection with the Sy case. The Ambassador acknowledged that he did not envy the position in which Khanh found himself, but emphasized again that nothing must be [done?] even to justify the impression the GVN was in the slightest degree anti-Catholic.

26. The meeting, which had been frank and friendly throughout, ended on a particularly warm and friendly note, with Khanh expressing his obviously sincere thanks for the Secretary’s and the Ambassador’s statements of all-out USG support for him and for his government.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis.

2 Held on May 13.

3 Document 136.

4 See Document 77.

5 Major Dang-Sy was Deputy Chief of Thua Thien Province and the official responsible for the government attacks on Buddhist demonstrators in Hue on May 8, 1963. Dang-Sy was relieved of his duties soon after the incident. After the overthrow of the Diem government in November 1963, he was arrested.

153. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 153. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 14, 1964—5 p.m.

2205. Literally eyes only to Rusk and McNamara from Lodge. From a very reliable source I reamed after McNamara departure that “Big” Minh stated on Wednesday2 afternoon that he was planning a coup to overthrow Khanh. This should be very closely held because knowledge of it might create the very developments we wish to discourage. Khanh is infinitely the best bet in this country.3

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis.

2 May 13.

3 On May 15, Lodge sent the following update to Rusk and McNamara in telegram 2213 from Saigon:

“Since my 2205, I have learnt that ‘Big Minh’ is moving at a very slow speed and letting things come to him, and that there is no high pressure plot to get anything done quickly. What is chiefly significant is the state of mind. My present intention is that it would do more harm than good for me to tell Khanh that I am aware of this. Undoubtedly, he is thoroughly aware of it and has been for a long time. I will exercise my best judgment.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

154. Notes Prepared by the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 154. Notes Prepared by the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, May 14, 1964.

RMcN’s NOTES FOR REPORT TO THE PRESIDENT

SUBJECT

South Vietnam

Summarized below are my comments and conclusions based upon the discussions which General Taylor and I held in South Vietnam May 12 and 13.

1. The Situation

a. Since last September the number of villages under Government control has declined by 200, approximately 12%. Most of this decline occurred between September and January, but the decline continued at a lesser rate through March. The adverse trend appears to have leveled off in April.

b. Khanh states that today the Government controls 8 million people out of a total population of 14 million.

c. The Viet Cong continue to hold the initiative. The rate of harassing incidents, with its adverse effects on public morale, continues to rise. The fighting strength of the Viet Cong has risen and they are now able occasionally to stand and fight rather than to retire and dissolve in the face of Government pressure. However, they are not yet capable of seizing an area and holding it for an extended period of time against determined Government attack.

d. The Government’s operations are improving in effectiveness: “Holding” and “oil spot” operations are under way in several parts of the country.

Khanh has a clear and effective concept of the pacification program.

However:

Frequent changes of leadership continue (there have been six Province Chiefs in Long An in recent weeks).

Incompetent leadership exists in many critical areas, e.g., the 5th Division and Hai Nghia Province.

Resources are not concentrated in the areas of highest priority (for example, the crescent of provinces around Saigon including Long An, Binh Duong, and Hai Nghia, has fewer troops and less competent leadership in relation to the Communist threat than do less critical areas).

Operational plans for applying the “holding” and “oil spot” concepts to all provinces or to all major parts of each important province (Long An) have not yet been developed.

Desertion rates remain high and the strength of both regular and pare-military forces is inadequate and falling.

The administrative processes of the Government, particularly as they relate to the war effort and especially its budgetary aspects, are ineffective (the budget for January has not yet been approved and province chiefs are reluctant to assume responsibility for spending for such purposes as increases in pay, additions to strength, the rural pacification program).

The Government remains fragmented by dissension and distrust (e.g., the Foreign Minister reported to Manfull on May 13 that Khanh had possible Communist or neutralist connections).

A religious crisis is brewing both among the Buddhists and between the Buddhists and the Catholics, and the latter may spread to the Army (note the “ultimatum” letters to Khanh from both the Buddhists and the Catholics and the Bishop’s proposal to remove Catholic chaplains from the Army).

Tri Quang, the leader of the Buddhists in the central part of the country, is an ambitious, dangerous, unpredictable, powerful, political force antagonistic to Khanh’s Government.

e. MACV estimates: 1) The Pacification Program will not be in full swing until September.

2) Governmental control over the Central and Northern areas will not be achieved before mid-1965 and possibly as late as the end of 1965 (per Westmoreland and Stilwell).

3) Governmental control over the Delta will not be achieved in less than two to three years (per Westmoreland and Stilwell).

4) Governmental preparations for operations against the North will not be completed before September or October.

2. Actions which we have recommended to strengthen the Government’s Program.

a. The strength of the regular and paramilitary forces must be increased substantially by the end of the year. MACV was asked to prepare a detailed plan to accomplish this, to obtain Khanh’s approval of the plan, and to monitor its implementation. The plan, prepared while we were in Saigon, proposed the recruitment of 147,000 men between April 1 and December 31, 1964. I asked Khanh to approve this plan—he did.

b. South Vietnam’s financial budget must be approved immediately and the province chiefs must be instructed to implement it at once. Khanh agreed to issue the necessary instructions.

c. Financial limitations or the fear of such limitations must not be allowed to stand in the way of the action required to expedite the Pacification Program. Mike Forrestal will stay in Saigon until he negotiates with Oanh a plan for providing whatever budgetary support is required to offset the bad psychological effect of what the South Vietnamese view as our restrictive financial policies. (Oanh has requested an additional $56 million for the CIP plus $20 million to be added to the foreign exchange reserve.)

d. Detailed plans for the extensive application of the “oil spot” concept must be developed for all provinces and resources provided and allocated in accordance with these plans. MACV will assume the responsibility for this action.

e. Certain additional training or logistical support is required for the Vietnamese forces. We will endeavor to increase by 100% the number of Vietnamese fighter pilots within 90–100 days. We will increase the number of fighter aircraft by approximately 3.3% by the first of October and provide by that date additional pilots for such aircraft. We will approve MACV’s request for additional financial and material assistance totalling approximately $7 million (this list of items to be submitted in response to my request that they tell us of any additional assistance which they required). A detailed training program for the 7,000 additional civilian administrators to be used for pacification cadres must be developed and expedited. The USOM Chief will follow this program.

3. Khanh’s views. (For a more complete exposition of his comments, see the report of my interview with him.)2

a. As stated earlier, Khanh believes that today the Government controls approximately 8 million of the population. He believes his plans for application of the “oil spot” concept will gradually extend the Government’s control over the remainder of the population, but he points out this will require a long time.

b. He states that his major problem today is not military, but rather political and religious in character. Irresponsible elements of the urban population, who have not been exposed to the dangers and pressures of the war, press for political reforms which are inappropriate under the present circumstances. Religious crises involving controversy among the Buddhists and between the Buddhists and Catholics are mounting rapidly. He fears they will spread to the Army. In these areas Khanh stated he is “a fish out of water” and he seeks our advice.

c. Because the war will last a long time, Khanh believes that at some point a strike against the North will be desirable. He will probably not be ready for such a strike before the end of the year, although it may be forced upon him earlier by political and psychological factors. The strikes against the North can be carried out by South Vietnamese forces, but the decision to undertake such action must be that of the United States because if the North Vietnamese and Chinese Communists respond by attacking South Vietnam, Khanh must depend on U.S. forces for the protection of his country. In any event, Khanh states strikes against the North are not required now and he is not yet ready to carry them out.

d. Khanh accepted my statements of the requirement for: 1) A plan to increase the military and paramilitary strength of the GVN forces.

2) The early approval and effective provincial application of the financial budget.

3) The early assignment of ambassadors to key nations throughout the world.

4) The concentration of resources in the strategic heartland.

5) The removal of incompetent leaders in both the military and political organizations.

e. Following Khanh’s acceptance of my statements of the action he should take to increase the effectiveness of the counterinsurgency program, I emphasized again that the U.S. would support fully whatever financial expenditures were required for projects which contributed to the effectiveness of the counterinsurgency program.

4. Lodge’s proposals for strikes against the North.

a. Lodge wishes to carry out air strikes against the North [4 lines of source text not declassified]. The objective of Lodge’s program would be not only to cut off the supply of men and equipment from the North, but also to destroy the morale of the North Vietnamese and to raise the morale of the South Vietnamese.

b. Not only is this the program which Lodge believes should be followed, but, according to Bill Sullivan, Lodge believes his record shows he has consistently recommended it. His memorandum of record of the conversation with Messrs. Bundy and Rusk indicates to him that he proposed such a plan to them.3 He considers that since his memorandum of last October to Averell Harriman he has consistently advocated this proposal.

c. Lodge believes he has made clear his opposition to Bill Bundy’s proposal for establishing a political base and time schedule for action against the North. Dunn’s notes of the conversations with Bundy and Rusk refer to Lodge’s arguments against Bundy’s proposal.

d. The time schedule which Lodge apparently would follow is based on the Canadians’ arrival in Saigon in June. Lodge believes the necessary training will be completed and plans to protect Saigon implemented by the end of the summer, at which time the political-military program could start.

e. Almost certainly Lodge has discussed such a plan with Khanh, hoping to lead him to accept it.

5. Administration of the Country Team.

[Paragraphs a and b (8 lines of source text) not declassified]

c. Harkins and Lodge do not communicate effectively with each other. Neither Harkins nor Nes saw Lodge’s cable reporting on his conversations with Khanh,4 nor did they see his “Dienbienphu” cable.5 [1 line of source text not declassified]

[Paragraph d (2 lines of source text) not declassified]

e. The morale in the Embassy is poor because the able people on the staff see no effective direction of the counterinsurgency program within the Country Team.

6. Miscellaneous comments.

a. Lodge believes that if Khanh disappears, the U.S. should be prepared to run the country, possibly from Cam Ranh Bay.

b. With respect to coup possibilities, DeSilva states that although Khanh is not very popular, this is a normal condition for a leader of such a country and coup prospects, in his opinion, are lowest since January 30 of this year.

RMcN

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 4370, South Vietnam-Statements and Supporting Papers. Secret. According to the President’s Daily Diary of May 14, Johnson met with McNamara, Taylor, McGeorge and William Bundy, Bell, and Colby from 10:40 a.m. to noon. Sullivan was not listed as a participant at the meeting. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary)

2 Document 152.

3 See Document 120.

4 Document 136.

5 Document 143.

155. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 155. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, May 14, 1964—8:04 p.m.

McNamara and Sullivan have reported fully this morning regarding their conversations with you and your colleagues.2 I was particularly struck by Sullivan’s report of his conversation with you in which you indicated your concept of a strategy for moving against the North.3 While you had discussed this matter with Dean Rusk and Bundy earlier, they had not understood that you were proposing that a sequence of actions be initiated in the near future.

I consider it vital that you and I at all times fully and clearly understand each other’s minds and would therefore greatly appreciate it if you would send me urgently your precise present recommendations with respect to the North including the Canadian aspect, the timing, and the degree of visible U.S. participation at each stage. With respect to the Canadians, I feel it important to know whether you contemplate their being informed of the full range of the actions you propose and being advised at this time of the precise nature of the messages you would wish them to convey to the North Vietnamese.

Bob McNamara also reports that in his discussion of-these matters General Khanh indicated his own present belief that action of this sort will become necessary later but that he will not be ready for such action before the end of the year.

Khanh also emphasized that any action of this kind must require a U.S. decision and a U.S. promise of protection against any reprisal. I would appreciate your estimate both as to the prospect of reprisal and of the need for advance protection.4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Sent as telegram 1942 to Saigon, which is the source text. The message was drafted in the White House and, according to a May 14 note from McGeorge to William Bundy, it was approved by the President and McNamara. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IX)

2 See footnote 1, Document 154.

3 See Document 148.

4 Telegram 1942 does not bear President Johnson’s signature.

156. Summary Record of the 532d Meeting of the National Security Council 156. Summary Record of the 532d Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, May 15, 1964, Noon.

The agenda of the meeting, which included presentations on U.S. assistance to Indonesia and U.S. policy toward Panama, was cancelled. The bipartisan Congressional leaders had been invited by the President to attend the Council session to hear reports by Secretaries Rusk and McNamara.

[Here follows Rusk’s brief summary of the NATO meeting he attended with specific reference to France and Cyprus.]

3. United Nations—A report on what we are doing in South Vietnam accompanied by a plea to the NATO members to assist in the effort against the Viet Cong. About half a dozen States may register their presence in South Vietnam. It is important that more flags appear in South Vietnam. The contribution which additional states will make helps the war effort but also has a beneficial effect on the morale of the South Vietnamese government. The resistance among NATO members to assisting in Vietnam is an echo of the past and recalls colonial disputes in which European nations believe we worked against them.

[Here follow discussion by Rusk of the U.S. position on overflights of Cuba as presented at the NATO meeting and his brief summary of NATO discussions concerning tripartite talks on German reunification.]

Secretary McNamara then summarized the report he had prepared following his most recent visit to South Vietnam.

1. The situation in South Vietnam has worsened since his last visit. The number of people under Viet Cong control’ and the amount of Vietnamese territory they control is increasing. The Viet Cong holds the initiative in the military action. The Khanh government is fragmented and a religious crisis is brewing. South Vietnamese efforts involve clear and hold exercises, the oil spot program, and pacification programs. Khanh controls eight out of fourteen million South Vietnamese. His major problem is not military but civilian and religious. He does not feel that he should strike north before his security situation in the south is improved, possibly by this Fall. No strike to the north is required now, but there may be a psychological requirement to hit North Vietnam at a later time. He feels that because the reaction of the Communists to an attack on North Vietnam is unknown, he must have a U.S. guarantee of protection, i.e., the introduction of U.S. forces, before such an attack is initiated.

In response to the President’s question, General Taylor said that if we attack North Vietnam, there would be a strong reaction by the Viet Cong in the south. It is difficult to estimate what the North Vietnamese and the Chinese Communists would do. The Chinese Communists could intervene but probably would not. The larger the U.S. attack, the greater chance of Communist reaction. The level of the attack would be the determining factor on the Communist reaction.

The President pointed out that Khanh’s support of any attack on North Vietnam would be essential.

Secretary McNamara said that the most important thing to do now is to back Khanh solidly. He suggested that we could help Khanh in the following ways: 1. Increase the South Vietnamese force level.

2. Help get his budget approved and implemented.

3. Provide financial support to ensure the stability of the South Vietnamese economy. More foreign aid in 1965 will be needed, as well as additional military equipment.

4. Train Vietnamese pilots in order to provide crews for the increased number of U.S. planes which we should send to Vietnam.

In answer to a question, Secretary McNamara said that U.S. military personnel would be training Vietnamese and would not be in combat. However, U.S. men are exposed to fire on the ground and in the air during their training time. He referred to Jungle Jim, an Air Force program to train a Vietnamese force for counterguerrilla activity. As to U.S. planes given to the Vietnamese earlier, he said there was a sound case for sending the T–28s. Propeller-driven planes are more appropriate to Vietnam than jets. The size of the airfields is small. The T–28s had been used to provide air cover for helicopters. U.S. experts agree that the T–28s are the best type of plane for the Vietnamese war. Fatalities were low, considering the large number of sorties flown.

Secretary McNamara said, in summary, that we would be obliged to increase our previous level of economic and military assistance. In answer to Senator Dirksen’s question, Director Bell said total U.S. assistance amounted to about $500 million a year.

Senator Dirksen recalled Secretary McNamara’s earlier report to the Congressional group2 and asked whether the Vietnamese had been able to enlist or conscript the additional soldiers called for under their program. Secretary McNamara said the present goal is 75,000 more men by the end of the year. In fact, 150,000 recruits are needed but it is unlikely that this number will be obtained.

In answer to a question by Senator Dirksen as to the effect of our increased assistance on the economy of South Vietnam, both Secretary McNamara and Mr. Bell agreed that the effect would be little. This year’s rice crop is expected to be good.

In answer to Senator Dirksen’s question about the Cambodian border incident,3 Secretary McNamara said it was very difficult to determine the specific facts. Apparently there were two different incidents involving the crossing of the border by South Vietnamese. Secretary Rusk added that the Viet Cong felt free to move across the border into Cambodia. He added that we may try to use the Cambodian appeal to the UN to get UN observers on the Cambodia/South Vietnam border. Director McCone noted that both sides have crossed and recrossed the border. These crossings are not deep and are in areas where the border is not clearly identified.

The President summarized the McNamara report by saying that the situation in South Vietnam was deteriorating and caused us to be extremely alarmed. The religious situation is explosive. A great effort will be necessary to turn the tide back to our side.

Senator Saltonstall asked whether U.S. soldiers will be engaged in fighting under the new program. He also asked whether U.S. planes were being adequately maintained, adding that many people had expressed their concern to him on this point.

Secretary McNamara replied that U.S. soldiers are not engaged in combat except in the course of their training Vietnamese. The number of our fighter pilots in South Vietnam has not been greatly increased. The bulk of the air effort is by South Vietnamese forces and does not involve exposing our men.

Congressman Jensen asked whether our allies are helping us. He wanted to know why the U.S. is carrying so much of the load and why our allies can not be forced to contribute more.

Secretary Rusk replied that we are carrying almost all of the load but are getting some assistance from Germany, France, the U.K. and Australia. The U.K., however, is involved in Borneo and in Malaysia. Some twenty nations have been asked to help us in South Vietnam.

Congressman Jensen made clear that he thought we are merely puttering around instead of launching a campaign against the Red Chinese. He is convinced that we have to deal with the Red Chinese. He is unhappy because he believes our allies really do not give a damn about Communist aggression in Southeast Asia.

Secretary McNamara repeated his view that effective action must be taken in South Vietnam. Attacks on North Vietnam may become necessary, but our purpose would be to make possible the carrying out of present programs in South Vietnam. The Viet Cong is being hurt in South Vietnam now. We are trying to get our allies to help, but many of them have severe limitations. However, the Australian effort is much too small. Because their entire defense budget is so low, the Australians would be able to put only a token force in South Vietnam.

Secretary Rusk pointed out that Prime Minister Menzies can now increase his defense budget because, in a recent election, he gained sufficient additional political support to make this action possible.

Congresswoman Bolton asked when we began training South Vietnamese pilots. Secretary McNamara replied in January 1962. He added that in two and one-fourth years twenty-eight U.S. lives have been lost, but that Vietnamese sorties had increased eight times. He cited additional facts to refute criticism that the Vietnamese are not fighting and that U.S. soldiers are actually carrying on the war.

When Secretary McNamara finished, Mrs. Bolton requested that his information be made public. She said she is getting a tremendous amount of mail criticizing our actions in South Vietnam. Secretary McNamara said we are making the information he had summarized available to the public and he had given some of it during his testimony before Congressional committees.

In response to a question from Senator Dirksen as to the location of the Seventh Fleet, Secretary McNamara said elements of the Fleet are off the coast of South Vietnam, within forty-eight hours steaming time of Saigon.

In response to a question by Senator Dirksen as to whether Communist China is increasing the number of weapons shipped to South Vietnam, Secretary McNamara replied that there had been no increase in weapon shipments above the March level.

Senator Dirksen asked for a description of the routes of supply from North Vietnam to South Vietnam. Secretary McNamara described several of the routes, adding that 90–95% of Viet Cong forces are recruited in South Vietnam. Only cadres are sent from North Vietnam.

Speaker McCormack said that the Administration was doing everything it could to get help from our allies. He pointed out that if South Vietnam goes, all of Southeast Asia will fall to the Communists. It is in our national interest to keep Southeast Asia non-Communist.

Congressman Jensen agreed that the U.S. has an interest in Southeast Asia but firmly restated his view that so do others who are not now helping us. He asked about the position of Thailand.

Secretary Rusk replied that Thailand is focusing on the problem in Laos and has moved some of its forces to northeast Thailand. This helps the situation in South Vietnam. In addition, the Thais are worried about the activity of Sihanouk. The South Vietnamese do not want Thai forces in their territory. The Thais are giving us good political support, but we have not pressed them to send military forces to South Vietnam.

Secretary Rusk called attention to the fact that the Vietnamese problem is ten years old. We have been committed to help Vietnam remain independent since 1954. In 1959, U.S. aid to Vietnam was increased when it became clear that Hanoi was intensifying its efforts to overthrow the South Vietnamese government.

The President said that a request for a supplemental appropriation to pay for increased economic and military assistance to South Vietnam would come from the Bureau of the Budget to the National Security Council and then be sent to Congress. The amount required was more than could be covered by the contingency fund. The specific amount was not yet known. The President requested that information on this point not be made public

Senator Saltonstall asked what could be said. The President replied that we would say that Congressional leaders had been asked to attend the National Security Council meeting to hear a briefing by Secretaries Rusk and McNamara. It was clear that more U.S. funds would be required for the Vietnamese program, but no details should be given out because they were still considered confidential.

In response to a question, Secretary McNamara said that Ambassador Lodge and General Harkins were in full agreement that more U.S. effort was needed in South Vietnam.

The President concluded the meeting by commenting that even with increased U.S. aid the prospect in South Vietnam is not bright.

Bromley Smith4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 11, Tab 4. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith. A list of attendees is ibid,. Memos to the President. McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 4.

2 See Document 107.

3 Reference is to a South Vietnamese armed incursion of Cambodia on May 7 and 8 in pursuit of the Viet Cong. (Memorandum from Samuel E. Belk to McGeorge Bundy, May 15; Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IX)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

157. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 157. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President1

Saigon, May 15, 1964—4 p.m.

This is in reply to your 1942.2

1. My views on this subject were last submitted in my memorandum of October 30 to Harriman3 and later various aspects were covered in the following wires from me to you: my 1583 of February 19,4 my 1594 of February 20,5 my 1757 of March 16,6 my 1454 of March 18,6 my 1776 of March 19,7 my 08 of April 16,8 and my 1803 of March 23.9

2. I think the Canadian interlocutor on his first trip to Hanoi should state that the Americans are utterly determined to win the struggle in South Viet Nam and will do whatever is necessary to win it. He should also point out that the North Vietnamese have it in their power to behave in such a way as to bring about the eventual withdrawal of U.S. military personnel, and so as to get food and economic aid for themselves, but that if they persist in their present gross and murderous intrusion into South Viet Nam, they will unquestionably be punished.

3. If prior to the Canadian’s trip to Hanoi there has been a terroristic act of the proper magnitude, then I suggest that a specific target in North Viet Nam be considered as a prelude to his arrival. The Vietnamese Air Force must be made capable of doing this, and they should undertake this type of action.

4. I much prefer a selective use of Vietnamese air power to an overt U.S. effort perhaps involving the total annihilation of all that has been built in North Viet Nam since 1954 because this would surely bring in the Chinese Communists, and might well bring in the Russians. Moreover, if you lay the whole country waste, it is quite likely that you will induce a mood of fatalism in the Viet Cong. Also, there will be nobody left in North Viet Nam on whom to put pressure. Furthermore, South Viet Nam’s infrastructure might well be destroyed. What we are interested in here is not destroying Ho Chi Minh (as his successor would probably be worse than he is), but getting him to change behavior. That is what President Kennedy was trying to do in October with Diem and with considerable success.

5. I believe the Canadian interlocutor idea offers the opportunity of using military power in a sharp focus to achieve specific political objectives, and we can increase or decrease the dose as we judge the traffic will bear and depending on our own readiness.

6. This is a procedure the intensity of which we can constantly control and bring up to the point to which we think the Communist reaction would cease to be manageable. It should be covert and undertaken by the Vietnamese, but, of course, we must be clear in our own minds that we are ready and able to take care of whatever reaction there may be.

7. It is easy for us on the one hand to ignore our superiority as we did at the time of Berlin in 1948 (when we still had sole possession of the atomic bomb). It is also a relatively simple concept to go all out and destroy North Viet Nam. What is complicated, but really effective, is to bring our power to bear in a precise way so as to get specific results.

8. Another advantage of this procedure is that when, as and if the time ever came that our military activities against the North became overt, we would be in a strong moral position both with regard to U.S. public opinion, the U.S. Congress, and the U.N. I say this because we would then have a record to show that we had given Ho Chi Minh fair warning to stop his murderous interference in the internal affairs of Viet Nam. Not only would we have given him fair warning, but we would have given him honest and valuable inducements in the way of some withdrawal of American personnel and in the way of economic aid, notably food. I think it is indispensable to lay this kind of basis on which we can then reasonably expect to get the support of Congress, public opinion, the United Nations.

9. The capacity to provide adequate protection against NVN reaction is a matter for the best military judgment available. I favor starting this procedure as soon as the Canadian can get going and as fast as military adequacy permits. Canadian should be a really big man.

Lodge10

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 2212 from Saigon, which is the source text. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1982, 002002.

2 Document 155.

3 Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. IV, pp. 656–659.

4 Document 53.

5 Document 55.

6 See footnote 2, Document 85.

7 Document 91.

8 See footnote 2, Document 116

9 Document 93.

10 Telegram 2212 bears this typed signature.

158. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State 158. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, May 15, 1964.

At yesterday’s meeting2 Secretary McNamara and Sullivan reported that Lodge was now urging that we undertake the Canadian gambit in the full sense as soon as the man gets out there (June 15 is now estimated), and that the initial threat-carrot approach be followed by covert air strikes against targets in North Vietnam. Lodge claims that it is the position that he took in his discussions with you in Saigon.

As you know, we have asked Lodge to make this specific. But just on the point of what he said to you during your visit, I have checked the notes taken by Lodge’s own man.3 They make clear that Lodge proposed the Canadian gambit but did not have in mind, at that time, that it would be undertaken before the new Canadian man arrived, which then looked like July. As to the question of initial air strikes being wholly “covert”, the record contains absolutely nothing to support Lodge’s contention that he made this point during the discussion. Our own scenario, which he should have read but (according to Nes) had not (!) made it quite clear that our script thought that the initial air strikes would have to be acknowledged by the GVN. Thus, it was an obvious point for Lodge to seize on if he disagreed with it, but the record is perfectly clear that he did not do so.

This only for use if the President appears to believe that you and I did not take Lodge in correctly. As often, he was simply fairly woolly.

I have now made a master file of all our exchanges with Lodge on this subject, and will do an analysis of this very soon so that we know just what kind of things he really said.

W.P.B.

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, WPB Chron. Confidential.

2 See footnote 1, Document 154.

3 See Document 120.

159. Memorandum Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency 159. Memorandum Prepared by the Directorate of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency1

Washington, May 15, 1964.

[document number not declassified]

SUMMARY

The over-all situation in South Vietnam remains extremely fragile. Although there has been some improvement in GVN/ARVN performance, sustained Viet Cong pressure continues to erode GVN authority throughout the country, undercut US/GVN programs and depress South Vietnamese morale. We do not see any signs that these trends are yet “bottoming out.” During the next several months there will be increasing danger that an assassination of Khanh, a successful coup, a grave military reverse, or a succession of serious military setbacks could have a critical psychological impact in South Vietnam. In any case, if the tide of deterioration has not been arrested by the end of the year, the anti-Communist position in South Vietnam is likely to become untenable.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IX. Secret. A covering memorandum from McCone, May 16, brought this memorandum to President Johnson’s attention. (Ibid., SEA Special Intelligence Material, Vol. I) Also published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 21C.

At 1:03 p.m., May 16, McCone called Rusk to discuss this memorandum:

“M said he thought the situation in Viet-Nam was much more serious than Bob’s report; we are trying to deal with it isolated from Cambodia, Laos and M thought the situation there was really serious. M said that was why he produced the paper this morning, the May 15 appraisal; he thought the Sec should read it; the Sec said he had not seen it. M said we are hanging on a thread of two people—Khanh and Phoumi. M said also the great emphasis was on the military and none on his building a government, which he did not have. Sec said he was working this week end on a long message from him to Lodge; probably President, McNamara and M would see before it went out.” (Department of State, Rusk Papers: Lot 72 D 172, Telephone Conversations)

For McNamara’s report, see Document 154

160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 160. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 16, 1964—6:59 p.m.

1968. Joint State/AID/DOD message. Pass Forrestal for info. Rpt to CINCPAC for info. Subject: Vietnam Supplemental Appropriation Request.

Decision made today to proceed on Monday with supplemental appropriation request $125 million for increase in FY 1965 U.S. foreign assistance to Vietnam, $70 million economic and $55 million military. Septel gives verbatim text presently proposed draft of message.2

Based information available here, supplemented by Secretary McNamara’s observations during this week’s Saigon visit, the $70 million economic aid will be divided $50 million additional for commercial import program and $20 million additional for counter-insurgency program. This additive to Congressional Presentation figures of $95 million CIP and $35 million C.I.

This action being taken in order to assure availability of funding for increased needs now foreseen and to remove any possible psychological or political impediment to all-out GVN budgetary, administrative and military efforts. This is to be used for real needs as they actually arise within the illustrative context of the current supplemental presentation and as additional reassurance in negotiating with GVN for maximum effort on its part.

For instance, we envisage announcement of our additional support will enable Country Team to obtain effective GVN commitments to following, inter alia: (a) Immediate, decisive GVN action to provide all plaster financing needed for civil counter-insurgency and increased military effort;

(b) Greatly simplified and streamlined budgetary and administrative procedures;

(c) Further curtailment of luxury imports;

(d) Sharing of import-financing costs through drawdown of GVN reserves by $25 to $30 million in FY 64 from the Jan 1, 1964 level of $ 179 million:

(e) RAND/USOM/GVN study on appropriate economic mobilization measures will be carried on vigorously and results applied to maximum extent feasible.

(f) Better utilization of military manpower and equipment.

In short, U.S. is providing under most extraordinary procedures virtually everything by way of external resources for which GVN has indicated need and it is now calling on GVN to exert maximum effort on its part along lines already jointly agreed as necessary.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 8 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Stoneman, cleared in substance by Bell and in draft by Poats and Blouin, and approved by Sullivan.

2 Telegram 1967 to Saigon, May 16. (Ibid., DEF 19–7 US–VIET S) The May 1& message to Congress is printed in American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 970–972.

161. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 161. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, May 19, 1964.

JCSM–426–64

SUBJECT

North Vietnam Operations

1. The first phase of operations against North Vietnam, under OPLAN 34A,2 terminates on 31 May 1964. In reviewing the military commanders’ proposal for a four month continuation of operations, commencing June 1964, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have appraised the achievements, and limitations, of the first three months of the program now being conducted under cognizance of the Department of Defense.

2. The over-all objective of the program is primarily to help convince the North Vietnamese leadership that it is in its own self-interest to desist from its aggressive policies. Ancillary objectives are: a. To gain more information regarding the enemy, and

b. To intensify the current psychological warfare, deception and resistance operations in order to weaken Hanoi’s control of the population and to involve the regime in costly countermeasures.

3. The indices of the progress of the war in South Vietnam for the past three months indicate a slow beginning in an over-all program designed to deter the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRY) aggression against the Republic of Vietnam (RVN). There are, however, indications that attempts at infiltration and certain psychological activities, together with widespread press and radio speculation over the extension of the war, have had an effect on the DRV. Its reactions tend to substantiate the premise that Hanoi is expending substantial resources in defensive measures.

4. The Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude from their appraisal of the program that: a. A general lack of program direction by the Government of Vietnam (GVN) was caused by the 30 January coup.

b. The program was initiated before the special materiel and personnel required for such a program were assembled in adequate numbers. Some of the assets inherited at the outset of the program were not operationally effective.

c. Overflights of Laos, while presently severely restricted, are essential in order to take advantage of en route weather conditions, avoid DRV radar and antiaircraft defenses, reduce time over DRV territory, permit planning flexibility, and enhance the security of drop zones and aircraft.

d. Other factors which have limited operations are bad weather, inadequate combat intelligence, motivational problems, and the time required for [to?] ready major items of equipment.

5. With due regard for the difficulties encountered in commencing this program, the Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that the potential of this total program remains high. They advocate continuing the program for the Phase II period of June, July, August, and September at a rate commensurate with the growing operational capabilities of COMUSMACV and GVN armed forces. The next four months will bring a substantial increase in the military resources which can be brought to bear in the form of improved electronic intelligence, trained RVN, military sabotage teams, increased C–123 airlift, including crews, Nasty type PT craft, and operating experience for all echelons. The recently developed capability of the VNAF to conduct aerial mine-laying should be exploited during this period. In addition to aerial mining, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the VNAF has the capability to conduct air strikes successfully now and their recommendations concerning this type of operation during the Phase II period will be provided in the near future.

6. In summary, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. RVN operations against North Vietnam be continued during the Phase II period commencing 1 June 1964 and intensified as operational capabilities are achieved and demonstrated.

b. Aerial mining against Swatow bases utilizing unmarked aircraft and non-US crews be authorized during this period.

c. The restrictions on overflights of Laos in support of this program be removed for unmarked aircraft with non-US crews.

d. Intelligence collection efforts, reconnaissance, and psychological operations be conducted at an increased tempo to include ground intelligence collection probes into the DMZ, the infiltration of intelligence teams into North Vietnam via Laos, and the development of intelligence networks and resistance cadres in tribal areas.

e. Joint planning, training, and organizing be conducted to provide for an intensified Phase III commencing 1 October 1964.

f. The recommendations contained herein, together with the proposed list of actions for June, July, August, and September contained in the Appendix hereto,3 be the basis of the Department of Defense position and presented for decision as a matter of priority.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor4
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 300, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 092 North Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive. A summary version is printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 511–512.

2 See footnote 2, Document 4.

3 Not printed.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this stamped signature.

162. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 162. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 20, 1964—8:50 p.m.

2022. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. As you and I agreed during my recent visit to Saigon, it is extremely important that the material effort we are investing in Viet Nam should have a visible impact upon the rural areas of the country where the Viet Cong terror strikes hardest. In discussions here in the United States and with our friends abroad, I am increasingly impressed with the general feeling that we have done little or nothing to improve the lot of the rural population. While I know that this feeling is inaccurate, I still wonder whether we are doing all we can, given the vast scope of our resources, to be sure that the peasant is receiving his share of the aid we are supplying or are prepared to supply.

It seems to me that some of the most useful evidences of concern for the peasant would be farm tools, seeds, pesticides, fertilizer, etc. which would ease his labor and increase his productivity and income; medical supplies and services which would meet his health needs; hamlet schools where none existed before to educate his children; and radio sets, which would place him in contact with Saigon and increase his appreciation of what the GVN is doing for him. All of these items are within the scope of materials being supplied by our AID Mission and I am informed that, with the exception of some lag in the arrangements with the GVN for the handling of radio sets, there are generally plentiful supplies either on hand in Viet Nam or in the pipeline.

However, the obvious bureaucratic inadequacies of the Vietnamese administrative apparatus—especially plaster releases, staffing and transportation bottlenecks—cause us to have great doubts that many of these benefits are actually reaching the hamlets and the villages.

I hope you will personally look into this matter, have your USOM team give you a full report on the status of their programs in these and related fields, and satisfy yourself that we are doing all we can to achieve the intended results. It may be that in addition to force-feeding these materials into the Vietnamese distribution channels at Saigon, we will need more Americans at the rural end of the distribution system extracting the commodities themselves and placing them in the hands of Vietnamese officials to present to the peasants as benefits from the Khanh Government.

It is reported to me that Trang Quoc Buu, the Vietnamese Labor Leader now in Washington, feels that Americans are needed in the countryside to handle this sort of problem. I know that this raises the risk of casualties, especially to civilians who are not supposedly intended to take combat risks. On the other hand I can think of no other way to be sure that what we are trying to do is actually accomplished.

I would appreciate your comments on this or any alternative proposals which will help ensure that our aid to the rural population is truly reaching its destination.2

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) 8 VIET S. Confidential; Priority. Drafted by Sullivan, cleared in draft by Stoneman, and initialed by Rusk.

2 In telegram 2330 from Saigon, May 29, Lodge reported that USOM felt that its rural programs were benefiting the peasant population, but there could be improvements in the logistical system. He reminded Rusk that USOM had requested 80 additional American positions and additional third-country nationals. In its 1965 request, USOM would stress the kinds of basic farming tools, health services, local schools, and radio communication which Rusk suggested. The Mission would continue to press the South Vietnamese to improve bureaucratic procedures. Lodge then stated that too many Americans in Vietnam would diminish the Vietnamese consciousness of their responsibility for the war and the need to make their government effective, and concluded that the best thing for the Vietnamese peasant was security, followed by social justice, efficient administration, and economic vitality unencumbered by inefficient government bureaucracy. (Ibid.)

163. Memorandum From William Y. Smith of the National Security Council Staff to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) 163. Memorandum From William Y. Smith of the National Security Council Staff to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor)1

Washington, May 21, 1964.

SUBJECT

Briefing for Mr. Bundy on Southeast Asia Plans

1. From 0930 to 1045 today Mr. McGeorge Bundy received briefings on OPLAN 34A,2 and OPLANs 373 and 994 by Capt Bowell (SACSA) and Col Kidd J–3). Capt Eggeman of SACSA accompanied Capt Bowell.

2. Capt Bowell described the origin and the scope of operations envisaged in OPLAN 34A. Mr. Bundy seemed particularly interested in the capabilities of the VNAF to carry out the more difficult operations called for in the plan. He was assured this was primarily a problem of training and could be handled. Bundy also was interested in the aerial mine-laying operations and the desirability of such operations.

3. Col Kidd then described the three categories of operations of OPLAN 37. He identified some of the more important targets that would be attacked in the various categories; he also covered the US forces that would be alerted when Category 1, 2, and 3 operations began. He noted that the 12 day reaction time for category 3 operations stemmed in large measure from the desirability of getting US forces moving into position so that they could both help deter escalation and be prepared to meet it, should it occur.

4. In the discussion of the target systems in OPLAN 37, Mr. Bundy, when POL bulk storage was mentioned as one option, asked about the strategic importance of oil and oil storage. He asked if we had any method of measuring the effects of destroying the DRV bulk storage facilities. With respect to possible attacks on rail lines, he asked if our intelligence could provide us with any indications of the degree of reliance the DRV placed on railways as opposed to seaways and truck movements. Finally, he asked about the difficulty of amphibious (maritime) operations. It was agreed they would be more difficult to mount but it was also pointed out that even if they were not completely successful, they did force the DRV to divert resources they might otherwise apply against the GVN.

5. Emphasizing the need to minimize any adverse political consequences, Mr. Bundy asked if we could warn the North Vietnamese populace of impending attacks. He had in mind possible leaflet drops to warn civilians that the area in which they were might be attacked. Col Kidd informed him that he felt certain that such warnings could be made. There then followed a brief discussion of our ability to produce the leaflets, and Capt Bowell assured Mr. Bundy that the problem could be handled.

6. Mr. Bundy also showed interest in the degree of public notice attendant to the various categories of actions in OPLAN 37. He said he believed that a major factor in the 1962 Cuba crisis had been the major movements of US forces in Southeast US. Moscow knew something was coming. He wanted to know if any such visible signs would accompany the alerting actions in OPLAN 37, or if they would not, was the plan flexible enough to permit them to do so. He was told that some of the alerting steps would surely attract public notice and others could be made to.

7. After completing the discussion of OPLAN 37, Col Kidd briefly explained that OPLAN 99 was very similar in that the same types of actions would be undertaken against the same target systems, but that US forces would be overtly involved rather than covertly as in the case ;of OPLAN 37.

8. Mr. Bundy seemed very well satisfied with the briefing, and commented that he certainly had learned a lot from the discussion.

Recommendation: I recommend that General Burchinal, by a copy of this memorandum, be asked to look into the principal matters raised by Mr. Bundy. Specifically, these questions should be looked into:

Can we develop any yardstick concerning the importance of POL and POL storage facilities to the DRV?

What degree of reliance does the DRV place on rail versus sea or truck lines of communication?

What capabilities exist to warn populations in selected target areas that an attack may soon be forthcoming? Is it a good idea to provide advance warning in some cases?

Which measures alerting US forces in OPLAN 37 will become public notice? What steps could be taken if it were desired to increase the public awareness of US alerting and movement actions?

W.Y. Smith5

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–248–87. Top Secret. Drafted by Smith.

2 See footnote 2, Document 4.

3 See footnote 3, Document 149.

4 OPLAN 99, as described in this memorandum, was similar to OPLAN 37, except that U.S. Forces would be involved overtly rather than covertly.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

164. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 164. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 21, 1964—3 p.m.

2027. Eyes only for the Ambassador from the Secretary.

1. Situation in Southeast Asia is clearly moving toward basic decisions both in the free world and in the communist world.

The present activity with regard to Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam illustrates that the central issue of pressures from the Communist North will have to be faced not just by us but by other allies.

2. You are aware of recent steps with regard to bombing operations in Laos and reconnaissance which step up the pace. The Geneva Accords of 1962 are very specific and have been grossly violated by the continued presence of Viet Minh in Laos and the persistent use of Laos for infiltration of South Vietnam. We intend to press very hard for the full and complete implementation of those accords on the basis of an international and legal position which is very strong indeed.

3. At a time when we and other governments are facing decisions on further military action in Southeast Asia, including the possibility of actions against North Vietnam, the fragility of the present situation in South Vietnam is very much on our minds.

On the basis of my talks with congressional leaders and committees and a sensing of public concern about Southeast Asia, I am convinced that the American people will do what has to be done if there is something to support. The prospect that we might strike the North, with all of the attendant risks, only to lose the South is most uninviting.

4. We need your judgment as to what more can be done to achieve the reality and appearance [of] greater solidarity in South Vietnam and to improve the actual administration performance of the government itself in grappling with the awesome problems.

5. When I was in Saigon, we talked about whether the nongovernmental community could be stimulated to demonstrate solidarity with the fight against the Viet Cong. Recent reports of new religious crises, rumblings among senior officials of government, delays in administration action to get on with the most elementary tasks of government are all disconcerting. From this end we are prepared to furnish men, material, funds on whatever scale is required to defeat the Viet Cong. But I feel the need to assure the President that everything humanly possible is being done both in Washington and by the government of Vietnam to provide a solid base of determination from which far-reaching decisions could proceed. I would greatly appreciate, therefore, your comments on such questions as the following, plus any others along the same lines which might occur to you. (A) Is there any way in which we can shake the main body of leadership by the scruff of the neck and insist that they put aside all bickering and lesser differences in order to concentrate upon the defeat of the Viet Cong?

(B) Can we find some way to get the leaders of the religious communities to declare a moratorium on their differences until the anti-religious Communist threat has been thrown back?

(C) How can we provide personnel experienced and trained in military government to work along side Vietnamese counterparts in order to galvanize the machinery of government?

(D) Can we find some way by which General Khanh can convince larger segments of the people that they have a stake in the success of his leadership against the Viet Cong?

(E) Can we devise further incentives to enlist the full cooperation of ordinary people both in the cities and in the countryside to pursue the struggle as one in which they are personally involved?

6. Everyone here in Washington is deeply impressed by the magnitude and difficulty of the problems faced by General Khanh, yourself and General Harkins but, in the face of the prospect of a deepening crisis and the possible necessity for asking the American people to accept larger sacrifices and grave risks, we want to be sure nothing is left undone which could be done to strengthen the position of South Vietnam itself.

I find it hard to believe, for example, that General Khanh and General Minh cannot find a basis to work together as patriotic Vietnamese even though it may require General Khanh to take some chances on working with some of those he displaced when he assumed power. I do not understand why so much delay in strengthening the puny diplomatic effort of Vietnam abroad. I can’t see why we are just now able to approve a January budget. I can’t see why materials in warehouses and pipelines cannot be moved promptly to the countryside to achieve the purpose for which such materials are being supplied. Surely administration can go on a war footing and French techniques of triple entry bureaucracy can be set aside in order to get prompt action. Having served in India, Burma and China during World War II I have had considerable personal experience with how deliberate all deliberate speed can be in that part of the world, but somehow we must change the pace at which these people move and I suspect that this can only be done with a pervasive intrusion of Americans into their affairs. I would deeply appreciate it if you would give me your best judgment as to how we on the American side can further stimulate Vietnamese solidarity and effort. In other words, what more can we do to make it quite clear to the American people that if a great deal more is required of them there is something solid to support and that what we may ask of them has point and the prospect of success.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

165. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 165. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 22, 1964—1 p.m.

2284. Eyes only for the Secretary from Lodge. Your 2027.2

1. There is no doubt that the situation here is fragile and unstable. The religious crisis, the rumblings among senior officials, and the delays in administrative action continue. See my 22823 for friction between General Khanh and General Minh.

2. This unhappy country emerged from colonialism ten years ago and has been trying to get along since then with help from us that is, in all truth, advisory and not at all colonial. The question clearly arises as to whether this “advisory” phase is not about to be played out and whether the United States will not have to move into a position of actual control. This time has clearly not arrived yet, but it may be approaching. Whether it means that we will have a High Commissioner or a Commissioner General, or a man who really gives the orders under the title of Ambassador, will have to be determined in the light of circumstances as they develop. It appears to me now that such a relationship can only succeed if we are invited in.

3. Replies to your specific questions are as follows: A. As you will see from my talk with Khanh on Thursday afternoon, I have made this point very clear to him. I will, of course, be glad to talk to Hoan, Oanh and Do Mau, and impress them with the importance of concentrating on the defeat of Viet Cong. I also stressed again yesterday the importance of increasing GVN diplomatic activity.

B. Monsignor de Nittis has just called here Friday morning and is tremendously upset because the trial of Dang-Sy is, at [after?] all, going to be held in Hue, and he fears violent actions against the Catholics. I am going to talk to Khanh about this, but this shows what chance there is of getting the “religious communities to declare a moratorium”. Everything is going the other way. I intend to tell Buddhist leaders Saturday night that they must do their part to avoid religious strife. Any more of these barbaric public trials can destroy the country.

C. We have at the present time literally hundreds of Americans, each of whom individually has many contacts with their Vietnamese counterparts. I started in some months ago making a list and am pouching it to you now. The question of going further than we are now going by installing American personnel involves the whole question of whether we shall shift from a basis of being advisory to that of being actually in control. We could probably use military government personnel in provinces and districts. Have we not got many in the U.S. who did military government in World War II?

It does not seem to me that it can possibly work for us to compel them to install American advisors throughout the government in a control capacity against their will. The result would be absolutely certain xenophobia, a stoppage of effort by the Vietnamese, a placing of full responsibility by [on] us for everything that went wrong. To bring about a system where the Americans run the show, we must be asked to do it. You can find many Vietnamese around town who will tell you frankly that they would like the Americans to run the country for ten years and get it through this difficult period, and then turn it back to the Vietnamese. But we have not reached the point where any Vietnamese in a position of responsibility will say this.

D. With a good deal of prodding by me, General Khanh is making radio speeches, and they go over quite well. This is a new departure for Viet-Nam, and it is promising; but you cannot expect any “crash” results from it. It must, at best, be gradual.

E. This is your most promising question. At this moment, I personally cannot think of “further incentives”, but I do not doubt that some could be found.

I believe that greater security at night is the one thing which would be most appreciated by people throughout this country, and that if the able-bodied men could join with the military forces to patrol the villages and hamlets at night, you would get an increased degree of security which would be much appreciated and which would, at the same time, discourage the Viet Cong. Also this would tend to lessen the emphasis on military activities such as napalm bombing which, whatever their military merit may be, hit women and children and do not make votes for our side.

I am also interested in promising land to veterans as we did in the Civil War.

4. Finally, I wonder whether the Americans should not give up “business as usual” atmosphere in Saigon, with its lavish cocktail parties and black tie dinners. If we lived in tents and drank out of lister bags, GVN might step up the pace. As it is, we keep numbers of them up at night going to our parties. This raises the question of evacuating dependents, which should not be done suddenly, but we can at least start policy of not bringing out any more. Also, the luxury items at our commissary (which are not available to Vietnamese) do not give a sense of urgency.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis.

2 Supra.

3 Telegram 2282, May 22, contained a long report of a conversation between Lodge and Khanh on Thursday, May 21, which ranged over many topics. One was the upcoming trial of Generals Don, Kim, and Dinh. Lodge suggested that they be found not guilty and released on the grounds that they had been misled by General Xuan. Khanh stated he had solid information that Generals Kim and Xuan planned to transform South Vietnam into a pro-French neutralist state and that the trial would expose Chief of State Minh’s role. According to Khanh, Minh was already considering resignation. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S).

166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 166. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 22, 1964—7:40 p.m.

2049. Literally eyes only for Ambassador from Secretary.

1. Many thanks for your thoughtful 2284.2 We are continuing to review carefully just what more we may be able to do within South Vietnam and also the question of possible action against the North.

2. In connection with the latter, we have of course cranked in your proposal for use of a Canadian intermediary and have been examining your other proposal that substantial initial attacks be carried out without acknowledgment by either the GVN or ourselves. On the Canadian matter, in light of present Canadian attitudes we tend to see real difficulty in approaching Canadians at this time with any message as specific as you suggest, i.e., that Hanoi be told by the Canadians “that they will be punished.” But we are keeping this in mind and will see whether we can go further when we consult them next week than the more general type of message stated in my 1821.3 As you can see, the more specific message might lead us into a very difficult dialogue with the Canadians as to just what our plans really were.4

3. On the other question, whether initial substantial attacks could be left without acknowledgment, it is our present view here that this would simply not be feasible. Even if Hanoi itself did not publicize them, there are enough ICC and other observers in North Vietnam who might pick them up and there is also the major possibility of leakage at the South Vietnam end. Thus, publicity seems almost inevitable to us here for any attack that did significant damage. Once such publicity occurred, I think you can see that the finger would point straight at us and that the President would then be put in perhaps a far more difficult position toward the American public and the Congress.

4. Thus, we are using a GVN- or US-acknowledged enterprise as part of our main planning track at the present time, although we do recognize that something a little stronger than the present OPLAN 34–A might be carried on on the basis you propose.

5. One final note. We have had some press inquiries here based on a report from some source that you were planning a speech in the United States on June 22. Both for press guidance and for wider reasons, would you let us know if you do have any thoughts in this direction? As I have indicated above, we may be entering a considerably more intensive phase in the whole area.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret: Priority; Nodis. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared by Sullivan, and approved by Rusk.

2 Document 165.

3 Document 134.

4 In telegram 2318 from Saigon, May 26, Lodge provided Rusk with the following additional thoughts:

“1. Upon reflection let me add that the scheme which I propose involves the use of Vietnamese planes and pilots. Also, the Canadian interlocutor does not need to tell North Viet Nam that the bomb is about to come. What I propose, if a proper opportunity offers, is that the bomb does come just prior to his arrival in Hanoi. There is no question whatsoever of consulting the Canadian.

“2. I am coming to the conclusion that we cannot reasonably and prudently expect a much better performance out of the GVN than that which we are now getting unless something new of this kind is brought into the picture. I am, of course pressing vigorously on all facets of our program and good breaks may occur.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

167. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 167. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, May 22, 1964.

SUBJECT

Planning Actions on Southeast Asia

A small, tightly knit group meeting at my call has now had two long sessions in working forward the two basic plans which you asked for Wednesday afternoon.2 Today’s session had the benefit of the full-scale participation of both Bob McNamara and George Ball.

1. A group under William Sullivan is now preparing a basic statement of a three to six month program for major stiffening of our effort in South Vietnam, essentially by marrying Americans to Vietnamese at every level, both civilian and military. (The direct military aspect of this stiffening is being studied by General Goodpaster and members of the Joint Staff.) The object of this exercise is to provide what Khanh has repeatedly asked for: the tall American at every point of stress and strain. This cannot be done overnight, but for the first time there is agreement that we must prepare a means to do it. The persuasion of Lodge and his relation to such an effort are tricky problems to which outline answers are being prepared.

2. An integrated political-military plan for graduated action against North Vietnam is being prepared under John McNaughton at Defense. The theory of this plan is that we should strike to hurt but not to destroy, and strike for the purpose of changing the North Vietnamese decision on intervention in the south. This is easier said than done, but McNamara has confidence that we have the military means as long as we have the political will.

3. An estimate of enemy reactions to both of these plans is being prepared on a crash basis by a task force of the intelligence community under Chester Cooper. This task force will examine in particular such sensitive questions as whether the Chinese or the Soviets would intervene and the equally edgy question whether the North Vietnamese reply to air strikes might be an irresistible increase of action against the shaky regime in South Vietnam. (Bob McNamara thinks this is not likely, but others are more worried.)

4. A small group under George Ball is drafting alternative forms of a Congressional resolution so as to give you a full range of choice with respect to the way in which you would seek Congressional validation of wider action. The preliminary consensus is that such a resolution is essential before we act against North Vietnam, but that it should be sufficiently general in form not to commit you to any particular action ahead of time. Our hope is that you might be able to persuade Dick Russell to accept a three-day truce in Civil Rights on straight patriotic grounds.

5. I am meeting this afternoon with Douglass Cater to make sure that he understands this whole situation and to ask him to begin drafting a speech or statement which would precede any new action on any of the above fronts.

6. Drafts of all of these plans and papers are to be submitted to my office in time for duplication and distribution the first thing Sunday morning.3 The working group plans to meet on Sunday morning and will be ready to report to you in a preliminary way at any time after lunch. My suggestion is that you might wish to have such a consideration in the latter part of Sunday afternoon.

McG. B.4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, Vol. IV. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 473A.

2 May 20.

3 May 24.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

168. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Secretary of State 168. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, May 23, 1964.

SUBJECT

Consultations with the Canadians

The Canadian Embassy has, with some insistence, scheduled my visit to Ottawa for Thursday May 28. I, therefore, plan to depart in the afternoon of May 27 and return in the morning of May 29. I will be accompanied by Mr. Chester Cooper of CIA.

Attached is a draft talking paper which builds upon your original cables to Lodge concerning the terms of reference for the Canadian interlocutor. While it does not accept Lodge’s suggestions concerning “punishment of North Viet Nam” it does expound upon the massive military power of the United States available in the area and the vulnerability of North Viet Nam should that power be brought into play.

I would be most appreciative if I could have your approval or revision of this paper prior to May 27. Mr. Ball and Mr. Bundy have already reviewed and approved it.2

Attachment3

SUBJECT

Talking Paper for Canadians

It is our hope that Commissioner Seaborn, upon assuming his new duties in Viet Nam, will place much greater stress than heretofore upon the nature and frequency of Canadian contacts in Hanoi. Since Seaborn has had considerable experience in Communist countries, he should know the means to establish useful arrangements in Hanoi which will bring him into touch with significant officials of the North Vietnamese Regime. He should make it clear to these officials that he is a political personality who can be dealt with and is not merely an observer who functions as a customs inspector.

In the course of his initial rounds in Hanoi Seaborn should express considerable interest in attempting to understand the North Vietnamese motivations for their policy in South Viet Nam. He should perhaps begin by giving all North Vietnamese officials who so desire an adequate opportunity to express not only their policies but their various complaints and the rationale for the course of action they are pursuing.

In the course of these discussions, Seaborn should attempt to determine what the state of mind is among the various high functionaries in Hanoi. He should specifically be alert to: a. Differences in attitude with respect to the Sino-Soviet split;

b. Frustration or war weariness with the slowness of the effort in the South;

c. Indications of the North Vietnamese desire for trade or other contacts with Western nations;

d. Evidences of cliques or factions within the Party and Governmental apparatus; and

e. Evidences of differing points of view between the political cadres and the military group.

Seaborn should additionally seek to develop the best information concerning the prevalence and the importance of the Chinese Communist presence in North Viet Nam. While it may not be possible for him to develop direct contacts with the Chinese Communist representation there he should learn as much as he can about the nature of that representation and particularly its relationship to other official representatives in Hanoi. Drawing upon his Moscow experience [he] ought to be able to establish contact with the Soviet Ambassador in Hanoi and draw him out on his evaluation of both domestic and international issues affecting the North Vietnamese regime.

In addition to these efforts, Seaborn should also establish himself as the authority upon United States motivations and policies. He should use every convincing evidence, including his discussions with United States officials in Saigon, to present to the North Vietnamese the full measure of the United States commitment to South Viet Nam. He should make clear that the United States views the problem in South Viet Nam as something which affects its policies and its stature throughout the entire world. Because the United States holds this view he should make it resoundingly clear that we do intend to see the problem through in Viet Nam and not withdraw ignominiously. He should carefully and deliberately stipulate that, if it becomes necessary for the United States to choose an alternative to the course it is now pursuing, that alternative would be in the direction of enlarging the military action and escalating direct pressure against North Viet Nam. He should draw on examples of United States actions in other parts of the world and in other circumstances to underline this statement.

At the same time, he should make clear the limitations of United States ambitions in Southeast Asia. He should specifically state that the United States seeks no military bases or other permanent installations in that area. Our purpose instead is to assure that the South Vietnamese are able to live independently free from external aggression. He should point out that we know that the aggression against South Viet Nam is directed and controlled from Hanoi. He should state that we hold Hanoi directly responsible for the guerrilla action in South Viet Nam.

He should state that the United States evaluation of North Vietnamese intentions suggests that Ho Chi Minh and the Viet Minh truly hope to succeed to the territorial control exercised by France in its colonial regime over the Indo-Chinese states. He should therefore emphasize that the United States holds North Viet Nam responsible, in the execution of this ambition, for the evidences of Communist subversion and terror throughout all the Indo-Chinese states. He should specify that we have convincing evidence of North Vietnamese presence in Laos and participation in the aggressive actions against Souvanna Phouma’s Government. He should also stress that we are aware of flagrant North Vietnamese violations of Laotian territories in the course of infiltrating personnel and material into South Viet Nam. He can if he chooses use Wilfred Burchette’s public journalistic accounts of his use of the Ho Chi Minh trail complex in his clandestine trips into South Viet Nam. Finally he should stress the fact of our awareness that Viet Cong units under North Vietnamese control regularly and frequently violate Cambodian territory and constitute an irritating factor in the Cambodian-Vietnamese border region.

He should underline the nature and the purpose of United States commitments in Southeast Asia. In doing this he should stress that our conviction is that Laos, Cambodia, and South Viet Nam have every right to be maintained free from the application of communist subversion. He should state that we believe these countries do not have the means within their own resources to resist this type of aggression but that the United States is determined to provide those means. He should point out that this is a matter of far greater significance to the United States than the parochial concerns of Southeast Asia. The United States, like the Chinese, understands the “three continent” approach that is inherent in the application of the Chinese doctrine of insurgency. Therefore, the position of the United States in Latin America and Africa, as well as the rest of Asia, is affected by the outcome of events in Southeast Asia. Consequently the United States does not view the Communist territorial nibblings in the scope of their immediate effect. The United States has long since become sophisticated in the doctrine of communist insurgency and indeed has developed a doctrine of counterinsurgency which it fully intends to apply to this area.

Seaborn can draw, however, upon many other examples of United States policy in other parts of the world to convince the North Vietnamese that we do generally accept the practice of peaceful coexistence and that we do tolerate “national Communism” as a fixture which it is not our purpose to subvert. The example of Tito, and our response to some of the recent stirrings in the East European Bloc may be used for this purpose. He could even go further to demonstrate that our policy encompasses the occasional provision of economic assistance, particularly food stuffs. He should cite the PL-480 agreements with Yugoslavia and specifically with Poland.

This sort of statement should be coupled with the frank acknowledgment that both official and public patience with North Vietnamese aggression is growing extremely thin. He should point out the bipartisan nature of this impatience in the United States and should stipulate that the existence of an election campaign in this country cannot be taken as the existence of a policy vacuum into which communist aggression can move at will. Hopefully, prior to Seaborn’s initial approaches with the North Vietnamese, tangible manifestations of this fact will have been made in the Congress and should be drawn upon to underline this point.

Insofar as Seaborn considers that it might be educational, he could review some of the military strength of the United States immediately available to the area of Southeast Asia and could graphically suggest the overwhelming ratio of forces which might be thrown against North Viet Nam if the United States crossed the Rubicon and decided upon a military punishment to North Vietnamese intervention. At the same time he might wish to indicate the well-known vulnerabilities of the North Vietnamese to American military power and the incapacity of the Chinese Communists to assist in resistance to this military power. In whatever manner he deemed most effective, Seaborn could paint a picture of the absolute havoc that would result in North Viet Nam if United States military power were brought to bear or indeed if North Viet Nam became a battlefield between United States and Chinese Communist military forces.

Again he could contrast this circumstance with the prospects that North Viet Nam could have for developing its own existence using not only resources indigenously available to it but also resources which could be introduced into a development of North Viet Nam both by foreign trade and by some degree of external technical assistance, perhaps even including assistance from international organizations and agencies.

In addition to these activities, which would be directed primarily toward North Vietnamese officials, Seaborn could apply his Eastern European experience to the cultivation of indirect influences, particularly with the Soviets and the Poles. In tracing some of the same general outlines suggested for his discussions with the North Vietnamese, Seaborn could elaborate with the Soviet and Polish representatives in an effort not only to have them use their influence upon North Vietnamese but also to modify their current actions with respect to the Geneva Agreements. Specifically, he should seek to convince the Pole that it is in Poland’s interest to disassociate itself from the reckless and irresponsible aggressive actions of the North Vietnamese. If the Pole can be convinced to vote even occasionally (perhaps not significantly) with the Indian and Canadian Commissioners on minor investigatory actions against North Vietnamese or Viet Cong violations, this would be progress.

In sum, the purpose of Seaborn’s mission in the North would be as an interlocutor with both active and passive functions. On the active side he should establish his credentials with the North Vietnamese and incidently with the East Europeans as an authoritative channel of communication with the United States. On the passive side he should function as a channel which could bring back either observances or direct communications concerning the North Vietnamese attitude toward extrication from or escalation of military activities. In each of his functions Seaborn should assume the posture that the decision as to the future course of events in Southeast Asia rests squarely with Hanoi and that the United States is looking to Hanoi for the signal which will determine the nature of events to ensue in Southeast Asia.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Negotiating Files: Lot 69 D 412, Vietnam Negotiations, Seaborn. Top Secret.

2 No revisions have been found.

3 Top Secret. Drafted by Sullivan on May 22.

169. Draft Congressional Resolution Prepared in the Department of State 169. Draft Congressional Resolution Prepared in the Department of State1

Washington, May 24, 1964.

DRAFT RESOLUTION ON SOUTHEAST ASIA

Whereas the signatories of the Geneva Accords of 1954, including the Soviet Union, the Communist regime in China, and Viet Nam agreed to respect the independence and territorial integrity of South Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia; and the United States, although not a signatory of the Accords, declared that it would view any renewal of aggression in violation of the Accords with grave concern and as seriously threatening international peace and security;2

Whereas the Communist regime in North Viet Nam, with the aid and support of the Communist regime in China, has systematically flouted its obligations under these Accords and has engaged in aggression against the independence and territorial integrity of South Viet Nam by carrying out a systematic plan for the subversion of the Government of South Viet Nam, by furnishing direction, training, personnel and arms for the conduct of guerrilla warfare within South Viet Nam, and by the ruthless use of terror against the peaceful population of that country;

Whereas in the face of this Communist aggression and subversion the Government and people of South Viet Nam have bravely undertaken the defense of their independence and territorial integrity, and at the request of that Government the United States has, in accordance with its Declaration of 1954, provided military advice, economic aid and military equipment;

Whereas in the Geneva Agreements of 1962 the United States, the Soviet Union, the Communist regime in China, North Viet Nam and others solemnly undertook to respect the sovereignty, independence, neutrality, unity and territorial integrity of the Kingdom of Laos;

Whereas in violation of these undertakings the Communist regime in North Viet Nam, with the aid and support of the Communist regime in China, has engaged in aggression against the independence, unity and territorial integrity of Laos by maintaining forces on Laotian territory, by the use of that territory for the infiltration of arms and equipment into South Viet Nam, and by providing direction, men and equipment for persistent armed attacks against the Government of National Unification of the Kingdom of Laos;

Whereas in the face of this Communist aggression the Government of National Unification and the non-Communist elements in Laos have striven to maintain the conditions of unity, independence and neutrality envisioned for their country in the Geneva Agreements of 1962;

Whereas the United States has no territorial, military or political ambitions in Southeast Asia, but desires only that the people of South Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia should be left in peace by their neighbors to work out their own destinies in their own way, and, therefore, its objective is that the status established for these countries in the Geneva Accords of 1954 and the Geneva Agreements of 1962 should be restored with effective means of enforcement;

Whereas it is essential that the world fully understand that the American people are united in their determination to take all steps that may be necessary to assist the peoples of South Viet Nam and Laos to maintain their independence and political integrity;

Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled:

That the United States regards the preservation of the independence and integrity of the nations of South Viet Nam and Laos as vital to its national interest and to world peace; Sec. 2. To this end, if the President determines the necessity thereof, the United States is prepared, upon the request of the Government of South Viet Nam or the Government of Laos, to use all measures, including the commitment of armed forces to assist that government in the defense of its independence and territorial integrity against aggression or subversion supported, controlled or directed from any Communist country.

Sec. 3. (a) The President is hereby authorized to use for assistance under this joint resolution not to exceed $___ during the fiscal year 1964, and not to exceed $___ during the fiscal year 1965, from any appropriations made available for carrying out the provisions of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961,3 as amended, in accordance with the provisions of that Act, except as otherwise provided in this joint resolution. This authorization is in addition to other existing authorizations with respect to the use of such appropriations.

(b) Obligations incurred in carrying out the provisions of this joint resolution may be paid either out of appropriations for military assistance or appropriations for other than military assistance, except that appropriations made available for Titles I, III, and VI of Chapter 2, Part I, of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, shall not be available for payment of such obligations.

(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, when the President determines it to be important to the security of the United States and in furtherance of the purposes of this joint resolution, he may authorize the use of up to $___ of funds available under subsection (a) in each of the fiscal years 1964 and 1965 under the authority of section 614(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, and is authorized to use up to $___ of such funds in each such year pursuant to his certification that it is inadvisable to specify the nature of the use of such funds, which certification shall be deemed to be a sufficient voucher for such amounts.

(d) Upon determination by the head of any agency making personnel available under authority of section 627 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, or otherwise under that Act, for purposes of assistance under this joint resolution, any officer or employee so made available may be provided compensation and allowances at rates other than those provided by the Foreign Service Act of 1946,4 as amended, the Career Compensation Act of 1949,5 as amended, and the Overseas Differentials and Allowances Act6 to the extent necessary to carry out the purposes of this joint resolution. The President shall prescribe regulations under which such rates of compensation and allowances may be provided. In addition, the President may utilize such provisions of the Foreign Service Act of 1946, as amended, as he deems appropriate to apply to personnel of any agency carrying out functions under this joint resolution.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting, May 5, 1964. Top Secret. According to a note on an agenda for the meeting on May 24 (see Document 172), this and other papers prepared for the meeting were “all working papers, no official standing.” (Executive Committee Meeting on Southeast Asia, May 24; Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on SEA, Vol. 1)

2 See Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. XVI, pp. 1500–1501.

3 Public Law 87–195, approved September 4, 1961; 75 Stat. 424.

4 Public Law 724, approved August 3,1946; 60 Stat. 999.

5 Public Law 351, approved October 12, 1949; 63 Stat. 802.

6 Public Law 86–707. approved September 6, 1960; 74 Stat. 792.

170. Draft Memorandum for the President Prepared by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) 170. Draft Memorandum for the President Prepared by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan)1

Washington, May 24, 1964.

SUBJECT

United States Role in Viet-Nam

1. Problem: The Vietnamese Government is not operating efficiently enough to reverse the adverse trend in the war with the Viet Cong. The Khanh Government has good intentions; it has announced good general plans and broad programs; but these plans are not being translated into effective action against the Viet Cong on either the military or the civil side. It has, therefore, become urgently necessary to find a means to infuse the efficiency into the governmental system that it now lacks.

2. General Concept: American personnel, who have hitherto served only as advisors, should be integrated into the Vietnamese chain of command, both military and civil. They should become direct operational components of the Vietnamese Governmental structure. For cosmetic purposes American personnel would not assume titles which would show command functions, but would rather be listed as “assistants” to the Vietnamese principals at the various levels of government.

3. Extent of American Integration: Americans should be integrated at all levels of the Vietnamese Government. General Khanh and General Tran Thien Khiem would continue to be superior in rank to any Americans integrated into the Vietnamese hierarchy, and Ambassador Lodge would continue to serve as the President’s principal representative and over-all policy advisor to General Khanh.

Americans would be integrated into the Central Government to insure that decisions are taken, orders are issued and funds, supplies and personnel are made available for their implementation, and execution actually takes place. At the regional level Americans, both military and civilian, would also be introduced into the corps and divisional apparatus, particularly to insure that military and civil activities are coordinated. Americans would likewise be brought into the government machinery at province and district level to insure that the counterinsurgency programs are actually executed at the level at which the people live.

Aside from the command aspect which Americans would assume, the principal other new element in this concept would be the introduction of American civilians at the district level. Their purpose would be to insure that programs are put into effect at the village and hamlet level to gain the support of the people.

Charts are attached2 showing a recommended pattern of integration for Americans at the various levels of the Vietnamese Government.

4. Sources of American Personnel: The great bulk of the Americans required for integration into the Vietnamese Government structure would come from those already serving in the Embassy, MACV, USOM, USIA [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. Lt. General Westmoreland, Deputy Commander, USMACV, would be the senior American integrated into the Vietnamese structure. David Nes, now Deputy Chief of Mission at the Embassy, would be the next senior man. Both should be introduced into the Vietnamese structure just below the levels of Generals Khanh and Khiem. In practice we believe that, in view of the good working relationship between these two Americans, Westmoreland would concentrate on security affairs and Nes on civil affairs.

As shown on the attached charts, other senior Americans, such as George Tanham, the Deputy Director of USOM for Counterinsurgency, Sol Silver, the Assistant Director of USOM for Programming and Economic Planning, Major General Richard Stilwell, Chief of Staff of MACV, and Barry Zorthian, Public Affairs Officer, would also be integrated. Most other officials of the American agencies in Viet-Nam would likewise be integrated at appropriate levels.

Additional recruitment of Americans would be required for civil functions. The total number would be about 950, broken down as follows: Civil Functions Civilians Military Personnel

Corps 40 —

Divisions 10 —

Provinces 200 200

Districts 250 250

Total 500 450

The main recruitment problem concerns Americans to perform civil functions at the district level. We envisage an average of two Americans per district for this purpose (augmented by Filipinos and Chinese Nationalists). Not all of the Americans would be required immediately as they should be phased into the picture as clear-and-hold operations are progressively mounted from district to district. Civilians can be recruited either through (a) a Presidential appeal for volunteers from the Foreign Service, AID, CIA, USIA and Peace Corps or (b) Department of State assignment of a specific number of career officers to this function. As shown in the table above, one-half of the number required could come from military officers assigned by the Department of Defense to civil affairs duties.

Personnel at the district level would confront a maximum risk and casualties would be virtually certain. Since the U.S. should take any feasible measure to assure their security, it is important that Vietnamese units of the Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps, which operate at this level, be encadred with an adequate number of American military personnel to insure that they will operate effectively.

Throughout the integration process we should be highly selective regarding the Americans chosen for these positions. Success will to a large extent depend upon their ability to get along with Vietnamese officials.

5. Residual American Setup in Viet-Nam: Each American agency would retain a modest traditional establishment in Viet-Nam. These establishments would be responsible (as at present) for U.S. policy recommendations and implementation, for over-all programming of U.S. input, for logistical and financial support, for reporting (which would be specifically excluded from the functions of the Americans integrated into the Vietnamese structure other than that required by their operational duties) and for the administrative support of the integrated Americans.

Charts showing the new organization of the American agencies are attached.3

6. Integration of Third Countries: We should also seek to obtain the agreement of both the Vietnamese Government and of third countries with advisors in Viet-Nam for the integration of the latter into the Vietnamese structure. We propose that Mr. R.G.K. Thompson, Chief of the British Advisory Mission, be integrated with General Westmoreland and Mr. Nes at the top level. Other British, Australian and any additional third-country advisors who are or become available would also be integrated at appropriate levels.

7. Changes in the Vietnamese Structure: We should proceed with integration without waiting for any changes in the Vietnamese structure. If acceptable to General Khanh, we should, however, seek the following minimal changes (which the attached charts reflect): a) Designation of General Khiem as “Deputy Premier” (in addition to his function as Minister of Defense) to place him above General Westmoreland and Mr. Nes.

b) Elimination of General Do Mau as a Vice Premier by placing the Ministries for which he is responsible under the Vice Premier for Pacification where they more appropriately belong. In view of reports of Do Mau’s intrigues against General Khanh the latter will probably gladly sacrifice him. However, in order to remove him from availability to intrigue, he should be given a significant post abroad.

c) We considered replacing Nguyen Ton Hoan as Vice Premier of Pacification, in view of his inactivity and political maneuvering, but decided it would cause fewer political problems to keep him. He is surrounded by Americans who can easily work around him, if necessary.

d) We would move the Ministry of Defense out from under the Vice Premier of Pacification, leaving the latter to deal with civil pacification matters only.

e) We would place the Directorate of New Rural Life under Colonel Lac directly under the Vice Premier for Pacification where it seems to belong.

f) We would move the Self-Defense Corps and Hamlet Militia (Popular Forces) from the Ministry of Interior to the Ministry of Defense where they would become a component of the ground forces thus enabling coordinated use of all ground forces available. (This is reportedly already in process.)

g) Civilian officials would be assigned at the corps level to effect coordination of military and civil activities and better support of the lagging civil activities.

While not reflected in the attached charts, we believe there would be merit to elimination of divisions from the Vietnamese military structure and placing all authority for pacification, military and civilian, in the hands of the province chiefs under the control of the corps commanders. Retention of responsibility for military activities in the divisions perpetuates the division of authority which has plagued counterinsurgency operations to date.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Meeting, May 24, 1964. Top Secret.

2 Not found.

3 Not found.

171. Draft Memorandum for the President Prepared by the Department of Defense 171. Draft Memorandum for the President Prepared by the Department of Defense1

Washington, May 24, 1964.

SUBJECT

Scenario for Strikes on North Vietnam

There are two alternatives for the United States in Vietnam—to try to improve the situation in the South without strikes on the North, or to try to improve the situation in the South with strikes on the North. Recent moves to extend Pathet Lao control over Laos and to intensify Viet Cong pressures in South Vietnam—as well as our belief that additional efforts regarding the Cambodian border, in Laos, and within South Vietnam will not by themselves prevent further deterioration there—caused us to consider strikes on the North in some detail.

The scenario below, in summary, provides simultaneously for military pressures on and political contacts with North Vietnam. (The military attacks would probably be by South Vietnamese, not Farmgate or U.S. aircraft initially, and would continue despite political communications, until there was clear evidence that North Vietnam had stopped its subversion of the South; the parties to the communications might soon include South Vietnam, North Vietnam, the U.S. and Communist China.) The military actions would start only after appropriate assurances were obtained of Congressional support for such actions.

SCENARIO

1. Stall off any “conference” on Vietnam until D-Day.

Mid-June

2. Intermediary (Canadian?) tell North Vietnam in general terms that U.S. does not want to destroy the North Vietnam regime (and indeed is willing “to provide a carrot”), but is determined to protect South Vietnam from North Vietnam.

D–19

3. Get Khanh’s agreement to start overt South Vietnamese air attacks against targets in the North (see D-Day item 14 below), and inform him of U.S. guarantee to protect South Vietnam in the event of North Vietnamese and/or Chinese retaliation.

D–19

4. Squeeze Khanh to take certain steps (re imprisoned generals, re trial of Major Sy, re internal bickering) which we have been trying to get him to take and which would improve the image of his regime in U.S. Use as leverage the difficulties anticipated in gaining backing of Congress and American public for actions against the North.

Concurrently: An effort should be in process to strengthen the posture in South Vietnam. Integration of U.S. advisors into the military and civilian elements critical to pacification, down at least to the district level, might be undertaken. And encadrement or expanded training of the Civil Guard and Self-Defense Corps by U.S. military personnel might be done.

D–18

5. President spell out plans (probably in specific terms) to Congressional leadership and lay groundwork for appropriate expression (probably in general terms) by Congress of its support.

D–17

6. Groundwork of item 5 followed by implementing steps, such as Presidential speech or message to Congress, to obtain appropriate Congressional expression of support.

D–17

7. Consult with Thailand and the Philippines to get permission for U.S. deployments. Ask them, plus U.K., Australia, New Zealand and Pakistan, for their open political support for the undertaking and for their participation in the re-enforcing action to be undertaken in anticipation of North Vietnamese and/or Chinese retaliation. (See Attachment A, on page 8, for suggested participation.) Talk to certain NATO allies. Start moves in the UN.

D–17

8. Release an expanded “Jorden Report,” including recent photography and evidence of the communications nets, giving full documentation of North Vietnamese supply and direction of the Viet Cong.

D–17

9. Start moving U.S. dependents.

D–16

10. Direct CINCPAC to take all preparatory actions necessary to ready the forces listed in Attachment B (at pages 9–12), making the necessary movements and completing the necessary plans on the assumption that strikes will be made on D-Day. This will include moving the B–57s to Saigon in augmention of Farmgate and may involve the initiation of low-level reconnaissance of North Vietnam if not previously begun.

D–10

11. Khanh makes speech demanding that North Vietnam stop aggression, threatening unspecified military action if he [it?] does not. (He could refer to a “carrot.”)

D–3

12. President informs U.S. public (and thereby North Vietnam) that action may come, referring to Khanh speech (item 11 above) and declaring support for South Vietnam.

D–1

13. Khanh announces that all efforts have failed and that attacks are imminent. (Again he refers to limited goal and possibly to “carrot.”)

D-Day

14. Launch first strikes. Initially, mine their ports and strike North Vietnam’s transport and related ability (bridges, trains) to move south; then against targets which have maximum psychological effect on the North’s willingness to stop insurgency. These latter targets would comprise those related to North Vietnam’s military power (e.g., POL storage, selected airfields, barracks/training areas, bridges, railroad yards, port facilities, communications) and those comprising their industrial assets. Initially, the strikes would be by South Vietnamese aircraft; they could then be expanded by adding Farmgate, or U.S. aircraft, or any combination of the three.

D-Day

15. Call for conference on Vietnam. State the limited objective: Not to overthrow the North Vietnam regime nor to destroy the country, but to stop DRV-directed Viet Cong terrorism and resistance to pacification efforts in the South. Essential that it be made clear that attacks on the North will continue (i.e., no cease-fire) until (a) terrorism, armed attacks, and armed resistance to pacification efforts in the South stop, and (b) communications on the networks out of the North are conducted entirely in uncoded form.

Responses to the above actions are estimated to be as follows:

To South Vietnamese Air Strikes—

North Vietnam: Has limited capability to deal with very low-level bombing even by A–1H aircraft. Would stir world opinion. Would request ChiCom air defense. Would probably increase ground strength in Laos (including in the Panhandle), and if the strikes began to hurt, would probably stimulate increased Viet Cong activity in South Vietnam.

Chinese: Would probably supply North Vietnam jet air defense and buttress their anti-aircraft capability. Would possibly (but not likely) undertake troop deployments along the South China border and, on a limited basis, into North Laos.

Soviets: Would probably do nothing more than make strenuous diplomatic efforts, including a probably successful effort to convene a UN meeting on Southeast Asia.

To Farmgate (B–57) Air Strikes—

North Vietnam: Same as above.

Chinese: Same as above except might attempt retaliatory air attacks against the South and somewhat more likely to undertake troop movements (above). Would make diplomatic-propaganda efforts to attribute attacks to U.S. and to label U.S. as aggressor.

Soviets: Same as above.

To Overt U.S. Air Strikes—

North Vietnam: Same as above except might be fearful enough to be willing to reduce its support of VC (perhaps also of PL), but would probably be prevented by Chinese.

Chinese: Would attempt to provide North Vietnam with air defense, but would hesitate to commit its limited air power against U.S. high-performance aircraft. Might attempt retaliatory air attacks against the South. Would probably move troops to South China border, and, on limited basis, into North Laos, and perhaps Burma and Thailand. Might engage in harassing actions elsewhere (e.g., off-shore islands). Not likely to send ground forces into South Vietnam unless North Vietnam is invaded by ground forces or China is bombed.

Soviets: Would intensify diplomatic efforts. Possibly take limited “threatening” military action and engage in harassing actions elsewhere (e.g., Berlin, Cuba).

Chinese/North Vietnamese Capabilities (if no interdiction):

In the wet season (May–November) they could initially deploy and logistically support in Southeast Asia, less Burma, about 9 infantry division-equivalents—some 95,000 troops. This force would probably be armor and artillery deficient. In the dry season, some 250,000 troops could be initially deployed, with more armor and artillery. The wet season forces are capable of starting their movement within one or two days; all could be across borders within 10 or so days. Wet season movement against light opposition would be at a rate of 6–8 miles per day (dry season movement at about 12 or so miles per day). The Chinese could simultaneously deploy up to 7 infantry division-equivalents into Burma. The North Vietnamese have no significant air force but have substantial AA capability (radar-controlled 57mm, 85mm and new 100mm guns), particularly against medium-height aircraft. The Chinese could deploy about 400 MIG-15, -17 or -19 jet fighters and about 150 jet light bombers, plus a few piston light bombers. The Chinese-North Vietnamese naval capability is limited, their major threat being Chinese PT boats and submarines (reportedly some 40 PT boats and 4–6 submarines).

16. The possible enemy military reactions described above are arranged below in ascending order of magnitude (and, probably, in descending order of probability). With respect to each such reaction, the possible U.S. military responses are considered: a. Greatly expanded insurgency in South Vietnam (possibly with sizable infiltration by the North Vietnamese army). (1) Redouble efforts with existing South Vietnamese forces augmented by U.S. ground forces prepositioned in South Vietnam or on board ship nearby.

(2) Intensify operations against North Vietnam; tell them that increased actions are in response to increased insurgency.

b. Drive toward Mekong by Pathet Lao with substantial North Vietnamese augmentation. (1) Neither FAR/Neutral, Thai, nor prepositioned U.S. brigade in Thailand could deal effectively with this threat. Meeting the challenge on the ground might require an additional two or more brigades plus additional tactical air.

(2) Intensified operations against North Vietnam

c. Chinese “Farmgate-like” attacks on South Vietnam. (1) Defend with prepositioned U.S. interceptor capability.

(2) Destroy on the ground their aircraft based in North Vietnam.

d. Overt Chinese Air Strikes. (1) Same as c(1) above.

(2) Attack bases in China. May be necessary to augment U.S. air capability to gain air supremacy.

e. Overt North Vietnamese Invasion of South Vietnam and Laos accompanied by Chinese occupation of North Laos.

Step up air attacks, and provide the following forces (implementing OPLAN 32,2 Phase III) in addition to the D-Day forces: (a) Ground— 3 divisions

1 reduced division

1 division in reserve

1 airborne brigade

1 mechanized brigade

(b) Air—10 tactical fighter squadrons to Southeast Asia and Western Pacific

(Note: All of this force could be deployed by 45 days from “go.”)

f. Chinese/North Vietnamese invasion of Southeast Asia with up to 24 divisions (some 250,000 troops).

(1) Provide the following forces (implementing OPLAN 32, Phase IV) in addition to the D-Day forces: (a) Ground— 4 divisions

1 reduced division

2 divisions in reserve

(b) Air—13 tactical fighter squadrons to Southeast Asia and Western Pacific

(c) Naval—1 attack carrier group

(Note: All of this force could be deployed by 60 days from “go.”)

(2) Alternatively, or additionally, deploy additional air and naval forces to the Western Pacific for the purpose of attacking mainland China with the objective of causing the Chinese to stop their aggression.

[Paragraph (3) (less than 1 line of source text) not declassified]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. X, Memos. Top Secret. No drafting information appears on the source text. Attachment A, “Possible SEATO Nation Contributions,” and Attachment B, “Major Forces Deployed and Alerted on D–12,” are not printed.

2 CINCPAC OPLAN 32–64, November 6, 1963, “Defense of Mainland Southeast Asia.” (Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Paper, Nov. 64, Vol. IV, JCS)

172. Summary Record of the National Security Council Executive Committee Meeting 172. Summary Record of the National Security Council Executive Committee Meeting1

Washington, May 24, 1964, 11 a.m.

PRESENT

Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Director McCone, General Taylor, Under Secretary Ball, Director Bell, Assistant Secretary Manning, Assistant Secretary Bundy, Assistant Secretary McNaughton, General Goodpaster, Special Assistant Sullivan, Mr. Chester Cooper, Mr. William Colby, Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Mr. Douglass Cater, Mr. Bromley Smith

Secretary Rusk opened the meeting by stating his general view toward the entire Southeast Asia problem. He reviewed current efforts to seal the Cambodian border and to uphold the government in Laos.

Referring to the proposal for a Congressional resolution,2 Secretary Rusk said it is most important that we not put the President in a precarious position. For example, General Khanh’s position is somewhat difficult for us to defend until he takes certain actions to damp down religious controversy and internal bickering in South Vietnam. We must remember that while the South Vietnamese are not fighting for the U.S., they must create an image of being willing and able to fight for themselves.

With reference to the proposal to assume larger responsibility of Vietnamese conduct of the war,3 Secretary Rusk expressed his doubts that we should try to persuade Khanh to accept a plan involving U.S. officers giving direct orders to Vietnamese officers. He preferred a parallel command arrangement. He feared that if we got too deeply into operations of the Vietnamese military, we would be open to accusations of colonialism. We would be giving Khanh’s enemies a chance to move against him in South Vietnam.

Secretary McNamara said the first issue which should be presented to the President is whether we believe that additional U.S. efforts within South Vietnam will or will not prevent further deterioration in South Vietnam.

Secretary Rusk developed his belief that we should straighten out the Laotian situation, possibly by moving against North Vietnam, and if we succeed in this, we would then straighten out South Vietnam. Secretary McNamara commented that we had not studied the scenario for Laos. Does it provide another road to the north? If so, it required study by the group. Mr. William Bundy was assigned the task of preparing a Laotian scenario which emphasizes the link between the Laotian problem and the South Vietnamese problem.

Secretary Rusk referred to four preconditions which must be met before we agree to a Laotian conference. Copies of Vientiane telegram 1407 were circulated (copy attached).4 This cable contains a summary of Souvanna’s press conference.

Secretary McNamara asked how we would get the Pathet Lao to withdraw from Laos. How could we force this? Secretary Rusk replied we could put pressure on Hanoi and Peking on the basis of the Geneva Accords of 1962. If we were not successful in getting a conference on our terms, we might attack East Laos and North Vietnam. This action thus becomes our path to the north.

General Taylor said we can go into North Vietnam only for both reasons, i.e., Laos and South Vietnam. Secretary McNamara said that if we went via the Laotian routes, the time schedule might be as short as fifteen to thirty days.

Secretary Rusk repeated his view that Laos is one chapter and South Vietnam is another and separate chapter. Mr. McGeorge Bundy commented that we could not separate the political and military chapters on Laos and South Vietnam. We will have to crank in any Laos scenario.

Secretary Rusk said we might accomplish our purpose in phases. The first phase would be diplomatic activity in an effort to get a conference based on our preconditions. If we get a conference on our terms, we will have achieved our objective. Phase two would involve the situation if there were no conference. The question immediately arises as to whether we should use force to get a conference. In phase two U.S. pressure would be exerted first to restore the Plaine des Jarres in Laos to the neutralists, force the removal of Pathet Lao forces from Laos, and then deal with North Vietnam. He mentioned that consideration was being given to a plan which would provide for a UN Security Council resolution authorizing a four-power commission, including teams to inspect the Cambodian/Vietnamese border.

Director McCone expressed his view that if we go into North Vietnam we should go in hard and not limit our action to pinpricks. General Taylor commented that a surprise attack from the air could be very effective, but thereafter attacks would be less effective and losses would go up.

Secretary McNamara pointed out that we had three kinds of military force: A South Vietnamese air force comprising some fifty fighter bombers; a much larger force consisting of South Vietnamese air forces plus Farmgate; and U.S. air power.

Secretary Rusk expressed his view that we should hit light at first so that North Vietnamese prestige was not involved. Ho Chi Minh could back out of the situation if his prestige was not deeply engaged. The Secretary referred again to the importance of getting the maximum out of General Khanh, such as actions which would induce full Vietnamese support of the Khanh government before we go to Congress asking U.S. support of the South Vietnamese government. Secretary McNamara’s response was to ask what specifically do we do. Can General Khanh do what we ask him to do in the light of his restricted political power? Secretary Rusk said we do not go to war for a government which is more interested in quarreling than in fighting the Viet Cong.

Mr. Sullivan summarized his proposal to send many more U.S. advisers to Vietnam so that General Khanh can carry out some of the actions he is prepared to take. Many things that the South Vietnamese government wants to do are not being done merely because there are not enough Vietnamese officials who know what to do.

Director McCone said the proposal to send more U.S. advisers might produce a reverse reaction, i.e., there were so many Americans that the Vietnamese would take the position that they had no responsibility.

Secretary McNamara referred to another major issue, i.e., can U.S. air stop a Chinese Communist movement into Laos and Vietnam? Our inability to halt such a movement from the air means that we will need to be prepared to put U.S. forces on the ground in Southeast Asia. He said our objective was to find the best way to deter the North Vietnamese from attacking South Vietnam, and, if the Chinese Communists attack in response to U.S. actions, the best way to defeat them.

Secretary Rusk said we should consider moving a U.S. division in Korea to Southeast Asia, at which time we would make public a declaration that any attack on South Korea would be met by the use of nuclear weapons.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy said we need an operational plan on targets in North Vietnam. General Taylor said the Chiefs and CINCPAC were at work on such a plan which involved dividing targets into three categories.

Secretary Rusk said he favored cutting down on dependents in South Vietnam beginning now. They should be returning in small groups so that they would not be a problem to deal with on D-Day. Secretary McNamara said he thought this would give a wrong signal to the South Vietnamese, i.e., that we were preparing to withdraw. All agreed that the dependents should come out on the day the President makes a speech outlining our plans.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy said the President was interested in seeing what could be done if we decide to intensify covert actions now being undertaken. It was agreed that there is little more which can be down in this area.

There was a lengthy discussion of what was called interlarding our political encadrement as explained in the paper listed as Tab 3.5 After Mr. Sullivan explained the concept, both Secretary McNamara and Director McCone pointed out that even if this plan were put into effect, it would have little effect in South Vietnam in the near future.

General Taylor said his reaction to the plan was to call it the “third coup.” As he saw it, it followed a chief of staff concept. He said Khanh would have to want it badly or he would not accept it. He felt it raised the question as to whose war, ours or South Vietnam’s. He thought it would have a bad effect on Vietnamese conduct of the war. He doubted that sufficient U.S. personnel could be found to implement it.

Secretary McNamara said that if he were President he would want to ask his advisers this question: “Do I want to use military force in Southeast Asia in the next two or three months?” This decision is not affected by whether or not we decide to attempt interlarding of U.S. forces. However, the President now appears to look at interlarding as an alternative or a substitute for the use of force.

Secretary Rusk said that a better situation in Saigon is a supporting requirement to a decision to go north. Congressional and world opinion must be given this reassurance. Secretary McNamara said the proposed actions in South Vietnam were not a substitute for the use of force. The attempt to take over more of the direction of the war in South Vietnam was extremely complex. We lacked sufficient U.S. personnel. General Khanh could be removed suddenly as head of the government by assassination or by coup. We must concentrate on the most crucial points and acknowledge that the measures to support South Vietnam are restricted. They will not substitute for the use of force against North Vietnam. We do not have a solution and these proposals will not save us.

General Taylor said we should try the interlarding concept on a pilot province basis.

Secretary McNamara said that where our proposals are being carried out now, the situation is still going to hell. We are continuing to lose. Nothing we are now doing will win.

General Taylor replied that it was too early to say that Khanh was losing. To reach the conclusion that he is not going to win out is unwise. We should give him four or five months before we decide that the actions he is taking will not be successful.

Mr. Sullivan commented that all we are doing now ends up with Viet Cong assassinations which remove promising provincial leaders as soon as they begin to act effectively. Secretary McNamara added that the leadership in the provinces is worse now than before because most present province leaders lack governmental experience.

Mr. Sullivan said General Khanh can’t implement his program, which is acceptable to us, because he lacks the personnel resources to carry it out.

Secretary Rusk said that, if necessary, the U.S. is prepared to take military action against North Vietnam and Communist China to keep Laos and South Vietnam from being overrun by the Communists. Thus, we are obliged to do everything we can to strengthen South Vietnam because the alternative is the use of force.

Secretary McNamara said the probability is that further weakening will occur in South Vietnam. The question is whether we should hit North Vietnam now or whether we can wait. South Vietnam is weaker now than it was in January, but we can ride through for a few additional weeks, even with further weakening. Thus, we do not have to act now, but we may have to use military force later.

Secretary Rusk said we must act for reasons arising out of the situation in Southeast Asia and not for reasons arising out of the situation in the U.S. He hoped that we could get better reporting out of South Vietnam where all is not doom and gloom. We must get better information here and in Vietnam in order to present a brighter picture of the actual situation in Vietnam. We badly need actions in the information field.

General Taylor commented that we need a government-wide information program. He urged that senior officials here and U.S. officers returning from Vietnam be used in this program.

Secretary Rusk said we must counter public reports that the President is not acting because of the upcoming elections. He thought that a major speech by the President was required soon. It would not need to contain much new, but he and other officials must say the same thing over and over again. He pointed out that while he had said nothing new in his last speech, the press had called attention to one idea as if it were new when in fact he had been saying it for months.

General Taylor commented that the South Vietnam government isn’t going to lose rapidly or win rapidly. Secretary McNamara restated his view that the situation in the provinces is much worse, the number of desertions has risen, and recruitment in South Vietnamese units is not adequate. He asked whether anything that we did could improve the situation as long as Viet Cong harassment continues. His personal view was that it was very doubtful whether we could affect the deteriorating situation in South Vietnam unless the Viet Cong could be stopped. If the Communist activity could be halted, what we are now doing in Vietnam would definitely improve the situation. General Taylor said the military would prefer to wait until fall before military action was taken. Better equipment would be available in the field and the administration of our military effort would be further along. However, prompt military action could be taken and it would serve as a shot in the arm for General Khanh and possibly be useful in dealing with the situation in Laos.

Secretary McNamara expressed doubt that we could get at the North Vietnamese situation via the Laos route, as suggested by Secretary Rusk.

Bromley Smith6

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on SEA, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

2 See Document 169.

3 Document 170.

4 Dated May 24, not attached. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 Laos)

5 Document 170.

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

173. Draft Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 173. Draft Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, May 25, 1964.

SUBJECT

Basic Recommendation and Projected Course of Action on Southeast Asia

I. Basic Recommendation

1. It is recommended that you make a Presidential decision that the U.S. will use selected and carefully graduated military force against North Vietnam, under the following conditions: (1) after appropriate diplomatic and political warning and preparation, and (2) unless such warning and preparation-in combination with other efforts-should produce a sufficient improvement of non-Communist prospects in South Vietnam and in Laos to make military action against North Vietnam unnecessary.

2. This basic Presidential decision is recommended on these premises: (1) that the U.S. cannot tolerate the loss of Southeast Asia to Communism;

(2) that without a decision to resort to military action if necessary the present prospect is not hopeful, in South Vietnam or in Laos;

(3) that a decision to use force if necessary, backed by resolute and extensive deployment, and conveyed by every possible means to our adversaries, gives the best present chance of avoiding the actual use of such force.

3. It is further recommended that our clear purpose in this decision should be to use all our influence to bring about a major reduction or elimination of North Vietnamese interference in Laos and in South Vietnam, and not to unroll a scenario aimed at the use of force as an end in itself. We will have further recommendations on the ways of stating U.S. objectives.

4. It is further recommended that in the execution of this decision all separate elements of the problem (political, diplomatic, economic, and military) and all separate geographical elements of it (in Laos, in South Vietnam, in Cambodia, and in North Vietnam itself) should be treated as parts of a single problem: the protection of Southeast Asia from further Communist encroachment.

5. It is the hope and best estimate of most of your advisers that a decision of this kind can be executed without bringing a major military reply from Red China, and still less from the Soviet Union. It is also the prevailing estimate that selective and carefully prepared military action against North Vietnam will not trigger acts of terror and military operations by the Viet Cong which would engulf the Khanh regime. Nevertheless, it is recognized that in making this decision we must accept two risks: (1) the risk of escalation toward major land war or the use of nuclear weapons; (2) the risk of a reply in South Vietnam itself which would lose that country to neutralism and so eventually to Communism.

II. An outline of the proposed sequence of actions

It is our current estimate that the actions which follow should be taken in the order in which they are listed. Especially in the later stages it might well be important to modify the sequence in the light of the development of events. In each major stage, moreover, there would be a number of connected actions. Finally, it must be remembered that the enemy has choices, too, and that this sequence might therefore be truncated or drastically modified by the actions of others.

(1) A Presidential decision as outlined in I. above.

(2) The establishment of communication with Hanoi (through the Canadians) and with other adversaries of major importance [less than 1 1ine of source text not declassified].

The purpose of these communications would be to make very clear both the seriousness of U.S. will and the limited character of U.S. objectives. We intend that Communism shall not take over Southeast Asia, but we do not intend or desire the destruction of the Hanoi regime. If terror and subversion end, major improvement in relations is possible. It is only if they do not end that trouble is coming.

(3) A Honolulu conference and discussions with Thailand.

This meeting, which might occur early next week, would be directed to the establishment of full understanding with Ambassador Lodge and MACV, and to possible intense consultations with Ambassador Unger and Ambassador Martin from Thailand. At the same time, or just after, we would communicate our basic determination and our opening strategy to the governments of Thailand, Laos and South Vietnam. This Honolulu meeting would imply major decisions also to intensify our efforts in South Vietnam (along lines to be presented in a separate paper).

(4) Action at the UN.

This would probably take a double form: (a) in the broadest terms, we would present the problem of Communist aggression in Southeast Asia, together with much hitherto secret evidence proving Hanoi’s responsibility;

(b) in parliamentary terms, we would probably ask [for] a resolution confined to the Pathet Lao aggression in Laos. It is the current estimate of our UN experts that on a wider resolution involving South Vietnam we might not have the necessary seven votes for affirmative action. The one thing we do not want is to take our basic political case to the UN and fail to muster a majority.

The basic object of this exercise would be a double one: (a) to give worldwide publicity to the basic problem through the voice of Stevenson, and

(b) to make it perfectly plain if we move to further action that we had done our best at the UN.

(5) A formal announcement by us and our friends that the requirements of the UN resolution (whether or not it was vetoed) are not being met.

The purpose of this step is to clarify again that we have tried the UN and that it is not our fault that there has been an inadequate response.

(6) Consultation of SEATO allies.

We believe this should take place both by a meeting of the SEATO Council in Bangkok and by more intense consultations in the capitals of the more energetic members of SEATO, notably Australia, New Zealand, Great Britain, The Philippines, and Thailand. We do not expect Pak or French support. The object would be to obtain basic agreement on the next steps toward action and commitment of forces at as high a level as possible.

(7) The first deployments toward Southeast Asia of U.S. and, hopefully, allied forces.

It is our recommendation that these deployments be on a very large scale, from the beginning, so as to maximize their deterrent impact and their menace. We repeat our view that a pound of threat is worth an ounce of action—as long as we are not bluffing.

(8) A Congressional Resolution.

We agree that no such resolution should be sought until Civil Rights is off the Senate calendar, and we believe that the preceding stages can be conducted in such a way as to leave a free choice on the timing of such a resolution. Some of us recommend that we aim at presenting and passing the resolution between the passage of Civil Rights and the convening of the Republican Convention. Others believe that delay may be to our advantage and that we could as well handle the matter later in the summer, in spite of domestic politics.

(9) A further and expanded deployment of military force toward the theater.

The object of this continuing deployment, after the passage of the resolution, is to give still more time for threat to do the work of action.

(10) Initial strike against the north.

This would be very carefully designed to have more deterrent than destructive impact, as far as possible. This action would be accompanied by the simultaneous withdrawal of U.S. dependents from South Vietnam and by active diplomatic offensives in the Security Council, or in a Geneva Conference, or both, aimed at restoring the peace throughout the area. This peacekeeping theme will have been at the center of the whole enterprise from the beginning.

McG. B.2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Luncheon with the President, Vol. I, Part 1. Top Secret Sensitive. Also published in Declassified Documents, 2979, 473B. Bundy sent this draft memorandum to Johnson under a covering memorandum with the explanation that it was his effort to put in one document both Rusk’s and McNamara’s thinking. He concluded: “There are several holes in this discussion, most notably on action in South Vietnam and on precise U. S. objectives, but there is more thinking on these topics than this particular paper shows.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Special Meetings on SE Asia, Vol. I)

2 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

174. Special National Intelligence Estimate 174. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, May 25, 1964.

SNIE 50–2–64

PROBABLE CONSEQUENCES OF CERTAIN US ACTIONS WITH RESPECT TO VIETNAM AND LAOS

The Problem

To estimate the consequences of certain US and US-sponsored actions against North Vietnam and Communist-held Laos, the objectives of which would be to induce the DRV to bring about a major reduction of Viet Cong insurrectionary activity in South Vietnam and to respect the 1962 Geneva agreement on Laos.

Assumptions2

I. The actions to be taken, primarily air and naval, would begin with GVN (US-assisted) operations against the DRV and Communist-held Laos, and might subsequently involve overt US military actions. They would be on a graduated scale of intensity, ranging from reconnaissance, threats, cross-border operations, and limited strikes on logistical targets supporting DRV efforts in South Vietnam and Laos, to strike (if necessary) on a growing number of military and economic targets in the DRV. In the absence of all-out attacks by the DRV or Communist China, the measures foreseen would not involve attacks on population centers or resort to nuclear weapons.

II. That these actions would be accompanied by these US moves: A. Through various channels, conveying the limited nature of US intentions to Hanoi, Peiping, and Moscow.

B. Stationing initially some 5,000 US combat troops and certain additional air elements in northeastern Thailand, with a possible increase at a later stage.

C. Giving the enemy tangible evidence of US seriousness of purpose by readying and deploying strong US strike units—naval, air, and ground assault—to the Western Pacific and the South China Sea.

D. Providing increased military support, including air defenses, to South Vietnam. Further, stiffening over-all GVN military and administrative capabilities by the infusion of substantial additional US personnel.

E. Acting diplomatically to avert a new Geneva conference, at least until it was judged that the above actions had improved the bargaining position of the US and its associates.

Conclusions

A. DRV reactions to US reparatory and low-scale actions-force deployments, serious threats, or GVN/Farmgate attacks on outlying targets in Communist-held Laos or in the DRV-would probably be to rouse world opinion against the US, hoping that a new Geneva conference or UN action would result and bring a cessation of attacks. We think that the DRV, while taking various precautionary measures, would order the VC and PL to refrain from dramatic new attacks, and might reduce the level of the insurrections for the moment. Communist China and the USSR would both support this course. The Communists would probably indicate that the outcome of a conference should be to stabilize the situation in South Vietnam and Laos. Their intention, however, would be to preserve Communist gains and assets in these two countries and to resume the insurrectionary campaigns at a later date.

B. If these initial responses did not succeed, and attacks on North Vietnam continued, it is likely that the Communists would intensify their political action efforts against the US course. Hanoi might intermittently step up the tempo of the insurrections in South Vietnam and Laos, while still seeking a negotiated settlement. If these tactics, too, failed, the scale of attacks broadened, and North Vietnam began to suffer considerable destruction, the DRV leaders would have to ask themselves whether the tactics they were pursuing were worth the destruction of their country. We are unable to set any meaningful odds for the course DRV leaders would adopt at this juncture, though we incline to the view that they would lower their terms for a negotiated outcome; they would do so in the interests of preserving their regime and in the expectation of being able to renew the insurrections in South Vietnam and Laos at a later date. There would nevertheless be a significant danger that they would fight, believing that the US would still not be willing to undertake a major ground war, or that if it was, it could ultimately be defeated by the methods which were successful against the French.

C. Communist China almost certainly would not wish to become involved in hostilities with US forces. It would accordingly proceed with caution, and though it would make various threatening gestures, would not risk any major ground action unless US forces attacked Chinese territory or US ground forces moved deep into the DRV. We believe that the USSR would refrain from military actions in the area, and would not provoke a major crisis with the US elsewhere. Its primary concern would be to exert its influence in a manner to insure a negotiated settlement.

D. Clear-cut achievement of the US objectives as stated in the Problem would signify not that the Communist threat in Southeast Asia was removed, but simply that time had been gained for further constructive action to deal with the threat. The US commitment would in itself improve anti-Communist morale and improve the chances for such action. On the other hand, to the degree that the consequences of the US action were ambiguous or unsuccessful, there would almost certainly be a strong tendency for morale and discipline in South Vietnam and Laos to deteriorate rapidly-perhaps more rapidly than if the US had not begun its intensified effort. The deterioration would be felt generally through non-Communist Asia.

[Here follows the “Discussion” section.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. X, Memos. Top Secret; Limited Distribution; Controlled Dissem. According to a note on the cover sheet, the CIA, the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State and Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this estimate. This estimate was submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board, with the Directors of INR, DIA, and NSA concurring and the representative of the AEC and the Assistant Director of the FBI abstaining on the grounds that the subject was outside their jurisdiction. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 30A.

2 These assumptions have been given to the intelligence community for the purpose of this estimate and are not meant to represent the full range of options open to the US. The intelligence community is not asked to assess the consequences either (1) of undertaking other broad courses, or (2) of not undertaking the general course discussed in this estimate. [Footnote in the source text.]

175. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 175. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, May 26, 1964—3 p.m.

2314. Eyes only for Rusk and McNamara from Lodge.

1. Recalling my conversation of last Thursday,2 I asked General Khanh today, Monday, what actual evidence the GVN has against General Kim and General Xuan.

2. General Khanh said that one of the key figures in the whole French neutralist conspiracy is Tran Dinh Lam, who is a French citizen and French officer, who arrived in Saigon quite unexpectedly, and whose arrival attracted a good deal of attention. Khanh says that they have the following information: a. General Kim, in his capacity as Secretary General of the Military Revolutionary Committee and as the member of the Military Revolutionary Committee for Foreign Affairs, gave the order to bring Lam back from France.

b. Kim was involved in the coup of November 11, 1960, a coup the promoters of which “were closely tied with the French” and they were backing Kim as the new “chief of government.”

3. These facts have just come to light as a result of the analysis which General Khiem is making of the captured Diem documents. The information in the documents is absolutely definite, said Khanh, and there can be no doubt about it.

4. Therefore, the outlook is that General Don will probably fare quite well, that Generals Kim and Xuan will not, and that it is a tossup on General Dinh. The trial will be in Dalat this week. The implications for General Minh may be far-reaching.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Top Secret. Sent to the Office of the Secretary of Defense on receipt in the Department of State.

2 May 21; see footnote 3, Document 165.

176. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State 176. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State1

Saigon, May 26, 1964.

Dear Dean: This is for you, the President, Bob McNamara, and whoever else you think needs to know. It is definitely not a subject which should get into the cable traffic.

General Khanh told me on May 25 that when Diem was shot he had in his hand a brief case containing one million dollars U.S. currency “in the largest denominations”. He said that General Minh took possession of the brief case and has never yet surrendered it. He added that General Minh at the same time had taken possession of forty kilograms of gold bars.

I advised General Khanh not to make this public lest it shake public confidence here in all generals. He hopes that General Minh will make his exit quietly.

As ever yours,

Cabot L.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192. Correspondence—L. Top Secret.

177. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President 177. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President1

Washington, May 26, 1964.

During and since my visit to South Viet-Nam,2 USIA has given the highest priority to altering its program so as to meet the urgent needs of Southeast Asia. In this connection, I have: 1. Increased the USIA staff in Viet-Nam by adding ten new positions.

2. Assigned three officers to Viet-Nam on temporary duty to assist in radio program production and other information activities.

3. Authorized the direct transfer of personnel from any post in the world to fill needs in South Viet-Nam.

4. Facilitated an agreement with the Defense Department to train an additional 42 Army officers who will serve as psychological warfare and civil affairs advisors at the province level. This will permit a vitally-needed expansion of the psychological warfare program in the countryside.

5. Recommended to AID (and secured its agreement) that a $278,000 “petty cash” fund be set up to insure that the information program in the provinces is not hampered because of lack of funds to cover such items as paper, ink or spare parts.

6. Increased Voice of America broadcasting into North Viet-Nam and made arrangements for a broad expansion of VOA broadcasts in Vietnamese in early July.

7. Secured the agreement of the Government of Viet-Nam to the installation of a portable 50 kilowatt transmitter to be located near Hue for broadcasting into North Viet-Nam (this is a joint USIA-Defense project, with Defense providing most of the money).

8. Arranged to fly, with the help of the Defense Department, three 50 kilowatt short-wave transmitters from Liberia to the Philippines so as to increase our Southeast Asia coverage by fifty per cent.

9. Agreed to provide a USIA officer as an engineering advisor to Radio Viet-Nam.

10. Asked the Australian Government to provide a program advisor for Radio Viet-Nam.

11. Placed on duty a USIA officer to advise the Government of Viet-Nam on motion picture production and have agreed to provide a production specialist for the GVN printing plant.

12. Agreed to provide a USIA officer who will serve as personal press relations advisor to Premier Khanh (this officer; who previously gave award-winning service in Viet-Nam, has been pulled out of France and is now enroute to Saigon).

13. Submitted a comprehensive country-wide information program for approval of the Government of Viet-Nam (this has been approved in principle and the GVN is now being pressed to implement the program with speed).

14. Set up in Washington a special research unit to produce materials on Viet-Nam for use by VOA and other facilities.

Following are more details on the actions listed above:

VOA PROGRAMMING TO VIET-NAM

On May 3 we introduced a new half-hour of prime evening time broadcasting to Viet-Nam. This raised to three hours per day our program designed to influence listeners in the North. By mid-July, VOA will broadcast a solid evening block of five and one-half hours, from 7:00 pm until 12:30 am Saigon time, plus one-half hour each morning.

To sustain this expanded schedule VOA is recruiting 12 new Vietnamese employees for work in Washington, has stationed an American officer in Saigon to develop new program materials on the scene, and is increasing use of Vietnamese students and other Vietnamese nationals in the United States. These additional resources will provide us with a great deal more material on North Viet-Nam than we have been able to get in the past.

USIA and the Army are cooperating in the crash construction of a 50 kilowatt medium-wave transmitter in Hue. Components are being flown from Liberia and the United States. The transmitter should be relaying VOA by July 18 and should give competitive coverage of North Viet-Nam unless the Communists resort to jamming.

In addition, the three 50 kilowatt short-wave transmitters to be flown from Liberia to the Philippines next month are expected to be operational by July 18. The Philippines is an ideal distance from Viet-Nam for short-wave coverage. These three transmitters will provide a good signal for a full program day.

I discussed with you our need for a megawatt medium-wave transmitter in the area in order for us to compete with Peking and Hanoi. I want to emphasize, however, that this facility is not of immediate importance because 18 to 24 months would be required for its construction. We have rushed, therefore, to install the kind of facilities that can have some immediate influence on the situation.

COORDINATION OF INFORMATION OPERATIONS WITHIN THE U.S. MISSION IN SAIGON

General lack of coordination has been, in my view, our gravest problem in terms of the information-psychological program. You are aware, I believe, that in accepting Barry Zorthian as the Public Affairs Officer last January, Ambassador Lodge specified in a telegram to Ed Murrow that Zorthian “will not have responsibility for press relations (newspaper, magazines, television, radio) as I do this work myself.”3 In addition the military had its own information program. The general result was that no one could be sure who was responsible for what, which is why I asked in my earlier memorandum to you4 that Zorthian be given over-all responsibility in this area.

There has been considerable progress in recent weeks. Zorthian has been made Chairman of a mission-wide Psychological Operations Committee and a Joint Field Service Center has been created to merge the resources of all U.S. agencies for the psychological effort.

I emphasize, however, that Zorthian and the USIA staff are still not in a position where they have any clear responsibility for dealing with the American press. I do not say this to suggest that giving them such responsibility would end the spate of critical articles written by American newsmen. Many, such as those by Jim Lucas in the Washington Daily News, are the products of reporters who go out into the field, gain the confidence of our soldiers and then pick up bits of information which they turn into stories that are not at all helpful to our over-all mission. These are reporters who will be influenced little, if at all, by government press officers. I do believe, however, that Zorthian and other USIA officers ought to be free to make whatever effort they can to inform and give guidance to American newsmen.

One aspect of the reports by American newsmen that has bothered me was their tendency to emphasize American mistakes and acts that could be called “brutal” and to give little coverage to Viet Cong atrocities. USIA has recommended that a special Army photographic team be sent to South Viet-Nam to cover combat actions and to make available to American and other newsmen the kind of photographs that put across the stories we want told. The military have agreed to do whatever is necessary.

COOPERATION WITH VIET-NAM GOVERNMENT

Our ability to move on the Country-wide Information Plan depends largely on the extent to which we can budge the GVN to go along.

The GVN has set up a counterpart to the U.S. Mission’s Psychological Operations Committee, and a joint committee representing the two governments began meeting immediately after my departure from Saigon.

This represents a significant step in view of the fact that no national information plan existed under previous GVN regimes and we could get no cooperation in producing one. My officers report that the current government is moving much more slowly than we like, but we are prodding them in Saigon, and I have indicated to Zorthian my willingness to write the Minister of Information from this end to urge greater speed on his part.

SUMMARY

USIA has given its highest priority to South Viet-Nam. In terms of its own program and that of the Government of South Viet-Nam, we are moving as rapidly in Viet-Nam as is possible and sparing no facility or personnel in our efforts to see that the rest of the world knows what is at stake in Viet-Nam and Southeast Asia.

Carl

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol X. Secret.

2 Rowan accompanied Rusk to South Vietnam, April 17–19.

3 Telegram 1285 from Saigon, January 10. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 Document 122.

178. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 178. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, May 26, 1964.

SOUTH VIETNAM

Here in brief are the major impressions I developed during my two-week stay with Ambassador Lodge in Saigon.

Progress of the War

I cannot answer the question of whether we are winning or losing. The situation varies from place to place. If I were forced to sum it up, I would say that there has been a slight improvement overall in the last month, but that the trend has definitely not yet fumed in our favor. Politically, the most damaging aspect of the military situation is the fact that Saigon is still in the center of a doughnut of Viet Cong controlled territory. Little or no progress has been made in clearing and holding these critical provinces surrounding Saigon. The impact of this on the psychology of everyone living in the capital (including the U.S. press) is very depressing.

Efforts of the Government of Vietnam

On the debit side of the ledger, General Khanh has not been able to attract the loyalty of the politicians in Saigon. Without a dramatic change in the military situation (either a success or something like an action against the North) he may never be able to. The war has gone on so long without a decisive turn one way or the other that people in Saigon have adjusted to it as a way of life. Consequently, political bickering among factions in the French fashion continues. The longer this continues, the weaker the central government becomes.

There is a definite possibility of a religious war between Catholics and Buddhists. It is going to take all the pressure we can bring to bear on both sides to keep it from crippling the war effort. Lodge is doing his most effective work on this problem and may be able to squeak through the next few critical weeks without a religious crisis.

Vietnamese bureaucracy is still having the greatest difficulty in cranking itself up to fighting the war in the countryside; this is partly because of the shortage of trained people and partly because there just isn’t the necessary sense of urgency.

On the credit side of the ledger, Khanh has gotten the services of as good a group of civilian ministers and sub-ministers as Vietnam has ever had. This is particularly true in budget, economics and finance. Most of them are younger people who have been trained in the West. They are by no means perfect, but they are head and shoulders above the average.

The psychological boost of the President’s message to Congress requesting a supplemental appropriation was great. We were able to follow it up quickly with negotiations on assistance for fiscal ’65. As a result there is now a feeling in some of the ministries in Saigon to get out and spend whatever amount of money is necessary to get goods and services out to the provinces. It will take a much greater U.S. effort, however, to make the civil service outside of Saigon function with any effect at the grass roots.

U.S. Efforts in Vietnam

Our own team in Saigon is badly coordinated, and some parts of it are in a shambles. The Embassy is functioning well in dealing with immediate political problems, such as the religious crisis, and damping down of coup plots and rumors. However, Ambassador Lodge has not yet developed an instrument for managing the total U.S. effort. He is not particularly interested in performing this function himself, and he has nobody on his staff who seems to be able to do it.

The military command (MACV) has been vastly improved by the recent reorganization; and such coordination between U.S. agencies as there is takes place because of the efforts of General Westmoreland. He accomplishes this by taking the Deputy AID Director and the USIS Chief with him on his trips to the provinces and using these occasions to discuss and coordinate specific actions under the pacification program. I doubt that General Westmoreland can keep this up for very long in view of his other responsibilities; and in any event it tends to leave the Embassy out of the picture and increase the danger of having another split in our own ranks.

The AID Mission is in a very bad state. There is no leadership, morale is low, and consequently there is bickering between Mission personnel. I would give first priority to effecting the changes in AID personnel in Saigon which have already been agreed here in Washington.

Suggestions

I have brought back two very strong personal opinions: First, the United States must take a fairly dramatic step soon against the North, not only to respond to Hanoi’s actions in Laos and increased Viet Cong activity in Vietnam, but also to develop a sense of urgency in GVN civil and military personnel. A bit of a shock is needed. There is a risk that the structure in Saigon is already so weak that it might not be able to withstand a strong reaction from Hanoi; but I am convinced that the structure will get weaker, rather than stronger, if we do nothing.

The second area in which we must act very quickly is the strengthening of our own organization in Vietnam and getting it much more deeply into the battle in the provinces than it now is.

We must find a civilian U.S. official who can compensate for Ambassador Lodge’s lack of managerial talent. He has got to be a man whom the Ambassador trusts and of sufficient stature to be able to work easily with General Westmoreland, CIA, and the AID Director.

We must speed up the additions to and changes in the personnel of the AID Mission, which we have already agreed to here in Washington.

Finally, I think we have to increase significantly our penetration of the Vietnamese civil and military bureaucracy at the corps and province levels, despite the political risks involved. It doesn’t make much difference whether we do so formally or not; but the effect must be that Americans interpose themselves much more directly in the chain of command between Saigon and the villages. Eventually this may mean an increase both in the American military and civilian presence in the countryside; but the first priority is to get those men that we already have in the field more intimately involved with the pacification program. There are many devices for doing this, such as the joint provincial committees, which are already being used. Both the Americans and the Vietnamese I talked to in Saigon seemed to agree that there will be less opposition to this kind of encadrement than one might expect. Putting our people into the ministries in Saigon is a more difficult and politically more touchy problem and may not be as necessary. It would probably be more effective to stimulate our own officials to be more energetic in following up actions with their Vietnamese counterparts.

We have to get the Vietnamese to concentrate more on the war and less on their individual political ambitions. This could be done, I think, by being far more vigorous than we have been in following up specific questions with them. It would also be a great help if we engaged them in a real effort against the North.

Michael V. Forrestal3

Attachment

APPENDIX TO MEMORANDUM ON SOUTH VIETNAM

AMBASSADOR LODGE

Ambassador Lodge has devoted most of his attention and efforts to maintaining an uneasy balance among the constantly shifting political factions in Saigon. His acute sense of politics has served him well in this respect, and he has achieved a useful kind of standing with the Vietnamese. They are a little frightened of him. His somewhat distant attitude has enabled him to avoid getting embroiled in local maneuverings and has added considerably to the weight of the advice he gives.

Unfortunately, the Ambassador has had neither the interest nor the time to concentrate on getting his own American community organized. This is partly because management is not one of his talents and partly because he has not found anyone on his own staff to whom he will delegate his fundamental authority to lead the American effort. I think he would give a rather free hand in this respect to a clearly competent official who made a real effort to gain his confidence.

Although Ambassador Lodge has virtually no effective communication with General Harkins, he is developing confidence in General Westmoreland despite the unfortunate episode of Nixon and the helicopters.4 General Westmoreland has gone out of his way to emphasize the essentially political nature of the war and has convinced Ambassador Lodge that he is receptive to political guidance.

Lodge is acutely aware of and quite frank about his strange political position as Ambassador. He senses a tendency towards record-making in his correspondence with Washington. He volunteered that he would under no circumstances make a public issue of any differences with the Administration on policy in Vietnam. While he felt that the President had a right to his advice, he also felt that the President had the right not to take it without fear of creating a political issue. The vehemence and sincerity with which Lodge discussed this subject has led me to conclude he would not kick over the traces under any circumstances we can now foresee.

Although I tried to sound him out on his personal plans, both before and after Oregon, I could not get a clear picture of his intentions. He said that he wanted to serve the U.S. in the most useful way he could, but he did not intend to spend the rest of his life in Saigon. On several occasions he made it clear he wanted to continue to serve the Government in some capacity, either in Washington or abroad.

I would hazard a guess that Lodge will stay in Saigon for the immediate future, unless he concludes that his presence in the United States in July might make the difference between Goldwater’s succeeding or failing in capturing the nomination. He seems convinced that a Goldwater victory would destroy the Republican Party. I do not think, however, that he has any real hopes of getting the nomination himself or that he would make the effort to do so.

Michael V. Forrestal5

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia-Vietnam, 1964 General, 3/64–5/64. Top Secret. A covering note from Forrestal to Bundy reads as follows: “Herewith the main thoughts I brought back. I’ve not sent this to anyone and will rely on your judgment as to who should see it.” Forrestal also sent Harriman a copy of this memorandum and appendix on June 1. McGeorge Bundy apparently sent this memorandum to the President under cover of a memorandum of May 27. Bundy wrote: “Here is an important memorandum from Mike Forrestal which may help you as you think about the basic problem in Southeast Asia.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy—Memos to the President, Vol. 4) A signed copy of Forrestal’s memorandum, but not the appendix, which Forrestal sent to McNamara, Ball, McNaughton, William Bundy, and Sullivan is in Department of State, Bundy Files, Special Papers.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

4 Former Vice President Nixon stopped in Vietnam in April during his 24-day trip to the Far East. Westmoreland escorted Nixon to the village of Phu My near Saigon, apparently by unauthorized use of helicopters.

5 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

179. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 179. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington. May 26, 1964.

SUBJECT

Talking Points at 4:30 Meeting with Republican Senators2

1. I have asked for this meeting in order to talk straight with you about the situation in Southeast Asia and to have a chance to exchange thoughts about some very serious possibilities that may lie ahead of us.

2. I will ask Secretary Rusk to describe briefly the immediate diplomatic crisis over Laos and Cambodia and to comment generally on the political situation in South Vietnam.

3. I will then ask Secretary McNamara to report on his own most recent visit to South Vietnam. Some of you may have heard this report, but its essentials have been brought up to date and confirmed by Mr. Michael Forrestal who returned yesterday, and it is worth hearing in outline.

4. I will then ask Director McCone to give a brief estimate of the forecast which the intelligence community now gives of possible further weakening in the situation in Laos and South Vietnam in coming months.

5. I hope that we can then have a general discussion.

6. Finally, I would emphasize in opening the meeting that while in one sense these are small scale problems involving small scale countries. —and while each country and even each province has a separate set of tricky questions (even the names of the actors are hard to remember and pronounce)

—and while the whole struggle in Laos has a comic opera aspect

—nevertheless what is at stake overall is whether the Communists will take over Southeast Asia—by a process of subversion and terror and general nibbling.

7. It is in this large framework—the U.S. national interest and the future of Southeast Asia—that I hope we will all be thinking as the discussion goes on.

McG. B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President, Vol. 4. Top Secret.

2 President Johnson, Rusk, McNamara, McCone, and McGeorge Bundy met from 4:35 to 5:23 p.m. on May 26 with the following Senators: Everett Dirkson, Thomas Kuchel, Leverett Saltonstall, Milton Young, Karl E. Mundt, J. Glenn Beall, Frank Carlson, and John J. Williams. No record of the meeting has been found.

180. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 180. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, May 26, 1964—8:45 p.m.

2086. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Ref: Embtels 2284,2 2314,3 2319,4 and others. Your tireless efforts to bring about constructive attitudes among the bickering elements in Viet Nam are greatly appreciated here. It would seem that your work with Oanh, the Buddhist hierarchy, and the responsible Catholic leaders is already producing dividends.

However, we remain worried about two specific elements of discord which could be potentially troublesome. The first concerns the trial of the generals. It is still not clear to us here that the evidence which Khanh expects to introduce against General Kim and which might implicate General Minh is convincing and authentic. The very fact that much of it is being drawn from Diem documents would seem to make it difficult to sustain publicly. If you feel that there is no alternative to a trial in Dalat this week, you should urge Khanh to have it speedily and quietly completed and “elegant” disposition of the generals put into effect immediately. From our point of view, however, it would be a disaster if one of the results of this trial were to be a deposition of General Minh.5

Subsequent message coming tonight6 explaining we here in Washington believe that fuse is shortening with respect to North Viet Nam, both because of events in South Viet Nam and because of events in Laos. We believe it imperative therefore, that the maximum facade of national unity be maintained in Saigon at this time, to avoid the appearance of political debacle just at the moment when we are making major decisions of national and international significance.

The other area which concerns us immediately is the activity of Vice Prime Minister Hoan and to a lesser extent, Minister of Information Pham Thai. We trust you will move in on them just as you have with Jack Oanh and just as effectively. The Dai Viet preoccupation with politics as usual could produce the worst sort of dilettante confusion in these days of crisis.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Sullivan, cleared by William Bundy, and initialed by Rusk.

2 Document 165.

3 Document 175.

4 In telegram 2319, May 26, Lodge reported that Khanh had accepted his suggestion that he talk to the three Vice Prime Ministers to explain to them “what is the proper role of a cabinet minister and their relationship with General Khanh.” Lodge told Khanh that he had already had a “heart-to-heart” talk with Oanh and informed him that cabinet ministers should not try to be “political personages in their own right.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

5 As reported in telegram 2332 from Saigon, May 28, Lodge made these suggestions to Khanh who stated that he hoped the Generals would admit their errors and then they could be pardoned and allowed to return to private lives. Although Khanh was surprised by Lodge’s suggestion that it was not the right time to depose Minh as Head of State, Khanh said he understood and would act accordingly. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

6 Apparent reference to the message Document 181.

VI. The Second Rusk Visit To Saigon; The Honolulu Meeting; The De Gaulle-Ball Conversation; Seaborn’s Discussions in Hanoi, May 26–June 25VI. The Second Rusk Visit To Saigon; The Honolulu Meeting; The De Gaulle-Ball Conversation; Seaborn’s Discussions in Hanoi, May 26–June 25

181. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)

Washington, May 26, 1964—9:12 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Eyes Only. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy and initialed and approved by Rusk. Transmitted as telegram 2087 to Saigon, which is the source text.

182. Memorandum for the Record of a Conversation Between President Johnson and Prime Minister Pearson

Hilton Hotel, New York, May 28, 1964, 6:15–6:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAN–US. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy on May 30. The President was in New York for a Democratic Party fundraising dinner and gala.

183. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President

Washington, May 29, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. X, Memos. Top Secret. In White House telegram CAP 64144, May 29, McGeorge Bundy sent the text of this memorandum to the Johnson Ranch in Texas. Bundy described the memorandum as “the most sensitive account I have yet seen of the probable balance of forces in South Vietnam.” (Ibid., Southeast Asia, Vol II, Memos CB)

184. Summary Record of a Meeting, Department of State

Washington, May 30, 1964, 10:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret. Drafted by Benjamin Read, Executive Secretary, on May 30. The source text indicates that Ball served as chairman of the meeting. There are several handwritten editorial changes in the source text, presumably by Read.

185. Letter From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the Secretary of State

Washington, May 31, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Manila Folder. Top Secret.

186. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State

Honolulu, June 1, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State Central Files, PSL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State. Rusk, accompanied by William Bundy, was in New Delhi, India, May 28–30. He flew to Saigon and Bangkok on May 31 and then on to Honolulu on June 1. McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this telegram to the President on June 2. His transmittal memorandum reads in part as follows: “You may also be interested in the Secretary’s summary of the things the U.S. had to bear in mind at the end of Section 3 and the beginning of Section 4. The Secretary’s emphasis here, as in other conversations in Asia, is more military and strategic than diplomatic and political. In particular, he does not address the question of international justification for action, an omission noted in the closing comment of the cable (which was probably drafted by my brother Bill.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5)

187. Summary Record of a Meeting

Honolulu, June 1, 1964, 8:30 a.m.–12:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. Top Secret. Prepared by CINCPAC. An attached list of partidpants is not printed. In all, 55 persons attended the conference. After this plenary session, a group of approximately 15 principals met in restricted discussions (see Documents 188 and 189). The rest of the participants formed four working groups, each to discuss one of the following issues: Program for wider actions; Matters pertaining to South Vietnam; Logistical support problems; and Psychological and informational actions. Summary reports of these working groups, prepared by CINCPAC, are not printed.

188. Summary Record of a Meeting

Honolulu, June 1, 1964, 2:15–6:15 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Southeast Asian Strategy. Top Secret. The source text does not indicate who drafted this account of the meeting.

189. Summary Record of Meetings

Honolulu, June 2, 1964, 8:30–11:50 a.m. and 2:15–4 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Southeast Asian Strategy. Top Secret. The source text does not indicate who drafted this record of the meeting.

190. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 2, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to CIA. the Office of the Secretary of Defense. the White House, JCS, and CINCPAC.

191. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, June 2, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that McNaughton saw this memorandum.

192. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, June 3, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File. Memos to the President. McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5. Top Secret

193. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 3, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. II, Memos (A). Secret. According to a June 3 covering note to McNamara, Bundy sent copies of “his personal notes” of the Honolulu conference to McNamara, Taylor, and McCone with the qualification that they did not necessarily reflect the views of Rusk who approved the distribution. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381) A note on the top of the source text in McGeorge Bundy’s hand reads: “Hitting the North is required.”

194. Editorial Note

195. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House

Washington, June 4, 1964, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, President’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Confidential. Drafted by Sullivan on June 5. The time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Daily Diary. Johnson Library) Quat was in the United States to attend the sessions of the United Nations. On June 3, he met with Secretary Rusk who urged Quat to try to eliminate political quarrels in Saigon, defuse religious differences, and encourage Vietnamese politicians to drop their business-as-usual attitude. Quat promised to take this message home and to try to improve South Vietnam’s diplomatic representation and its information policies and programs. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) A subsequent discussion of Vietnamese information policies and program is in a memorandum of conversation between Quat and Rowan. June 5. (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA Psychological Operations Files: FRC 68 A 4933, INFO–PSYCH Operations, 1964) Quat also met with Senator Humphrey on June 5; see footnote 4, Document 208.

196. Memorandum From the President to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, June 4 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL FR–US. Top Secret. The unsigned White House copy of this memorandum is published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 315A.

197. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President

Washington, June 4, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. 11, Memos (A). Secret. Rowan sent this memorandum to the President with a covering memorandum explaining the issue was discussed at Honolulu. Rowan believed the steps proposed were “of great importance” and hoped that the President would find time to read the report. It is uncertain whether the President did so. McGeorge Bundy received the original and Forrestal got a copy.

198. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 5, 1964—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis Received at 4:18 a.m.

199. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, June 5, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret.

200. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President

Saigon, June 5, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XI. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 001490.

201. Paper Prepared for the President by the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, June 5, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XI, Memos. Secret. Published in part in Declassified Documents, 1978, 62C. A title page indicates that this memorandum was for the President’s use at a meeting at 6 p.m. on June 5. The President met with Rusk, McGeorge Bundy, and McNamara from 6:52 to 7:43 p.m., June 5. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record of this meeting has been found.

202. Telegram From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the Department of State

Paris, June 6, 1964—1 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated priority to Saigon. Received at 10:30 p.m., June 5, and sent to the White House.

203. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, June 6, 1964—1:13 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, INF 8 US–VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Rowan and Sullivan and cleared by Forrestal and McNamara. Repeated to CINCPAC

204. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, June 6, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5. No classification marking. A note on the source text indicates Bundy dictated, but did not read, this memorandum.

205. Memorandum by the President

Washington, June 6, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XI, Memos. No classification marking.

206. Editorial Note

207. Memorandum From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State

Saigon, June 8, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Correspondence—L. No classification marking. Lodge sent this memorandum to Rusk under a cover of a brief letter, June 8, which explained that the memorandum represented “some of the thoughts which I said I would send you regarding the job of the U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam.”

208. Memorandum From Senator Hubert H. Humphrey to the President

Washington, June 8, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol III, Memos (A). Secret.

209. Memorandum From the Board of National Estimates to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)

Washington, June 9, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. III, Memos (B). Secret. A June 11 covering memorandum from McCone to McGeorge Bundy reads as follows: “Attached is a memorandum from Dr. Sherman Kent on the ‘doming effect’ in the Far East resulting from loss of South Vietnam and Laos.” “You will recall the President made inquiry concerning this subject last Saturday. I call your specific attention to numbered paragraph 9, the final paragraph in the memorandum.” On another copy of this memorandum, Forrestal wrote the following note: “Mac: This is obvious but good. Might help answer one of the Pres’s questions.”

210. Summary Record of a Meeting

White House, Washington, June 10, 1964, 5:30 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on Southeast Asia, Vol. 1. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Smith. The source text indicates the President did not attend.

211. Draft Memorandum by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 10, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Southeast Asia, Vol. 111. Top Secret.

212. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, June 10, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5. Top Secret. An “L” on the source text indicates that the President saw this memorandum, and a handwritten note reads: “returned by Pres. 6/12/64.”

213. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 12, 1964–3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Exdis.

214. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, June 15, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 092 Vietnam. Unclassified with Secret and Top Secret Attachments. Attachment 5, a “Question Index” of 14 questions about a possible Congressional resolution, is not printed. The questions as well as draft answers are published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 90B. The answers were not part of the original attachment.

215. Memorandum Prepared for a Meeting at the Department of State

Washington, June 15, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Southeast Asia, Vol. 111, Memos (B). Top Secret. No drafter is indicated on the source text, but according to the William P. Bundy manuscript, Chapter 13, p. 25, McGeorge Bundy drafted this memorandum. (Department of State, Bundy Files, William P. Bundy Manuscript) This is the paper prepared for the meeting described in footnote 2, Document 214.

216. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 16, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XII, Memos. Top Secret.

217. Memorandum From the Secretary of the Treasury (Dillon) to the Secretary of State

Washington, June 17, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL FR–US. Top Secret; Exdis. Also sent to McNamara and McGeorge Bundy.

218. Telegram From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Department of State

Saigon, June 18, 1964—10:28 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Lodge Resignation and Taylor Appointment. Top Secret; No Distribution. [1 line of text not declassified] Received at 11:39 p.m., June 17.

219. National Security Action Memorandum No. 308

Washington, June 22, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 308. Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 001493.

220. Editorial Note

221. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant (Cater) to the President

Washington, June 23, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. 111, Memos (A). No classification marking.

222. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, June 24, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis.

223. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, June 24, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File. Vietnam Country File. Vol. XII, Memos. Confidential.

224. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President

Washington, June 25, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIII. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the original memorandum went to Forrestal.

225. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, June 25, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5. Secret.

181. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) 181. Message From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge)1

Washington, May 26, 1964—9:12 p.m.

I have been giving the most intense consideration to the whole battle for Southeast Asia, and I have now instructed Dean Rusk, Bob McNamara, Max Taylor, and John McCone to join Felt in Honolulu for a meeting with you and a very small group of your most senior associates in Southeast Asia to review for my final approval a series of plans for effective action.

I am sending you this message at once to give you private advance notice because I hope this meeting can occur very soon-perhaps on Monday.2 Dean Rusk will be sending tomorrow a separate cable on the subjects proposed for the meeting,3 and Bob McNamara will put a plane at your disposal for the trip.

In the light of my message to General Harkins asking him to return on June 244 and in the light of the undesirability of having our two senior military officers away from Saigon at the same time, I suggest that you bring General Westmoreland to this meeting and leave General Harkins in charge of the war.

Finally, I have received from Forrestal a direct account of your belief that there is need for change and improvement in the civilian side of the country team.5 We have reached a similar conclusion here, and indeed we believe that it is essential for you to have a top-ranking officer who is wholly acceptable to you as chief of staff for country team operations. My own impression is that this should be either a newly appointed civilian of wide governmental experience and high standing, or General Westmoreland himself, and I am asking Rusk and McNamara to discuss this problem with you privately and in detail. You can be sure that we will leave no step untaken to insure effective support for your over-all command.6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Eyes Only. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy and initialed and approved by Rusk. Transmitted as telegram 2087 to Saigon, which is the source text.

2 June 1.

3 In telegram 2095 to Saigon, May 27. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 1 ASIA SE)

4 Not found.

5 Document 178.

6 Telegram 2087 does not bear President Johnson’s signature.

182. Memorandum for the Record of a Conversation Between President Johnson and Prime Minister Pearson 182. Memorandum for the Record of a Conversation Between President Johnson and Prime Minister Pearson1

Hilton Hotel, New York, May 28, 1964, 6:15–6:45 p.m.

The President and the Prime Minister began by talking briefly and lightly about immediate problems of politics in their two countries. The President gave the Prime Minister greetings from Senator Magnuson,2 and the Prime Minister commented wryly on the problems of lumber and fish. The Prime Minister explained the great political difficulty and importance of changing the national flag of Canada, and the President remarked that he had as many troubles as he wanted, too.

The conversation then turned to Southeast Asia. The Prime Minister opened by saying that in his brief conversation with McGeorge Bundy3 he had agreed on the importance of sending Mr. Seaborn to Vietnam as soon as possible, and he made it clear that he thought this could be arranged in the coming week. He spoke warmly of Mr. Seaborn’s qualifications, and made clear his entire readiness to have a Canadian officer play this important role of reporting accurately the purposes of the United States Government and the meaning of any actions in which it might be involved.

The President thanked the Prime Minister and gave a general summary of his view of U.S. policy in Southeast Asia. The U.S. was not interested in starting wars, but in keeping peace. The U.S. had no desire to threaten any government in the area, and wanted nothing more than the restoration of peace in countries which were now under attack from outside. The U.S. was not going to be pushed out, but the Prime Minister could be absolutely sure that the President intended to follow a policy of peace.

The Prime Minister expressed his satisfaction in this general exposition and said he fully understood the very difficult and important problems which the U.S. faced in Southeast Asia. He agreed that the U.S. could not simply pull out and that it must continue its support for governments which were not always very good at supporting themselves, difficult as this task might be. The Prime Minister said that, on the other hand, he did think it would be dangerous to move in directions which had recently been mentioned by Senator Goldwater,4 and that any drastic escalation would give great problems both in Canada and internationally. The Prime Minister said that it would be a different matter if action could be carefully limited and directed in the interdiction of supply lines from North to South.

The President firmly interjected that the Prime Minister could be absolutely sure that the present Administration had no interest at all in the kind of thing which Senator Goldwater had mentioned. The President himself was a man of peace, and his Administration was going to be an Administration of peace. If it did become necessary, against the President’s own hopes and desires, to act against the North, the President’s intention was that such action should be carefully limited.

The Prime Minister expressed his satisfaction at the President’s comment and said that he thought it would be very important to have targets carefully defined and sharply delimited. It would be one thing to attack a bridge or an oil tank, but quite another to shower bombs on a village full of women and children.

The President expressed his clear agreement.

The President and the Prime Minister then talked briefly about more general aspects of the problem. The President indicated the next immediate courses of action were to be the subject of the Honolulu meeting, and thanked the Prime Minister again for his cooperation in the matter of Mr. Seaborn’s special assignment.5 The conversation then became informal and social, and the President introduced the Prime Minister to members of his family and others guests in the Presidential suite.

The Prime Minister later informed me that at a moment when I was out of the room, he had mentioned to the President the important meeting of Commonwealth Prime Ministers in London in July, and had said that he would be glad to know of any special U.S. views which it might be helpful for Canada to know about at the time of such a meeting. He told me that the President had expressed interest, and I undertook to make sure that we would be in a position to offer such close consultation before the Prime Minister’s meeting.

McG.B.6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL CAN–US. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy on May 30. The President was in New York for a Democratic Party fundraising dinner and gala.

2 Senator Warren G. Magnuson of Washington.

3 No record of this conversation has been found.

4 Senator Barry M. Goldwater in his campaign for the Republican presidential nomination suggested on May 24 that “low yield atomic weapons” be used as defoliants along South Vietnam’s borders and that the United States employ a conventional bombing campaign to attack roads, railroads, and bridges used in supplying the insurgency in South Vietnam.

5 While Pearson and Johnson were meeting in New York, Sullivan met with Canadian Foreign Minister Martin and Seaborn in Ottawa. Sullivan found Canadian officials to be of a similar mind to Pearson, and noted: “While Foreign Minister Martin seemed a little nervous about the prospect of ‘expanding the war’, External Affairs officials readily assented to the use of Seaborn as an interlocutor. It was stipulated that he need not agree with or associate his Government with the substance of some of the messages he would be asked to transmit. The only thing required was faithful transmission of the messages.”

“Seaborn, who struck Sullivan as an alert, intelligent and steady officer, readily agreed to these conditions and has made immediate plans for an accelerated departure.” (Telegram 2133 to Saigon, May 30; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

6 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

183. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President 183. Memorandum From Michael V. Forrestal of the National Security Council Staff to the President1

Washington, May 29, 1964.

SOUTH VIETNAM

Mac Bundy tells me that you are interested in the time factor in the struggle in South Vietnam: Is it working with us or against us, and if against us, how fast?

I cannot speak with any assurance about the military situation. I think that in spots there are signs of improvement, and in some areas there are signs that the Government’s efforts to reach people are beginning to show progress. But these are isolated indications and, in my judgment, are not widespread enough to indicate a trend for the better.

I can speak more confidently about the political atmosphere in Saigon. The feeling there is that the Government’s military and political position continues to erode. There is doubt that the war will ever be ended the way it is now being fought; and this produces a tendency towards factionalism, bickering, and probably some coup plotting in political and military circles.

I don’t think that there is in the near future a danger of military collapse; but there is an increasing danger of political accident or upheaval, unless there is some dramatic change in the atmosphere in which the struggle is being waged. What I think is needed fairly soon (i.e. within the next month or 6 weeks) is action by the United States in some part of Southeast Asia which gets across forcefully to the Vietnamese a sense that we believe Communist insurgency can be contained and that we will do whatever is required to insure this.

MVF

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. X, Memos. Top Secret. In White House telegram CAP 64144, May 29, McGeorge Bundy sent the text of this memorandum to the Johnson Ranch in Texas. Bundy described the memorandum as “the most sensitive account I have yet seen of the probable balance of forces in South Vietnam.” (Ibid., Southeast Asia, Vol II, Memos CB)

184. Summary Record of a Meeting, Department of State 184. Summary Record of a Meeting, Department of State1

Washington, May 30, 1964, 10:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam and Honolulu Meeting

PARTICIPANTS

State: Messrs. Ball, Harriman, Green, Sullivan, Trueheart and Read

Defense: Secretary McNamara and Mr. McNaughton

AID: Mr. Stoneman

CIA: Mr. Colby, Mr. Cooper, Gen. Carter

White House: Mr. Bundy and Mr. Forrestal

Mr. Ball distributed the agenda (attached)2 with five points on questions relating to Viet-Nam.

Agenda Item I

Mr. Ball asked for comment on his assessment that the general situation in Viet-Nam was deteriorating.

Secretary McNamara agreed with this assessment. He said he agreed with UK representative Thompson who was in Washington this week, who said that his assessment was that nothing much was happening and that there was lots of talk but little action. He said that Thompson had stated that he did not know whether we were beyond the point of no return, and that if the present deterioration continues the situation would disintegrate in anywhere from three to four months to nine months from now. If the situation is to be retrieved Thompson favored getting rid of the Dai Viet. Secretary McNamara said these conclusions were approximately the same as his own.

Mr. Sullivan stated Thompson had made the point to him that the US must cross the line between its advisory role and action or operational role for at least the top ten officials in the country. Thompson thought we weren’t getting more than 10 cents on our dollar of material input.

Agenda Item II

Mr. Ball asked why interlarding was not doing the job. Why weren’t oil spot procedures working out?

Secretary McNamara said that it was complex administrative problems and that the main difficulty was the lack of competent political and military personnel.

Mr. Forrestal said it was the question of trying to improve morale in South Vietnam that was critical in his opinion. Mr. Sullivan stated that many people in the south were now hedging their bets on the future with the thought that the US would cut its losses and pull out. He said in addition there was a premium on inefficiency because efficient administrators were prime subjects of assassination. Mr. McNamara asked the Agency representatives to prepare a paper on the attacks on division and district chiefs to see if there was corroboration for the view that the efficient leaders were the principal targets for assassination.

Mr. Stoneman stated that Secretary Rusk felt that we should try a pilot program in provinces where the deterioration was not advanced.

Secretary McNamara said we are already trying to do too many things and that AID was short 80 persons already. We should concentrate on the provinces in the south and west of Saigon where the situation was critical and not start other new programs.

Mr. Ball stated that one of the purposes of the Honolulu meeting should be to assure that there are no arbitrary limits on personnel.

Mr. Colby stated that the Agency has received indications of reservations at both low and high levels in the Vietnamese government to our encadrement proposal forwarded to Lodge three or four days ago. Mr. Colby’s view is that the most important thing is to integrate civil and military functions under a single commander.

Mr. Ball expressed reservation to any proposal which would have the effect of putting Western representatives out front with all the argument of neo-colonialism which could be brought to bear against us.

Agenda Item III

Secretary McNamara said he thought we should have somebody looking at the problem of “surrender terms” if we took the war to the North; or, more accurately, the problem of when we should stop if such a venture is undertaken.

Mr. McNaughton said that a study was underway on this point and the Agency also indicated it had some studies underway on related problems.

Honolulu Meeting

Secretary McNamara said that he thought the Honolulu talks should proceed on two or three planes.

First, on the military questions two military sub-groups should get to work to examine the J–3 and J–4 problems, and contingency war plans.

Second, an information panel should be set up, chaired by Carl Rowan or Bob Manning, to examine four different information problems: (1) North Vietnam (2) South Vietnam (3) US and (4) European allies, i.e., the problems of information originating in the south beamed towards the north, information beamed into the south and what we are putting out in the US for domestic and overseas consumption.

Third, Gaud and Sullivan should chair a panel examining the pilot province program and this team would have aid, military and political considerations to take into account.

At the policy-making level the two Secretaries and Ambassador Lodge should examine the problems of getting Khanh’s backing and cooperation for our program and the choice of international forums. The Secretary said we would put the detailed agenda together on the airplane.

Gov. Harriman said he thought we needed more work done on the question of what “carrots” we could offer to North Vietnam. It was generally agreed that this did not need more attention

Secretary McNamara said he saw the purposes of the Honolulu meeting as follows: (1) to exchange views with Lodge and Westmoreland on our assessments and estimates of the situation in South Vietnam; (2) to map out more effective actions against the Viet Cong; and (3) to consider tentative courses of action in case the situation in the south continues to deteriorate and to try to achieve accord on our contingency plans against the North.

Mr. Cleveland stated that we would have a huge job of convincing the rest of the world of our assumption that if we can’t win in Indo-China, we can at least prevent Peking and Hanoi from doing so.

Secretary McNamara stated that that is what the President, Secretary Rusk and he had been worrying about for the last week or more.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret. Drafted by Benjamin Read, Executive Secretary, on May 30. The source text indicates that Ball served as chairman of the meeting. There are several handwritten editorial changes in the source text, presumably by Read.

2 Not found.

185. Letter From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the Secretary of State 185. Letter From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, May 31, 1964.

Dear Dean: Wednesday afternoon2 the President asked me to participate in a discussion with Walter Lippmann. The others involved were Bob McNamara and McGeorge Bundy. The President sat in on part of the discussion and after Lippmann had left, he talked further to the three of us for almost an hour.

Lippmann made his usual argument for neutralization—admitting, when I pressed him, (a) that his proposed course of action was based on the assumption that all of Southeast Asia was destined inevitably to become a zone of Chinese Communist control; (b) that we could not halt Chinese expansionism in this area; and (c) that our best hope was to seek by political means to slow that expansionism down and make it less brutal.

The exchange with Lippmann was rather animated but it did serve to bring out the differences in the assumptions on which we were proceeding. I do not think that the President bought Lippmann’s ultimate thesis. He was, however, quite clearly impressed by Lippmann’s contention that the United States was presenting itself in a bad light to the world by refusing to negotiate and entertaining the possibility of enlarged military action.

After Walter’s departure, the President returned to the question that has been preoccupying him. (He said that he had not slept more than a few hours the night before.) How could he maintain his posture as a man of peace in the face of the Southeast Asian crisis? How could he carry a united country with him if we were to embark on a course of action that might escalate under conditions where the rest of the world would regard us as wrong-headed?

While no precise instructions emerged from our discussion, I was persuaded that the President will not act hastily and that he is by no means tied on to a scenario of the kind that was being considered when you left. This impression has been confirmed by casual remarks he has made since the Lippmann conversation.

Before talking with the President, I had already begun to ask some hard questions which it seemed to me had been treated too cavalierly. When I first moved back into the Vietnamese situation a fortnight ago, I had the feeling that plans were going forward too precipitously and that there was an inarticulate wish to sweep the difficult issues under the bed. It seemed to me that much of our planning was proceeding on the assumption that, since we were in danger of losing by pursuing the present course, we should promptly undertake a more decisive plan of action even though (a) no one could be sure that the new plan of action would have the desired effect and (b) the risks of a major catastrophe might be vastly enlarged.

Against the background of the President’s wise caution, Alex and I have, by an insistent challenge of the basic premises, considerably slowed down the headlong crystallization of a plan for enlarging the war. The new mood of diminished certainty will necessarily alter the purposes of the Honolulu meeting. Instead of concentrating on detailed arrangements necessary to carry out a specific plan of action, the meeting should, I think, be devoted primarily to an examination of the assumptions and implications of alternative courses of action in order to bring about a greater common understanding between Saigon and Washington and lay the basis for plans consistent with the hard realities. Since Alex returned Thursday3 morning, he and I have worked closely together in trying to point up some of the problems and focus on available alternatives. With the Honolulu meeting in mind, we have drawn up a list of questions that you might wish to inject into the discussion.

I realize that these questions may appear negative and defeatist. I am disturbed, however, by the fact that we are not facing up to the basic requirements for achieving the maximum effectiveness in our present management of the war. Both Alex and I find it personally difficult to advocate a course of action that could result in the loss of many American lives, the further disruption of Western solidarity, and grave dangers of escalation-at a time when we feel unprepared to do all that we know to be possible to reverse the downward trend (if it exists) in South Viet-Nam.

I cannot, in other words, reconcile myself to the-fateful step of action against the North until we are satisfied in our hearts that we have taken every possible step to achieve full effectiveness in our own efforts in the South. I need not specify the kinds of steps needed. You and I have frequently talked about them.

We appreciated your prompt response on our thoughts with respect to the Polish proposal for Laos.4 They have been passed on to the President but we have not yet heard from him. (He is at the Ranch over this long week-end.) If and when he approves in principle, our first step should probably be for Unger to have a thorough discussion with Souvanna. Unless Souvanna comes along, we will obviously have no package.

Yours ever,

George

P.S. With the President’s approval, I am asking Paris today to set up a meeting for me with de Gaulle on Friday, June 5. I will be seeing the British on Monday (June 8), at their request, to talk about a number of things, including Cyprus. It seems to us that since Bill Bundy has just been to London and I am going there, our failure to talk to Paris would be a subject for wide comment. You might give some thought to the line I should take with the General, and we can go over it on Thursday when you return.5

Enclosure

FUNDAMENTAL ISSUES

1. Are we proposing action against the North because we are reasonably confident it will, in fact, work, or merely because we are becoming reasonably confident that the present course of action will not work and we are not able to think of anything else to do?

2. What will be the effect on the SVN of action against the North?

Here we should measure the temporary boost to morale that may be given the GVN leadership against the dangers of a panic of the SVN population—particularly in Saigon—that may result from (a) counter-threats by Hanoi, Peiping, and perhaps Moscow and (b) increased terrorism in the cities (bombing of cafes, public buildings, assassinations, etc.).

3. What do we seek to achieve by bombing the North?

If we hope to achieve merely an interruption or impairment of the North’s ability to direct insurgency through the radio net, or to assist insurgency through men and supplies, then we must ask ourselves whether the Viet Cong may not now have self-sufficient tactical centers in the South adequate to enable the carrying-on of their campaign with only marginally diminished effectiveness.

If on the other hand, we intend by attacking the North to force North Viet-Nam to direct the cessation of insurgency in the South, how feasible is this? The history of the Viet Cong has been that of carrying on underground when necessary. Even after the partition they did not give up a plan that has now been in existence for more than two decades and that has a fundamental ideological underpinning. Is it not probable that—even though the DRV announced that they were ceasing their encouragement and assistance to the Viet Cong in the South—they would covertly direct the Viet Cong to continue insurgency without their direct help?

This question can be formulated in another way. Do we yet have in South Viet-Nam a sufficiently strong political base in the GVN to deal with the indigenous disaffection that would continue even if the North were in fact to order a cessation of insurgency? The argument may well be made that—even granting the strength of indigenous disaffection—the cessation of encouragement and direction from the North would reduce the insurgency to manageable form. Is this demonstrable?

4. What kinds of assurances will the USG be required to give the FGVN in order to assure their tranquillity?

Presumably this would mean more than the provision of antiaircraft and other air defense apparatus. It would mean the assurance that if there were a land effort against SVN we would have the forces immediately available to defend the country. This raises a number of issues: (a) It implies an open-ended commitment of the US to defend SVN with our own troops. This must be considered in the light of the deep aversion of many Americans to the commitment of US ground forces to the Asian mainland.

(b) From the SVN point of view, the appearance of substantial American troops might either have the effect of raising the old colonial bogey or of persuading the SVN that the US would do the fighting and they need do nothing.

(c) From the point of view of many other friendly nations, such a US action would be regarded as America’s inability to learn from past experience. While we might minimize by strenuous information and diplomatic activities, we could not count on having many, if any, of our friends with us very far down the road. In any event, we should have an extended period of psychological and political preparation and an opportunity to measure its results before final decisions are reached.

5. Why are we contemplating an air action against the North in the face of a recently played war game that demonstrated the ineffectiveness of such a tactic. (Alex participated—along with Mac Bundy, Max Taylor and many others.)6 The answers I have been given are not wholly satisfactory. They are merely that the war game was crudely played and that the time span for action (60 days) was too brief. Yet, it did reveal some of the serious disadvantages of the proposed course and those lessons have not been critically applied to the plans now being proposed.

6. Would not the proposed course of action lead directly to what we have been seeking to avoid—a conference in which our bargaining position is poor? Either on our own initiative or through the actions of others, we would be faced with a Security Council action almost as soon as the first air strike was completed. The first efforts of the Security Council would be to obtain a ceasefire. If we vetoed such a resolution, we would almost certainly be faced with a call for a General Assembly.

Under these circumstances, we could well find ourselves in a position not wholly dissimilar from that of Britain and France at Suez. World opinion would be against us and opposition would be heightened by the racial implications of a white attack upon the Asian people. Our friends could not be counted on to stay with us far down this track. It seems unlikely that we could hold out very long against some form of conference either in New York or Geneva—in which the neutralization of Southeast Asia would be very appealing to most of the participants. While we might have gained some slight advantage by the demonstration of American will and capability, we would have lost greatly in the moral approbation of most UN members.

1 Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Manila Folder. Top Secret.

2 May 27.

3 May 28.

4 On May 27, the Polish Embassy in Vientiane proposed immediate consultations in Switzerland among high-level representatives of the 1954 Geneva Cochairmen (the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union), the ICC member nations, and the three political factions in Laos. (Circular telegram 2209, May 27; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS)

5 Ball wrote the following note at the end of the postscript: “You might wish to tell Lodge about this since he has been concerned about the effect in Saigon of any conversations in Paris.”

6 See footnote 5, Document 99.

186. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State 186. Telegram From the Secretary of State to the Department of State1

Honolulu, June 1, 1964—5 p.m.

Secto 37. Highlights of General Khanh conversation with Secretary, May 31. (Ambassador Lodge participating, and Mr. Bundy and Mr. Flott present.)

1. Solidarity Within South Vietnam.

After amenities Secretary Rusk transmitted greetings of President Johnson to General Khanh and said President spends much time and thought on problems of SVN and SEA in general. Secretary remarked President had recently been consulting on SEA problems with Senators both parties with Secretary present.2 Senators are increasingly concerned about pressures being applied on SEA by Peking and Hanoi. Forthcoming Honolulu conference will consider these problems and many others.

Secretary stated one of main problems President faces is justifying to American people whatever course of action may be necessary or indicated as matter of internal solidarity of SVN. Secretary noted that if struggle escalates, only US will have the forces to cope with it.

This basic reality means President has heavy responsibility of making vital decisions and leading American public opinion to accept them. Difficult to do this if SVN appears hopelessly divided and rent by internal quarrels.

A principal purpose of the US in area is to bring about a free, secure, peaceful SVN. This can be done only if Vietnam people display internal solidarity. So it follows that the greater is the solidarity of Vietnamese people, the greater will be the propensity of US and other free world countries to aid it in struggle against aggressors and to escalate if necessary.

Secretary said he was not thinking in terms of displaying solidarity so as to convince Paris that struggle could be won, but rather was thinking in terms of sustaining the faith in the possibilities of ultimate success of our Vietnamese effort among those nations we hoped “would be in the foxholes with us” if escalation became necessary and if enemy forces reacted in strength, for example, UK, Australia, New Zealand. Solidarity and unity of purpose in SVN was keystone of whole effort. Was General Khanh doing all he could to bring about such national unity?

Khanh replied affirmatively, saying he fully aware of importance of unity. His recent handling of the case of the arrested Generals showed this.3 His clemency showed he was primarily interested in protecting unity of army. But there were many problems. Underlying structure and heritage of country was such that only army could lead nation in unity. Only army had the requisite organization, cadres, discipline, and sense of purpose. Nascent political parties and other groupings did not. The intellectuals would never be able to adopt a common point of view unless it was imposed by a dictatorship-by a party as the Communists did, or a “family dictatorship” such as Diem’s. This situation was made worse because of disproportion between measure of political and civil liberties granted in wartime situation on one hand and lack of background and sense of responsibility of recipients on other hand. A direct consequence of this disproportion has inevitably some measure of disunity. He was aware he had perhaps given more freedom than really prudent handling of situation would have dictated, but he had to be mindful oft-proclaimed democratic goals of the Vietnamese revolution. All in all, this disunity would not be fatal because Army itself was united, and no potentially disruptive force could hope to oppose army and overthrow GVN. (N.B. No reference to religious problems, sects, or labor under this heading.)

Khanh said that he and Minh and other members National [Military] Revolutionary Council had literally worked 27 hours without interruption in Dalat on Friday discussing case of Generals among themselves and with detainees. There were many different views on how situation should be handled. Nobody was entirely satisfied with Khanh’s decision. After it was all over, he asked for a secret vote of confidence in himself personally. He received 15 favorable votes with 15 senior officers voting. This showed army was united.

2. Need for Action Outside South Vietnam.

Khanh dwelt at length on this, laying out some fairly precise ideas about the kind of action that might be taken. Basically, he said that despite the pacification plan and some individual successes he and his government were “on the defensive” against the Viet Cong. He said pretty flatly that they could not win unless action was taken outside South Vietnam, and that this needed a firm US decision for such action.

Specifically, Khanh said that he thought both Hanoi and Peiping now assumed that some wider action was going to be taken in the near future. He thought that this was the reason Hanoi had moved to clean out the Plaine des Jarres and weaken Kong Le and Vang Pao, that Hanoi had a historic concern for the overland threat from the Plaine des Jarres through Sam Neua province and up to Hanoi.

He then said that the “immediate” response should be to clean out the Communists in eastern Laos, who were the same kind of threat to him, and that we should not get bogged down in negotiations but act.

He said that they did not know really what the Communists had in eastern Laos (circling especially the area south of Tchepone), but that there was a strong chance of major units being there which would at some point-perhaps in the event of attack on the North-move across the border and give the Communists enough strength to cut through to Quang Ngai and divide the country in two, joining up with the forces concentrated around the Do Xa area.

Khanh also said that the real enemy was Peiping, and that they were the power behind Hanoi and the Viet Cong. He said that attacks against North Vietnam should be selective and designed to minimize the chances of a drastic Communist response. (No reference was made to who should carry out these attacks or who should clean out eastern Laos, though there was some implication that he thought South Vietnamese forces, with air, could deal with the latter.)

Secretary then noted we could never predict enemy reaction with certainty. How would SVN people react if NVN and China responded by attacking SVN? Khanh replied this would have even more favorable effect on SVN national unity and faith in victory, and would mobilize usual patriotic reactions in face of more clearcut external threat.

Secretary asked if Khanh believed Viet Cong was fully committed in present operation, or if he felt it had reserves.

Khanh replied VC forces in SVN were fully committed and no significant reserves existed in country. When questioned, however, he admitted that VC could do more in the way of terrorism (importance of which he belittled) and that it may have significant reserves in southern Laos or Cambodia about which we knew nothing. Our intelligence from these areas was poor, and we could be in for unpleasant surprises. Noted that if VC could assemble one division in Laos just north of fifteenth parallel, it could attack towards sea at Quang Ngai and perhaps cut SVN in two and isolate important Da Nang area and its installations.

Khanh recalled French experience with Vietminh reserves about 1950 at Cao Bang and Long Son.

Further to strategy, Khanh said Vietminh had made possible their seizure of Red River Delta by attacking toward Luang Prabang and more or less forcing French into Dien Bien Phu commitment and subsequent defeat. This defeat need not have been fatal but French morale cracked. All this suggests following: best way to react to current Communist encroachments in Laos would be SVN attack in southern Laos, just south of Tchepone, and perhaps in Cambodia as well.

Secretary asked whether such actions outside SVN as cutting of Laos corridor would seriously damage VC materially and break their will to resist.

Khanh replied with considerable assurance as follows: Re Central Vietnam and high plateau, cutting Laotian corridor would cut off deliveries of munitions and cadres and seriously affect VC, both materially and morale-wise. Re Delta, material effect would be minimal because external aid for VC in Delta and west and northwest of Saigon comes from Cambodia often by sea along Gulf of Siam. Not by chance are most ChiCom and Soviet-origin arms captured in these areas. Nonetheless, cutting of Laotian corridor would lower morale of VC in south in that it would show US determination and indicate Hanoi unable any longer to support VC.

3. Timing of Action Against the North and Necessary Prior Action Within South Vietnam.

Khanh asked if Secretary and Ambassador believed he should proclaim state of war existed during next few days and now that Generals’ case was settled. Both advised him to wait at least until after Honolulu conference and in no case ever to take action on such matter without consulting. He agreed, and remarked that if he proclaimed state of war, NVN would know this was preparatory to some form of escalation and he would never act unilaterally and thereby run risk of tipping America’s hand. Although the matter was not specifically mentioned, Khanh appeared to accept as entirely natural that he would not necessarily know in advance when and if US decided to strike outside SVN.

During military discussions Khanh mentioned that during recent Do Xa operation,4 GVN had come upon proof of ChiCom involvement in that area and nearer to coast. Proofs of Chinese involvement were in fact more conclusive there than in Delta.

Secretary asked Khanh if something could not be done to penetrate highest levels of NVN government and know what they were saying and how they were reacting to situation.

Khanh replied one promising possibility was NVN Under Secretary of State of Agriculture. Not sure of his exact post. GVN hoped he would go abroad on official mission to some such place in Soviet bloc as Hungary, where it would be easy (sic) for GVN to contact him. Added that it was of course much easier to penetrate NFLSVN, and GVN knew what its leaders were thinking, both the real Communist members and the non-Communist window-dressing members. Re NVN, Khanh added that Americans and British more likely to be informed than GVN. Comment: Unstated implication was that only significant possibility of coverage would be by [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] or by use of third country national agents.

In course of discussion of possible enemy reactions to escalation, Khanh remarked NVN had commenced civil defense precautions and South had not. Secretary noted that although North presented no significant air power threat, it was nevertheless impossible to state with absolute certainty that North would be unable to deliver a single bomb on Saigon before their air power was totally destroyed. Secretary noted Japanese had created panic by dropping one single fifty-pound bomb in Calcutta during World War II. One million people tried to cross a single bridge in purposeful flight. How would Saigonese react? Khanh replied: Probably just as Indians did. Noted Saigonese not experienced in matter of air warfare. He seemed inclined to go into matter of civil defense in more time-consuming detail than Americans present wished. Secretary and Bundy headed off this digression by remarking that only valid and credible civil defense was overwhelming offensive capability, and our air force was indeed overwhelmingly superior.

Further to Hanoi reactions, Secretary remarked we purposely giving Sino-Soviet bloc many indicators we are about to react to recent aggressions. Hanoi well aware we overflying NVN, and that whereas earlier only 7 T–28’s in Laos, now are 28. Additional indicators being planted with Poles, Czechs, Soviets, etc. Some question as to how enemy camp will react at various points in conversation. Khanh was obviously seeking some more definite statement of specific American intentions in immediate future. Secretary told him he could say nothing on this because he simply did not know. The Honolulu meeting would produce some firm recommendations to the President and some plans, but ultimately only President could decide. His decision would be influenced by consideration of all implications of escalation: on our forces, on our allies, and perhaps even on mankind itself if nuclear warfare should result. Only US had the means to cope with problems escalation would pose. and only President could make the ultimate decisions.

Nevertheless, Secretary said he wished to emphasize the following: a. Since 1945 US had taken 165,000 casualties in defense of free world against Communist encroachments, and most of these casualties were in Asia.

b. US would never again get involved in a land war in Asia limited to conventional forces. Our population was 190,000,000. Mainland China had at least 700,000,000. We would not allow ourselves to be bled white fighting them with conventional weapons.

c. This meant that if escalation brought about major Chinese attack, it would also involve use of nuclear arms. Many free world leaders would oppose this. Chiang Kai-shek had told him fervently he did, and so did U Thant. Many Asians seemed to see an element of racial discrimination in use of nuclear arms; something we would do to Asians but not to Westerners. Khanh replied he certainly had no quarrel with American use of nuclear arms, noted that decisive use of atomic bombs on Japan had in ending war saved not only American but also Japanese lives. One must use the force one had; if Chinese used masses of humanity, we would use superior fire power.

d. Regardless what decisions were reached at Honolulu, their implementation would require positioning of our forces. This would take time. Khanh must remember we had other responsibilities in Asia and must be able react anywhere we had forces or commitments. Not by chance was this conference being held at Honolulu; the combined headquarters of all American forces in Pacific was there.

e. A further complicating factor in all this was Sino-Soviet split. We would not want to heal it by our actions.

f. In summary, US took problems of SEA very seriously, but we have to keep control of events and keep events from getting control over us. The responsibility of the President himself in all this was enormous, and only he could make the final decisions, and that only after the conversations in Honolulu and consultations in Washington.

4. SVN Diplomatic Representation.

Secretary then asked Khanh what he was doing about appointing Ambassadors and generally increasing effectiveness of GVN representation abroad. Khanh acknowledged some action from him was long over due and said Ambassador had frequently reminded him of this. Khanh had put off action on naming Ambassadors until Generals’ case was settled. Now Foreign Minister Quat was out of country. When he returned, Khanh would take action. Secretary and Ambassador reemphasized importance of GVN achieving effective representation abroad and making most of opportunities to get aid from friendly third countries.

5. Further Disposition of Released Generals.

On closing, Khanh asked if any more questions. Ambassador said he would like to know what Khanh thought the Generals, both Minh and detainees, said among themselves after he left them in the room in Dalat after announcing his disposition of their case. Reply: Minh probably said, “Look, fellows, I am sorry about this decision but I did all I could for you.” Don probably said, “You, Minh, are a stinker. You looked out for yourself and left us to take the rap. Of all of us, only you came out of it all right.” Khanh said both Kim and Mai Hu Xuan had really feared that they would be shot, and cried from joy on hearing of disposition their case. Khanh indicated that he fully aware he had not made friends of the Generals he released. Acknowledged they might still like to conspire against him but commented that after the vote of confidence he got from the other officers, it would be clear to all that any attempt at conspiracy foredoomed to failure. (Khanh did not comment on what jobs, if any, the Generals would be given or where they would be located.)

As can be seen, the Secretary let Khanh develop his ideas fairly fully and do most of the talking. Khanh talked firmly and effectively, and responded well to the Secretary’s several points. He showed clearly that he was aware of the gravity of the decisions (though he did seem a touch cavalier about the political problems of hitting eastern Laos at once), and did not seem to want a firm US answer the day after tomorrow. But it seemed clear that he did want it pretty soon, and was now convinced he could not win in South Vietnam without hitting other areas including the North. He was careful to point out that the pacification campaign was making gains and would continue do so. Still, it was essentially defensive.

On the timing, the Secretary said that any action would be preceded in any event by some period of time for force deployments (he did not refer to diplomatic steps re Laos, the UN side, the US Congressional problem, or other types of factors). Khanh understood this, and also accepted the Secretary’s point that we would need to consult very closely with Khanh himself, try to bring the British and Australians aboard (the Secretary referred only to these two possible active participants), and generally synchronize and work out the whole plan with great care.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State Central Files, PSL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State. Rusk, accompanied by William Bundy, was in New Delhi, India, May 28–30. He flew to Saigon and Bangkok on May 31 and then on to Honolulu on June 1.

McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this telegram to the President on June 2. His transmittal memorandum reads in part as follows:

“You may also be interested in the Secretary’s summary of the things the U.S. had to bear in mind at the end of Section 3 and the beginning of Section 4. The Secretary’s emphasis here, as in other conversations in Asia, is more military and strategic than diplomatic and political. In particular, he does not address the question of international justification for action, an omission noted in the closing comment of the cable (which was probably drafted by my brother Bill.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5)

2 See Document 156.

3 The General Officers of the Military Revolutionary Committee met in Dalat May 27–28 to consider the cases of Generals Tran Van Don, Mai Huu Xuan, Le Van Kim, Ton That Dinh, and Nguyen Van Vy, all of whom had been under arrest since the Khanh coup of January 30. The MRC found the Generals’ actions prior to the coup to be lacking in revolutionary spirit, thoughtless, demoralizing to the people and the troops under their command, and irresponsible. The Generals received official reprimands and were prohibited from serving on the MRC or holding a command for a fixed period. (Telegram 2359 from Saigon, May 31; Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

4 The “Weekly Report, The Situation in South Vietnam,” June 3, reported that this month-long operation against the Viet Cong Do Xa base ended on May 27. Although no major engagement with VC forces resulted, the operation achieved one of its objectives: the destruction of VC structure and food supplies. The report concluded that while losses of men, materiel, and structures would not have a permanent effect on VC capabilities, the operation represented a considerable setback. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XI, Memos)

187. Summary Record of a Meeting 187. Summary Record of a Meeting1

Honolulu, June 1, 1964, 8:30 a.m.–12:30 p.m.

I. OPENING PLENARY SESSION TO REVIEW THE SITUATION IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

Secretary Rusk opened the meeting by stating that the purpose this morning was to assess the situation in Southeast Asia as it exists today. He was seeking information as to where we stand and what are the problem areas which would have a bearing on future policy decisions.

A. South Vietnam

1. General review of the political situation. Ambassador Lodge opened the discussion with an over-all review of the situation in South Vietnam. He characterized it as being still generally unsatisfactory. He does not think that General Khanh has actually extended government control over an additional two million more Vietnamese as he recently claimed. Long An and Hai Nghia are two particularly bad provinces. While the intensity of GVN activity has stepped up, the VC have also increased the level of their operations with the result that such gains as GVN has achieved have been offset by the VC.

Within Saigon the police are as effective as they have ever been in maintaining internal security, yet more Americans are being killed there all the time. This is due, of course to a greater level of VC activity in the capital City.

When discussing Vietnam it must be remembered that we are not talking about a unified country in any sense of the word. Internal divisions are manifold. It is a country where many discordant elements live together. Catholics, Buddhists, Hoa Hao, Cao Dai, Montagnards, etc. It is characterized by a general lack of patriotism and public spirit. In a sense, it is a case of every man for himself with the Devil taking the hindmost. With this as a background, we have to remember that what America is trying to do is to pull this undeveloped country into the 20th Century as fast as we can.

Although we were able to get through Buddha’s birthday on May 26 without serious incidents, the possibility of religious trouble is always present. Credit for getting over this anniversary was due primarily to General Khanh’s patience and hard work with both Catholic and Buddhist leaders, as well as extensive activity by the Embassy.

All in all, it would not be prudent for us to think that the situation in South Vietnam can be expected to improve in the near future without our introducing something new and significant into the equation.

General Khanh has managed to halt the general deterioration of political stability in the country which began with the 8 May 1963 Buddhist disorders in Hue. He has injected new pep into the army. He travels around the country making a major effort to give the general population a psychological “shot in the arm” and raise their morale. He is trying to build up the strength and esprit of the Civil Guard and the SDC. He is giving command emphasis to the problem of improving the over-all psychological attitude of the people and is making some headway in this regard. He appears to have emerged successfully from the religious crisis stemming from discrimination against the Buddhists, which he inherited from the Diem regime, and recently seems to have gotten himself “off the hook” on the crisis of the four generals, although here he has exchanged one political problem for another political problem of a different character. He has released the generals from prison and has constituted them into a special staff to work together in Dalat. Of course these four are under surveillance 24 hours a day, but at least they are not under lock and key. In general, Ambassador Lodge’s assessment of Khanh was that he is an able man, who like his country has high potential.

In assessing the release of the generals, Ambassador Lodge felt that they were well under control at present, that they had no possibility of organizing a coup in the near future, that their popularity in the Army seemed to be exaggerated, and that in any event, General Khanh had a sufficient following within the RVNAF to keep him in power.

Secretary Rusk asked if there seemed to be any widespread feeling in South Vietnam in support of the Communist aims; was there any general revolutionary movement among the population with direct loyalty to Hanoi? Ambassador Lodge said he did not think so. A number of Vietnamese consider Ho Chi Minh a great leader, but any support for the VC in the country-side is a direct result of their terrorism campaign which is extremely effective. As soon as some “counterterrorism measures” can be initiated by the GVN, we can expect to see this popular support for the VC change. By counter-terrorism measures, Ambassador Lodge explained that he did not mean indiscriminate saturation bombing of North Vietnam. That would have a bad effect on public opinion in the South. However, he is convinced that the South Vietnamese would welcome a selective bombing campaign against military targets in the North. This would bolster morale and give the population in the South a feeling of unity and a sense of accomplishing something in the war.

Secretary Rusk asked if there were any private groups or popular movements in the GVN that could be persuaded to come out publicly in support for the government program and if there were, what would be the best way to get them to speak out? Ambassador Lodge said that the strongest anti-Communist group in South Vietnam is the Catholics. In his judgment this would have to be the core around which a really effective anti-Communist political force would be built. The Hoa Hao and Cao Dai are also influential groups totaling from two to three million people. At present they support General Khanh. The Buddhists, while they have never denounced the VC publicly, still have been able to prevent the VC from seriously infiltrating their ranks. Both the Buddhist and Catholic leadership are cautious about taking a public position against the VC for fear that their priests and bonzes in the villages might become targets for VC terrorist attacks. There is also Mr. Buu’s labor union, as well as numbers of rice farmers and rubber plantation workers. The latter two labor groups can be expected to follow the lead of Mr. Buu and his union. As far as “political parties” in South Vietnam are concerned, there are only two of any importance, the Dai Viet and the VNQDD. Both of these are relatively small groups most of whom are personal friends. Some have returned only recently from exile in France. Neither are political parties in the U.S. sense of the word. They have no appeal to the masses or any real mass base.

Secretary Rusk asked if United States had any inventory of trained Vietnamese personnel living outside of Vietnam. Ambassador Lodge stated that General Khanh knew of some that he would like to bring back, however past experience with this type of intelligentsia has not been overly successful. The problem is that when they return to Vietnam they generally feel they have not been given high enough positions to warrant their remaining. GVN has asked UNESCO to survey this personnel problem and it is hoped that a specific placement program for this type of trained Vietnamese can be developed. Mr. Colby pointed out that there were a couple of hundred thousand Vietnamese living in France as French citizens. However, very few of these are particularly interested in returning to South Vietnam and we cannot expect to find many recruits among them. In fact Ambassador Lodge pointed out that more and more of the educated Vietnamese are leaving the country to seek their future elsewhere.

Mr. McCone asked if there was not some political approach that might be made to the Vietnamese leadership which would cause them to put aside their differences for the duration of the war and work together in a unified way against the VC. Ambassador Lodge said there was more national spirit today than there was five years ago. He was of the opinion that if we bombed Tchepone or attacked the Swatow boats and the Vietnamese people knew about it, this would tend to stimulate their morale, unify their efforts and reduce the quarreling among themselves as it would focus their attention on a common enemy and enable Khanh to make more effective his appeal to put the whole country on a war footing. Ambassador Lodge stated that the Papal Delegate in SVN and Archbishop Binh of Saigon were both good men. On the Buddhist side he said that the Venerable Tam Chau is a good man, and that Tri Quang is a natural politician and a very important man in the country. Ambassador Lodge has tried to impress upon Tri Quang the importance of sharing a more active responsibility for the fate of his country. He has told Tri Quang that he could be a world figure if he was prepared to step forward and assume a greater responsibility for events.

Secretary Rusk asked if there was any major personality or leader on the Vietnamese scene. Ambassador Lodge said that he did not see any. Aside from General Khanh himself, there is always “Big” Minh, but in Lodge’s judgment the latter fills the bill of a natural leader even less today than he did in the early days of the war. The most prominent figure, Deputy Prime Minister Hoan, does not have any substantial personal following either.

Secretary Rusk asked if there would be any merit in the suggestion that the Office of the Chief of State might be made more important and used in some way to create a greater sense of Buddhist and Catholic unity. Ambassador Lodge has already explained to Khanh that the art of politics was the art of inclusion, not exclusion of divergent views. Khanh has made a real effort to include both Catholic and Buddhist and other elements in high positions in government today. In fact he has done about as much as he can to bring together all points of view. The Ambassador’s feeling was that it would be better to leave things as they are for the time being and not try to inject a new emphasis on the Chief of State role or reorganize the government. It seemed preferable to leave the Ministers where they were and to work around them if necessary.

Secretary Rusk asked if General Khanh himself felt the situation had deteriorated since he took office. Ambassador Lodge said no. Khanh thinks that what has happened is that both sides have stepped-up the intensity of their activities. This applies not only to in-country VC activities, but external factors also.

Secretary McNamara expressed concern that things were going badly in South Vietnam, citing desertion rate increases as a case in point. He was of the opinion that this unfavorable trend of events will not be reversed unless something new is injected into the situation to cause a change.

Secretary Rusk asked whether the general administrative ineffectiveness of the government was due to defective administrative procedures or poorly trained administrative personnel. Ambassador Lodge thought the fault lay in the antiquated administrative procedures, most of which were inherited from the French Civil Service System, rather than personnel. Mr. Manfull added that since the November coup, bureaucrats have been reluctant to assume responsibility for fear of another sudden change of administration. Moreover Vietnamese administrative personnel work on a different and much more leisurely time frame than we are accustomed to in the United States. As far as the administration in the country-side is concerned, there is the perennial problem of lack of trained personnel to work at the district, village and hamlet levels. We cannot look forward to any quick improvement in this area.

2. Military and security situation: General Westmoreland presented a brief overview of the military situation in Vietnam under the subheadings of Control, Personnel Management, Resource Management and Operational Effectiveness. Control is important as both the goal and the measurement of success. Government control of rural population continued to decline during the first quarter of calendar year 1964. It fell from 79% on 31 December 1963 to 75% on 31 March 1964. But the rate of decline slowed and the trend in April started to rise slowly, yes—but this indicates that while the situation is grim, the prospects are not.

Hamlets of New Rural Life (formerly called Strategic Hamlets) as a program and reflection of Government control made gains in areas open to US impact where money and material could help. However, in the more significant aspects of control, i.e., mutual trust (in the government by the people and in the people by those in authority) there was a failure to meet objectives and an actual decline. This is best shown in the decline in the percent of MAP supported hamlet militia programmed to be armed which have actively been armed, and in the percent of completed hamlets having their authorized number of armed hamlet militia squads. No doubt the VC understood and exploited this situation because, although the trend line in VC attacks declined, the VC initiated incident line continued its upward course.

The brief analysis of selected indicators of control shows the need for long duration pacification operations to establish firm separation of the population from the VC and restore the confidence of the people in the ability and desire of the government to protect them from the VC.

A major problem facing MACV is that of personnel management in the Vietnamese Armed Forces. The review and analysis of the last quarter of year 1963 touched upon the demoralization of the middle level of management in the Vietnamese Armed Forces following the loss and replacement of military and civil leaders after the 1 November coup. Their discontentment when neither progress nor leadership materialized and the apathy when General Khanh took over on 30 January appeared to have reached the ordinary soldier in the first quarter of calendar year 1964 and the desertion rate rose in an alarming fashion. There are some indications of slight improvement. Volunteers in April-almost a thousand-exceeded the entire total for the first quarter 1964 and the increase in desertion rate slowed in April but the trend line continues to rise and points up the demoralization of the Armed Forces. The combat unit level is where the strength declines more rapidly than elsewhere because combat losses compound the desertion problem and could rob us of the means to execute a sound and comprehensive national pacification plan. This is the number one problem for joint GVN/US action.

Resource Management is one aspect of the military situation in Vietnam which is improving and improving at a steady rate. Forces are being allocated to weigh the critical provinces and major pacification efforts. General reserve forces have been released in greater numbers to Corps and the Corps have used them well. The 3rd Regiment was moved out of I Corps and used in the highly successful Ara Solour operation in III Corps. It is now engaged in supporting 7th Division pacification operations in Dinh Tuong Province. Two A1H fighter squadrons are coming into operational use with the third one scheduled to be flying before the end of the calendar year. Another step forward is the reorganization of the paramilitary forces. Decrees signed on 7 and 12 May redesignate the Civil Guard as Regional Force and the Self Defense Corps and Hamlet Militia as the Popular Force. The headquarters of both these forces are under the Ministry of Defense and command arrangements are provided for down to the subsector level.

As to operational effectiveness, massive US effort to accelerate the tempo of military operations has been successful in spite of the dislocations caused by two changes in government. Although there was a slight downward trend in air support caused by the training necessary for the activation of the third A1H squadron, the number of small unit operations tripled in the first quarter of this year and battalion size operations doubled. Battalion operations with contact rose to 58% also but small unit operations with contact declined and remains at about 2%.

Here we note a paradox. The number of GVN operations of all types rose dramatically above the rate of increase of VC initiated incidents, but there was no corresponding increase of population or area under Government control. In fact, Government control continued to decline. This establishes the fact that there is no direct relationship of []between operating tempo and extension of control. Further, the failure to show an increase in the effectiveness of operations in terms of contact in small unit actions highlights the problem. If no contact indicates a VC disability incurred by increased presence of Government forces, why was there no corresponding increase in area and population under Government control?

The strength decline in the Armed Forces and high desertion rates in both the regular and paramilitary forces also need to be considered. Canvassing alternatives and integrating professional observations of the advisory effort, it is concluded that operations must be aimed at retention and extension of control and this means more clear and hold operations and fewer “safaris” with large formations which start from a secure area, sweep through a contested area, then return to a secure area-and with no lasting contribution to pacification. All things considered, there must be more attention to pacification oriented tasks together with carefully selected morale building attacks against the VC when the weight of good intelligence, planning and firepower are on the side of GVN forces. In short, the philosophy and concepts of the Chien Thang National Pacification Plan need to be translated into operational techniques.

One clear fact arises from this analysis. The GVN responded to the massive US advisory pressure to increase the tempo of operations. Therefore, there is good reason to believe that the GVN will respond to a massive, continuing US advisory program aimed at pacification-oriented operations which result in control. This will be the prime objective and the major theme for US advisory efforts in the months ahead.

In summary, General Westmoreland expressed the view that the entire military situation in Vietnam today is tenuous, but far from hopeless. We have developed a means for translating the good philosophy of the Chien Thang Plan into itemized requirements which wild guide planning and measure the progress of our efforts towards national pacification.

In response to a question by General Taylor, General Westmoreland indicated that the chain of command for pacification operations ran from General Khanh to General Khiem (the Secretary of Defense) to the Corps, the Divisions and then to the Provinces or Sectors

Secretary McNamara asked if there was a clear understanding on pacification matters as to the chain of command and responsibilities of the division commanders and the province chiefs. The discussion revealed that this matter had been clarified by General Khanh who had decided that the Division Commander would be in the chain.

General Westmoreland indicated that he had considered a possible elimination or reorientation of the III Corps headquarters with the 5th and 7th Divisions functioning as independent divisions for operations in the critical provinces in the heart of the country. He would give highest priority to pacification operations in the key areas immediately surrounding the capital and would defer any major effort in the IV Corps area until later.

Secretary McNamara said he would like to go back to General Westmoreland’s summary. For the sake of discussion, he thought we should consider the military situation worse than tenuous. It was approaching the hopeless category. Desertion rates are higher than ever, the GVN was falling behind in recruiting to meet any of the force goals agreed upon at our mid-March meeting. Morale in the armed forces is generally very poor and not getting any better. The GVN has yet to deploy adequate forces into the key provinces to meet the critical VC situation there. The three facts that seem to be unmistakably clear are: (1) An average of 17,000 new recruits per month are needed, but at present the rate is running around 1,000. (2) There is no evidence of any increase in either area or population under government control. (3) The administration of the overall pacification effort is very ineffective. As of today the GVN has only about 10–12 clear and hold operations underway in the whole country and the gist of the reports on all of these operations is that they are making little if any progress.

General Westmoreland stated that MACV had urged General Khanh to initiate an intensive recruiting campaign. Nevertheless, during the month of May the percentage recruited as compared to the goals indicated shortages of anywhere from 50 to 80%. There have been at least two instances where a group of draftees have elected to join the VC rather than the government. One of the propaganda themes of the VC is that Vietnamese who join their ranks will be able to remain at their homes and will not be sent to other parts of the country as is the case if they join the government. The fact of the matter is that the government is in serious competition with the VC for recruits.

General Westmoreland pointed out that it is easier to recruit for the Civil Guard and the SDC than it is for the regular Army as these units are not required to move from their home area. His idea is that an attempt should be made to recruit for the regular Army from the Civil Guard and SDC, taking personnel from those units who have indicated a desire to follow a military career. Regular troops could then be deployed around the country where needed. Regional and Popular Forces would be deployed as near where they were recruited as possible, with the mission of securing cleared areas.

Secretary Rusk noted that morale is generally considered to be a function of leadership. He asked for a report on measures being taken by General Khanh to improve the low morale. General Westmoreland cited General Khanh’s use of a more liberal promotion policy, better pay, and prompt recognition of valor by awarding medals to deserving soldiers. He went on to say that MACV studies indicated dependent housing is one of the key factors affecting Vietnamese Armed Forces morale and that MACV hoped to be able to submit specific recommendations on this problem within two weeks. Secretary Rusk said that if this would improve morale we should get on with it as soon as possible. He wondered, for example, if there would be any advantage in announcing some approval in principle of this idea within a week. General Westmoreland pointed out that any construction in Vietnam involved a lot of red tape and it would probably take at least six months to get anything going under the Vietnamese system. For that reason, MACV is even exploring the possibility of using U.S. prefabricated housing to cut down this time lag. Secretary Rusk said that this was something we should push through the planning stage as fast as possible so as to produce some tangible results quickly.

In response to a question from General Taylor as to whether the Vietnamese officers and soldiers are willing to fight, Ambassador Lodge provided the Secretary with a paper on this subject which had been prepared in Saigon.2

General Westmoreland distributed a “spread sheet” which indicated MACV’s concept as to how to translate the Chien Thang National Plan, which was soundly conceived, into specific actions. The chart includes three phases-Phase I, Clearing; Phase II, Securing; Phase III, Developing. Secretary Rusk asked what the difference was between a pacified area and a cleared area. General Westmoreland explained that a pacified area was one in which the VC infrastructure had been completely eliminated whereas a cleared area was one which had been swept clear of VC regular or guerrilla forces.

[Here follow sections entitled “South Vietnam, Economic situation and USOM status, Psychological factors and programs;” “Laos, The military situation, Political situation;” and “Thailand, Political situation and attitudes, Military appraisal.”]

D. North Vietnam.

1. The military situation: CINCPAC J2 presented a briefing on the North Vietnamese Armed Forces which currently include some 225,000 fighting troops.

Secretary McNamara asked if the North Vietnamese had any mode of transport for their divisions. The answer was that their divisions are not motorized in the U.S. sense and generally moved from one location to another by foot. Each division has some 150 2–1/2 ton trucks to move their supplies.

As to the general disposition of the PAVN deployments, the current order of battle indicates they are neither disposed for offense or defense but rather are deployed administratively as are U.S. forces in continental USA. The majority of their divisions are located in the Red River delta. Their Air Force consists of some 76 aircraft, forty of which are light transport. None are fighters or jets. There are five jet-capable airfields in North Vietnam. Ambassador Lodge observed that the current deployments of PAVN units seemed to be designed more to help the government maintain its control over the people than anything else.

General Taylor inquired as to the status of North Vietnamese air defense. He was told that it was relatively ineffective against high-flying jet aircraft but would be effective against helicopters and prop-aircraft. Although NVN AC&W system was overlapped by the Communist Chinese air defense system, there is no evidence to date that a combined North Vietnamese-Chinese Communist air defense control center has been established. It was pointed out that the AC&W and AAA were centered in the Hanoi-Haiphong industrial area.

With respect to possible air operations against North Vietnam, General Smart stated that our aircraft could probably go in and hit targets without any losses in an initial attack. Secretary McNamara emphasized that whatever air defenses the North Vietnamese may have, they are only effective where their guns are positioned. No missiles (SAM) are known to be located in NVN. They simply do not have the air defense resources to provide air defense for all their key targets. Consequently, it should certainly be possible to plan an air attack on targets in North Vietnam which would avoid running into their defended areas. Secretary McNamara asked that one of the working groups specifically examine the proposed target system in North Vietnam from the point of view of the North Vietnamese air defense capability.

Admiral Felt reminded everyone present that the North Vietnamese army did defeat the French and this fact has certainly not been forgotten by the Thais and the Lao. As far as these two countries are concerned, the Viet Minh soldier seems to be “one hundred feet tall”.

Secretary Rusk inquired whether there were any reports of ChiCom displacements of air units towards the South of China. He was told that no such reports had been received, however, the fact that the North Vietnamese possessed five jet-capable fields lends a ready potential for deployment of Chinese Communist jet aircraft to North Vietnam at some future date. Secretary Rusk brought the morning meeting to an end at 12:30 p.m. by reminding those present that there would be no statements made to the press today. Some form of communiqué would be issued at the end of the meeting and this would be a problem for Mr. Rowan’s working group to consider.

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAMs. Top Secret. Prepared by CINCPAC. An attached list of partidpants is not printed. In all, 55 persons attended the conference. After this plenary session, a group of approximately 15 principals met in restricted discussions (see Documents 188 and 189). The rest of the participants formed four working groups, each to discuss one of the following issues: Program for wider actions; Matters pertaining to South Vietnam; Logistical support problems; and Psychological and informational actions. Summary reports of these working groups, prepared by CINCPAC, are not printed.

2 Not found. In telegram 2336 from Saigon, May 28, Lodge asked the Department of State to inform McNamara that he had asked MACV to prepare a “definitive essay with detailed examples, facts and 6gures to support our claim that the Vietnamese are brave, effective fighters willing to sacrifice their lives in defense of their country.” Lodge hoped to bring it with him to Honolulu. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

188. Summary Record of a Meeting 188. Summary Record of a Meeting1

Honolulu, June 1, 1964, 2:15–6:15 p.m.

MEETING OF PRINCIPALS

Secretary Rusk

Ambassador Lodge

Secretary McNamara

Ambassador Martin

General Taylor

Admiral Felt

Asst Sec State Bundy

Admiral Sharp

Asst Sec Def McNaughton

Lt General Westmoreland

Mr. Forrestal

Mr. Chadbourn2

Mr. Sullivan

1. Assessment of Situation in SVN.

SecDef asked re situation in SVN: Is it deteriorating per evidence; weak planning at grass roots; shifting administrators.

SecState said he did not believe it was deteriorating rapidly; not going downward as bad as a year ago.

Lodge said if there is nothing new, SVN will probably jog along as is. Potential there to do better. External things could have effect. Khanh has done a lot; improved things in last 4 months.

SecDef said that GVN controls less, lower fighting will, fewer men to fight. This though better than would have been without Khanh.

SecState asked if there has been a downward trend since January.

Westmoreland said there is instability at SDC level because of coupe. Desertion rate is final, delayed, manifestation of coup impact. Recruiting was stopped administratively. He is not optimistic; but not pessimistic. Things have leveled off and there has been a slight rise. Generals are finally getting the concept of pacification, and we are keeping them at it. Some successful operations recently. Khanh is doing fairly well at getting good commanders. Hopefully, the desertion rate will be reduced. Psywar is moving in right direction. Plans now getting down to where we can get moving. Need a “victory” badly: e.g., battlefield; pacification; hitting panhandle, etc. Can’t pacify SVN completely as long as the panhandle is open. If no “victory” but Khanh is in power, we’ll move forward bit by bit-by first of year should see substantial progress. Not spectacular. Should at least double existing oil spots. We should see a leveling off and slight rise by the end of year.

Lodge anticipated some improvement if Khanh lives; jogging along. Hitting the North would be a shot in the arm. It would weaken the VC and lift the GVN. We should be in considerably better shape if Khanh remains in for a year. SecState reminded that we shouldn’t get ourselves hung on Khanh’s survival. If Khanh gone, USA must start again.

SecDef said we need plan to apply if Khanh gone. He is not happy with Kim.

Lodge said maybe we’ll have no government at all.

SecDef summarized that the opinion at the table is that there is no great pressure for drastic action at this time; SVN is not deteriorating rapidly.

McCone said that while deterioration may not be fast, a dramatic victory for the VC could be very negative; and what of the deteriorating morale of people themselves.

Westmoreland said that instability has just filtered down. Also, of course, there is war weariness.

Taylor reported that Buu said morale surprisingly good.

Sullivan said that Bob Thompson agreed.

Westmoreland added that the VC have their morale problems too.

2. Measures which might be taken in SVN.

Lodge said we should organize the police in the chosen bad provinces to kill off terrorism.

McCone remarked that Castro did it effectively in Cuba.

Westmoreland said that the Civil Defense Corps may have been designed with this task.

SecState pointed out that Saigon has something like this.

Felt repeated his offer of Civil Affairs military people who can help on this.

SecDef suggested that we consider this as one of recommendations, along with other actions, in the chosen provinces. He asked what else?

Westmoreland said, first we must designate the critical critical provinces and get GVN to accept the concept. Then we must infuse resources and cadres of GVN and US advisors, and create a task force to monitor, on a day-by-day basis, the operation. He suggested 8 provinces in “Phase I”; 1 in “Phase II”; and 1 in “Phase III.”3 He omitted Kien Hoa because it would be too much of an undertaking; not of sufficient strategic importance.

Felt dissented re Kien Hoa.

Westmoreland would move in troops, probably borrowed from Corps II. He would not abandon the lower half of Corps IV. It is politically unacceptable.

Taylor suggested that if we can’t do 8 provinces, do fewer. Also, he is bothered by the absence of centralized control of the program.

Westmoreland said that General Hon will take over the 5th Division (he worked with Cushman). Saigon will jump over Corps III and work directly with 5th and 7th Divisions. There would be an interdepartmental (US/GVN) task force. We would make Colonel Depuy the US representative. The task force would meet in Colonel Lake’s office (Ministry of Rural Life).

Lodge said that, when the point is raised, Khanh acts interested in it, but never does anything.

Westmoreland said that the troops would be under the command of the province chief (who must be good and have US advisors). Although the province chief would be under the division commander, troops couldn’t be removed by the division commander. There would be a team of 25 people (1/2 US, 1/2 VN) in a province. Extend down to district. If we say four districts per province, with 6 US and 6 VN per district, require 35–40 US military per province and 5 USOM. They would be a training team to work with counterparts at province and district level from 2–6 months—as long as needed. This over and above existing military and USOM there. Could call them a “Pacification Task Force.” They would pair off with GVN representatives. The division commander will hold back small reserve (companies); also there is a reserve in Saigon (battalions) to be called on. So no need to divert the province chief’s pacification forces. He reminded that sons of most families in bad areas are in the VC. Find only old folks, women and kids there. What happens if youth can’t come home? This is a problem that takes time.

SecDef said we should concentrate on the 8 provinces. Take the 500 men out of existing assets. We can’t do this in less than 90 days-6 months if we recruit. Shouldn’t wait. So we must drain off elsewhere in SVN to get going immediately. Can get military all right. As for USOM, we can transfer people from military to temporary duty with USOM for the time being.

Westmoreland said that the reorganization will free up some men.

SecDef asked if the first thing the team does is to lay out, with district chief, the pacification plan step by step in the district, and the allocation of resources (forces, cadres, etc.) and timing.

Westmoreland said that we are trying it out now in Go Cong.

SecDef asked if Westmoreland needed more men to provide “stiffening” for the GVN paramilitary.

Westmoreland said that that was already included. Also we should increase from one officer and one noncom to 2 plus 2 per battalion. We need 30 officers and 30 men per division-or, in 8 provinces, about 75 men. They would be battalion advisors. This is for the regular Army. For the CG and SDC, the 40 men per province already mentioned can take care of it.

Taylor asked if we need 4 men per district to do unit training of paramilitary and to plan operations.

Westmoreland said that his 6 + 6 at district level absorbs Taylor’s

4.

Lodge said that then we must consolidate by police, to get the population [under?] control. SecDef asked what about curfews, identification, etc., in critical provinces.

Westmoreland said that we have tried a blockade of the Mekong (with limited success). Some curfews-left to local decision. Results have been disappointing.

SecState said that, re police, he was for on-the-job training.

Westmoreland said that we need 4 weeks at least to be sure the man is reliable. Also, though highly desirable to integrate police forces into the Phase I operations, there are not enough police now to do it until maybe Phase III.

SecDef said we should agree that the functions, by military (or paramilitary) will be in Phase I. He asked if we need anything else. Piasters? Information Program? We can supply radios in 2 or 3 weeks if we must. He said we should leave this with Bill Gaud. We could pay for the radios from MAP and deliver them by air.

SecState said maybe we should ask the Japanese to give the radios.

SecDef asked what about the “economic leg” of the 3-legged stool: Medicines, materials for schools, etc. He said we need a package.

SecState said we should use it as bait for pacification.

Westmoreland said we better pay for civil servants too.

SecState commented that it’s hard to escalate from business-as-usual to war-with-China just to jog folks a little.

Lodge suggested better population control, perhaps a curfew for all (not just US), declaration of some kind by Khanh, a night-shift war, promises of land to vets, promotions (rank to go with command). Re Americans, there is some business as usual. Re parties, we do want continued US–VN association. Could remove dependents.

SecDef said there are three things we could do: Stop inflow of dependents; encourage them to go home; order them home.

Lodge said he was now encouraging kids to go home for the summer (at own expense).

SecDef guessed that more would get out if we paid their transportation home and their tuition.

Westmoreland said that there are now 113 MACV authorized with families (cut by 40 recently). No dependents means a 1-year tour. But also, families sometimes pay their own way; 103 such cases now.

SecDef said this could be stopped.

SecState asked what resources we had, to make use of national emergency, to set aside peacetime regulations-e.g., accounting for the property, etc. Would let us tell agencies to get things done. We should get our lawyers at it.

Westmoreland said he could save people by streamlining certain procedures, but not save much time that way.

Lodge said he wants to stop the flow of dependents. Chadbourn remarked that it would be discriminatory. He said it would lift morale, but show a lack of confidence in the outcome.

Taylor said it would not lift military morale.

SecDef asked what about sending dependents to the Philippines. We could pay transportation and allow visits.

SecDef asked if further “encadrement” in the other provinces is wise. He distinguishes (1) for training, (2) for planning and (3) for stiffening.

Westmoreland said we are getting advisory experience in 13 districts now. Have 150 or so relevant districts (239 districts, 40 capitals of which are province capitals, and 40 of which are not usefully accessible). With 2 officers and 2 men in each, would assist in training paramilitary and supervising them. Problems are (1) interpreter shortage, (2) would probably triple U.S. casualties. On the plus side: The men (1) would be good as “agents” for MACV, (2) would be catalysts for action for MACV, and (3) could help in training and operations. Query as to net value. It would not divert many GVNs to protect the Americans. They would have to stay 6–9 months to do the job. He prefers to work on the 8 “damn critical” provinces. He can scrape up enough interpreters. (The GVN portion of 6-plus-6 Task Force would speak English).

[1 paragraph (3–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

SecState asked about possible use of third country assistance. He said it is important that we get these people out there soon, that they be distributed around country, and that their participation be coordinated with GVN before request and before arrival.

Gaud said that third countries could help with police.

SecDef said, re facilities to match up with third country medical, manpower contributions, we will provide the facilities.

SecDef then asked about the proposal to make the government one of “technicians”?

Lodge said it is better to work around the politicians like FDR did; the politicians are not getting in way; they have symbolic value; there should be no “purge”.

McCone asked if we can recruit able South Vietnamese in SVN and outside.

Lodge said Khanh doesn’t trust them and for good reasons.

Lodge remarked that Khanh may send Big Minh to USA as ambassador.

SecState, re “civil encadrement”, defined it as “an adviser in the next office”.

Lodge said he would favor this only if invited in urgently by Khanh.

Forrestal asked what about “joint operations committees”.

Lodge said he did this in the piaster settlement—an ad hoc thing. But if the idea were institutionalized, it would go against the GVN grain and look like “colonialism”.

Gaud asked if it couldn’t be done for the very critical provinces. and then expanded to the entire pacification program.

Westmoreland pointed out that, in the Directorate of Rural Life, there is such a thing. The principle, on ad hoc basis, is not so bad. Also, he favors fewer direct contacts by so many people with Khanh and more formal contacts when contacts are made.

SecState said that the Ambassador should coordinate all contacts with Khanh.

SecDef asked about the idea of co-location of headquarters.

Westmoreland said that the pacification effort should be integrated as he had described. He added that, now, we have a number of officers permanently at JGS and JOC combined. He opposed advisory representation at the company level, but he favored a beefing up of the battalion team. He would change if from 2 officers and 4 man to 2 plus 3. This would mean 377 more people. (This includes 29 officers—one with each artillery battalion, where we now have no officers.)

SecDef suggested that we address the information program and the offensive guerrilla force tomorrow.

SecState added intelligence operations across the border.

Westmoreland reported that we now have 4 6-man VN ranger paratrooper teams in training. They are for intelligence (looking) only. They will be dropped on 6/15 into the trees. They are to operate North and South of Rt. 9 (unaccompanied by Americans). On 7/15, double it to 8x6; on 8/15, 16x60. They are to stay there 30 days, be air supplied and removed by helicopter.

Taylor said that Westmoreland should look at what he would do if the limits were lifted.

Adjourned at 1815 until 0830, 2 June 1964.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Southeast Asian Strategy. Top Secret. The source text does not indicate who drafted this account of the meeting.

2 Philip H. Chadbourn, Counselor of the Embassy in Vientiane.

3 References are to the phases in the Chien Thang or National Pacification Plan; see Document 187.

189. Summary Record of Meetings 189. Summary Record of Meetings1

Honolulu, June 2, 1964, 8:30–11:50 a.m. and 2:15–4 p.m.

PRINCIPALS’ MEETING

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

General Taylor

Mr. McCone

Mr. Rowan

Mr. W. Bundy

Mr. McNaughton

Mr. Gaud

Mr. Forrestal

Mr. Sullivan

Ambassador Lodge

Ambassador Martin

Admiral Felt

Admiral Sharp

LtGen Westmoreland

Mr. Chadbourn

McCone summarized his assessment of the situation in SVN. He sees the downward spiral as continuing; he views the internal dissension and business-as-usual as making value of “encadrement” doubtful; he saw a dramatic VC victory as demoralizing. He sees erosion of the will to resist. He does not see the situation as “unrecoupable” but grim.

Felt remarked that if we pulled troops out of Corps II it would leave Quang Ngai exposed. A dramatic VC attack could “fix the clock”.

[Here follow discussion primarily on Laos.]

Rowan gave Information Report. He said there was a good deal of unanimity. He addressed the press in particular and psychology in general. The press will continue to write pessimistically. Defeats will be defeats and lassitude will be lassitude. But we can improve our propaganda. It must be part and parcel of every step we take.

(1) Improve morale of South Vietnamese. Doubt that victory can be won without more support of SVN people. Since there is no inspired leadership, the job is to make Khanh and his government look inspired. E.g.: (a) Fireside chats on a regular basis (tape 3 or 4, 10 minutes long, with synchronized sound to interlock with film from field). We have film capacity. Khanh can’t do it all himself. To extent feasible, might bring in other governmental leaders. Some of this going on now.

(b) Radios for rural areas. Ask Japan for 100,000 (as cheap as $1 each). Gaud says 10,000 are there; 25,000 are on the way, 65,000 no problem. McCone said let’s have 200,000 then.

(c) With every military unit in field with US advisers, one should have no responsibility other than propaganda. He should be alert to VC atrocities and mistakes. He could interview bereaved widows; he could take pictures. Now have 42 US military in training for this role. Westmoreland says in Binh Duong there is an experiment with “Go teams”-one for this sort of thing. Felt says we never see any of this Rowan says they will be alert to heroism for newspapers and radios. This has overlapping effect (e.g., on US newsmen). Re the 42 military men, they won’t be out of school until November!

(d) Courage is contagious. Recently, series of stories of heroism compiled. This should be continuous and for immediate exploitation. Maybe cash gift or piece of land.

(e) Mission should press for land reform in Delta.

(f) CIA has 200 Agitation-Propaganda teams doing word-of-mouth propaganda.

(g) Explore role US youth might play in firing up SVN youth. Lodge is apprehensive since the idea seems not to be directed. Quality of people is important.

(h) Also try to find US and third country exchange professors. Lodge agrees. Add 7 field service advisers, for the provinces.

(j) Press the Minister of Info to call in their people for training.

(k) Try to write a song for SVN.

(l) Find a good story-teller in GVN units.

(2) Propaganda directed to North. Many of the above ideas will apply. Begin in-service training program. USIA will take over White programming in Hue in September. Lodge said Reds use guitar-playing story-telling types to good effect. Could use US singer who memorized bit. Westmoreland said ARVN does a good deal of this. Lodge asked if we are advising VN to keep people’s minds full. Rowan said Minister of Info promised to do it. We are pressing.

(Rusk and McNamara returned at 1105)

(3) Program aimed at US and rest of the world. Must restore credibility of US. Military representatives said they had to lie too often. We have caused US newsmen to lie. We must make a new start to cure suspicion and cynicism. Recommend: (a) Fresh info directive (e.g., re Napalm, helicopters, jets, defoliants, Farmgate) giving discretion to Lodge and MACV. SecDef said should wipe off old directive, replace with new position; query if state publicly everything we are doing; against lying to press, but not against certain restrictions. Felt said “jets” should not be on the list; no question there; training operations.

Rowan continued: (b) More cohesive press program. Non U.S. newsmen don’t get full briefings. Non-resident US newsmen, more of which will be visiting, should be treated properly. Favor a “communications czar”-a civilian-heading up all of it. SecDef said could have a policy czar in embassy and operations in MACV. Westmoreland queried how it would work. Rowan said he envisioned a czar who would receive, say, visitors and make all contacts. Westmoreland asked if this merely raises the level of the press attache. Lodge said it could free military from this kind of worry. MACV publicity is “defensive” and “reactive”. We have lousy news stories. No one at MACV looking at it from “positive” viewpoint. SecDef said he would like a propaganda chief operating under Lodge. Sees that press gets to the right things to tell the story. It can’t be done from the US; must be done in SVN. Lodge says they are straightened out vis-a-vis the embassy, but not in MACV.

Rowan continued: The man’s status must be up. Colonel Baker hasn’t enough weight. Can’t ensure space on helicopters. (c) Bad stories are reports of gripe stories. But can minimize military sounding off. (d) PA officers are substandard—some with no experience, some resistance in D.C. Rule in USIA will be pick good men. Felt asked if we could get reservists to do it. SecDef queries if they would volunteer. He said we have enough PA officers in DOD; we can get them out there.

Lodge says any “czar” must be in on military discussions to see the angles. Westmoreland said the problem is how to keep the man in on everything. SecDef said the question is not lack of knowledge, but lack of proper orientation. Decided Westy should review competency of men and replace the incompetent. Felt said there had been transportation availability. Westmoreland said the whole thing has to be managed by MACV. Rowan said the “czar” could be high-ranking military. Westmoreland suggested Lt. Col. Breaulet. Rowan said the rank was too low.

Taylor asked about the problem in USA. SecDef said we need a “czar” there too, and it should be on our agenda in Washington. Manning distinguished the case needed internationally (Jordan-type case) and in US (SVN will to fight, etc.).

SecDef said that if create a “czar” in Saigon, need (1) positive approach and (2) quick response on bad stories. Though 63% of US not “concerned,” one half of remainder think will do a bad job (obsolete equipment, lack of will to fight, ruthless GVN, inefficient government, graft). Recommend that Zorthian’s job be enlarged to handle this job. McCone said we should not short-change the job inside SVN. SecDef agreed, but suggested larger staff. Rowan said that is partly why he picked Art Hanes (?) to be Zorthian’s deputy. SecDef said we should agree to leave it in Lodge’s hands to request what he needs.

McCone asked about radio broadcasting capability in SVN; which he considers more important than broadcasting to the North. He thinks we should do more with transmitters. Zorthian said the problems are programs and receivers.

(1150 adjourned for lunch)

Resumed 6/2/64—1415

Rusk asked whether there is a Joint Pacification Committee in Saigon. Westmoreland said that at the province level we have advisers. At division level we have GVN and U.S. staffs and a USOM adviser to the general. At Corps level, advisers. Get to Colonel Lak’s Directorate of New Rural Life. MACV and USOM participate by officers physically located there. Report to General Kim, executive agent for Pacification. Have Committee on U.S. side: J–3, Zorthian, Manfull, Brent, Nes. It is formally “unilateral”. Lodge said they shy away from the GVN-U.S. groups which meet regularly-institutionalized. SecDef says that he hopes there will be special meetings, almost regularly, for the very critical Provinces Program. Westmoreland said he had this in mind.

SecDef raised the question of a successor to Khanh if he were assassinated. Doubtful about Khiem. Lodge says it has been regularized. If all get assassinated, we probably would have to work with the most promising Colonel near Saigon. Westmoreland said his impression of Khiem is not bad; he cannot find a better one than Khiem. McCone said the contingency plan would depend on how Khanh disappeared from the scene. Lodge said we should think some about how we can exist in SVN if the government is hostile. Taylor said we couldn’t stay if armed forces are on the other side.

[Here follows a brief discussion on Thailand.]

Re the requirement of a joint resolution, SecDef said we would have to make major deployments, make guarantees, anticipate escalation, and call up some reserves. The political foundation is required.

Taylor said ChiComs could move air forces into NVN; VC could step up activity. These are not too troublesome. But NVN may use [move?] its 5 divisions into SVN and Laos, and Chinese could come in. They have their troubles, and we could be [have] 25–75% interdiction effectiveness. In dry season, with 50% reduction factor, they could maintain 13 divisions. Even in wet season, about half of that. To hold along Mekong, take someone’s 5–7 divisions Saigon-Burma. We could punish heavily by air. Query how long it would take to force them to desist. SecDef said this is why it is important to have solid political base. We must be prepared to respond to this even before selective strikes begun.

McCone says that the probabilities are such that it would be reckless to make any move against the North without the preparation: and, the preparations increase the probabilities.

Felt says they are capable of deploying 18 divisions against SEA. First, we hold with 5 U.S. divisions into SEA; then offensive by amphibious operation into North Vietnam.

SecDef said that this is a possible, not probable reaction. If we have controlled, selective strikes, probably there won’t be attacks against SVN. But they are possible, so must be prepared. [3 lines of source text not declassified]

SecState referred to Cuba II. We did not expect USSR to strike with nuclears, but risk so great that it had to be taken into account and faced. He then referred to Korea. MacArthur thought 2 divisions enough, then 4, then 7. He recommended crossing 38th parallel on ground China would not come in. China did come in and maintained 500,000 men despite our air superiority. In Laos, we may isolate U.S.S.R.; but re SVN, U.S.S.R. as better as China [sic]. Soviet might intrude via Berlin or elsewhere. We do what must be done, but this is a major decision requiring full national support. Other side won’t roll over and play dead. In 1953–54, France-U.K.-U.S. agreed when threat. If agreed to partition of VN, why not Laos, etc.? So President must face all this. And the nuclear part of it. Not impossible.

Taylor said if McCone’s and SecDef’s pessimistic view is right, we can err by inaction too. SecState agreed.

McCone suggested the resolution itself would be a deterrent. E.g., the Middle East resolution gotten long before needed. Lodge asked what the resolution might say. Sullivan read from draft (“to use all measures on request”). They come from Middle East resolutions. Lodge suggested that it be extended to “the independent nations of SEA”.

Lodge said VC could make Saigon uninhabitable, shooting from the nearby areas they control.

Chadbourn said Unger wants to know how far he can go talking to Lao. (1) Re extension of “our war” into Panhandle. Probably Souvanna less sensitive about that now. SecState said some things we may have to do without talking to Lao. Object of exercise is to make NVN desist. SecDef said if PL moved on, we might strike NVN. Rusk said it would be hard to get U.S. or Allies to support Siho2 if Souvanna backs out. A lot depends on Souvanna’s attitude.

Taylor remarked that the time factor is important. SecState said he saw nothing quickly unless PL move on. Will take some time to handle physical and political base. Taylor said it would be 8/64 before 3 squadrons of A1’s in (6 squadrons by 2/15); B–57’s in any time; Khanh says he needs a “firm base”-by end of the year; some trouble with U.S. 5–7 divisions (e.g. calling up some reserves and shipping requiring perhaps 2 months). Westmoreland would like to build up manpower, get pacification base, squeeze 12 battalions out for the Laos border, and rainy season. Taylor recommends being ready by middle of November. SecDef said we envision a resolution with perhaps a long wait. A month of preparation, public and private, required for a resolution. In meantime, we must head off hardening of opposition to our policy in SVN. SecState said large group strongly opposes U.S. boys in Asia.

[Here follows a brief discussion on Laos.]

(Meetings terminated at 1600.)

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, McNamara Files: FRC 71 A 3470, Southeast Asian Strategy. Top Secret. The source text does not indicate who drafted this record of the meeting.

2 General Siho Lamphouthacoul, head of paramilitary police in Laos, attempted unsuccessfully on April 19 to overthrow the government of Souvanna Phouma.

190. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 190. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 2, 1964—3 p.m.

2377. CINCPAC for Ambassador Lodge and De Silva.

1. During the past several days we have had chance to sit down [less than 1 1ine of source text not declassified] and review the situation emerging from the 28 May Dalat disposition of charges against Major Generals Tran Van Don, Ton That Dinh, Le Van Kim, Mai Huu Xuan, and Brigadier General Nguyen Van Vy.

2. Considerable uneasiness exists both because original charges of pro-neutralism were neither proffered nor sustained and because the Generals now that they are free and together have a far greater capability to engage in anti-regime coup plotting. A key factor is the attitude of Major General Duong Van (Big) Minh. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] who conversed with Minh immediately after the court of honor terminated, states Minh was definitely unhappy with those proceedings and said as much in aside to him. Minh also stated that he would be remaining in Dalat with the newly released Generals through 2 June, returning to Saigon 3 June, at which time he desired to see [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] again. Generals Don and Kim likewise, but in a friendly fashion, urged caution on the part of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] but did not explain the reason for such caution. The circumstances were such that discussion was impossible.

3. Again, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] General Kim, probably the most perceptive of the Vietnamese Generals, had emerged from his detention somewhat aged and strained. By contrast, General Dinh appears more physically and mentally fit than ever before. There were no perceptible, remarkable changes in the other detainees.

4. The ex-detainees, although stripped of command, have been given the function of creating among themselves a special planning staff. Among them are some of the best minds and tacticians that the Vietnamese Army has known. Kim is politically and administratively astute. Dinh, while tending to flamboyance, has in the past shown tactical skill. Don still has some following in both military and civilian circles, particularly I Corps, although aspirant General Nguyen Chanh Thi, Deputy I Corps Commander, was the only member of the MRC to demand the continued detention of the Generals. Xuan is clever and well-connected, with undoubted lines both into the French and VC camps. Vy, who suffered a heart attack following the events in Dalat and is now in the Grall Hospital, is a long-time friend and supporter of Khanh and can be dismissed from the role of probable coup plotters.

5. It is probably true Khanh has these officers under careful surveillance. The quantity of the surveillance, as proven by past experience, may not be entirely adequate, particularly given the fact that the families of the Generals have been brought to Dalat and have used the interval between 30 January and the present to test and probe former loyalties and to secure means of clandestine communication.

6. Although it is not explicit in any statement or action of the ex-detainee Generals, they must know the Dalat affair is but the first of many steps designed for them by Khanh. If they believe this, and if they have any aspirations towards gaining power, and we must assume they have, then they probably conclude they must act quickly. We believe that the profundity of the crisis which could attend a power grab on the part of these individuals is such that urgent and strong measures should be agreed upon to halt them before they move.

7. In this light it is recommended that we be authorized to have [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] inform Minh, Kim and the others that they would not have American support before, during or after any new coup attempt and to emphasize that such rash actions on their part would lead only to American disengagement and a probable Communization of SVN. We believe we can make this point effectively with them in such a fashion that they would believe it. We must state this position, however, as upon the highest authority in Washington and without conditions.2

8. [less than 1 1ine of source text not declassified] will be contacting Minh again at his request on Wednesday morning.3 He plans merely to listen and elicit further details of Minh’s mood and thinking. Because of time factors it may become urgent, however, that we have within our arsenal, for immediate use, the authority to take the position outlined above.

9. We are of course alert to reactions to the Dalat affair and are carefully probing military attitudes particularly. A Mission assessment of reaction among various power groups will be transmitted next day or two. So far, we have no evidence to indicate strong military reaction for or against the Dalat decisions.

10. As a contingency, however, the use of the statement of position noted above could be effective in giving military opinion one way or the other on the matter or another coup. If we wait until we are faced with a move by the Generals (and that moment may quickly or never come) we might lose by a few hours the possibility of forestalling such actions. In the interest of time we recommend that we be suitably empowered to approach the Generals as outlined above if and when this is clearly essential. We would not, however, unless so instructed plan the approach prior to Amb Lodge’s return from Honolulu end this week.

11. Charge has shown General Harkins this message and he concurs.

Nes

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to CIA. the Office of the Secretary of Defense. the White House, JCS, and CINCPAC.

2 Ball recommended that this authority should be granted by Rusk in Honolulu in consultation with Lodge. (Tosec 68, June 2; ibid.) Rusk and Lodge sent Nes the authorization in Secto 40. June 2. (Ibid.)

3 June 3.

191. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 191. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, June 2, 1964.

CM–1450–64

SUBJECT

Transmittal of JCSM–471–64. “Objectives and Courses of Action-Southeast Asia”

1. On 30 May 1964, the Joint Chiefs of Staff considered the subject paper and directed the Joint Staff to recast certain parts to make it acceptable to all Chiefs. The recasting was done but because of the desire to get it to you before your departure for Honolulu on 31 May, it was dispatched by the office of the Director, Joint Staff before being seen by all the Chiefs in its modified form. When I saw it on 31 May prior to leaving with you for Honolulu, I found that it did not entirely conform to my views and directed its withdrawal from your office pending further consideration by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Nevertheless, because of its pertinence to the impending discussions in Honolulu, I made it available to you and Assistant Secretary McNaughton as a paper still under consideration and not approved in its existing form.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff met on this paper on June 1 and made several changes in language which they have cabled to Honolulu. They requested that the paper be modified and transmitted to you. To meet their request, I am attaching it in modified form to this memorandum. It should now be considered an agreed JCS paper less the views of the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, which I will submit later.2

Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

Attachment

Washington, June 2, 1964.

Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)3

JCSM–471–64

SUBJECT

Objectives and Courses of Action—Southeast Asia

1. Over the past few months and particularly in recent weeks, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have given considerable attention and thought to our national purpose in Southeast Asia. In this context they are concerned because of what they consider to be a lack of definition, even a confusion in respect to objectives and courses of action related to each objective.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that it is their first obligation to define a militarily valid objective for Southeast Asia and then advocate a desirable military course of action to achieve that objective. Based on military considerations, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that the United States should seek through military actions to accomplish destruction of the North Vietnamese will and capabilities as necessary to compel the Democratic Government of Vietnam (DRY) to cease providing support to the insurgencies in South Vietnam and Laos. Only a course of action geared to this objective can assure that the North Vietnamese support of the subversive efforts in Laos and South Vietnam will terminate. The Joint Staff currently is developing a new plan of action against North Vietnam designed to achieve this objective. This plan will be completed as a matter of urgency.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are concerned that the military validity of the objective stated above may not be recognized. They note that some current thinking appears to dismiss this objective in favor of a lesser objective, on visualizing limited military action which, hopefully, would cause the North Vietnamese to decide to terminate their subversive support of activity in Laos and South Vietnam. This lesser objective is thus not geared to destruction of capability but rather to an enforced changing of policy and its implementation which, if achieved, may well be temporary in nature. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that this lesser objective just described is militarily an inadequate objective for the present situation, but would agree as an initial measure to pursue a course of action to achieve this lesser objective.

4. In the event that US action is to be related to achievement of the lesser objective, it is incumbent upon the Joint Chiefs of Staff to furnish their views as to the implementing military actions. Assuming national authority chooses to pursue the lesser objective, resort to a broad range and evolutionary development of miscellaneous activity can perpetuate the inadequacy of present response and the impact on the North Vietnamese could be delayed and even diffused and uncertain. Reluctance now to take positive action will almost inevitably increase the price and gravity of such action when it is finally taken. This situation exists because, in spite of more than two years of effort to convince a determined enemy of our determination that he will not prevail, he has clearly increased his effort and achieved improvement in his relative situation. Thus, even within the lesser second objective, the time for continuing a monologue of “messages” that repeat the substance or maintain the intensity of our past effort seems to us to be well past. If we mean to send a “message” to convey the determination which must be part of our national purpose if we really intend to prevail in this situation, we must recognize the requirement to convey directly, sharply, even abruptly, that the situation has indeed changed insofar as the United States is concerned. It appears that the way to convey that “message” now is along the following lines: a. Select carefully a limited number of target complexes-perhaps two-in North Vietnam.

b. In selecting these target complexes, screen carefully to assure that those chosen are in fact directly and significantly associated with support of the effort in Laos and North Vietnam; that they represent completely valid military objectives; that they are susceptible to reasonable quick and precise destruction by air attack; that their destruction can be achieved with minimum impact on civilian populations. (Appended hereto are summary data on the target complexes selected in keeping with these criteria.)4

c. Once the targets are chosen, appropriate planning action should be initiated to establish readiness for implementation.

d. In relation to establishing readiness for this action, we must, of course, establish a related readiness for implementing the course of action related to the first objective discussed above since readiness for escalation must be clearly established as a matter of military prudence and clearly demonstrated to achieve the full impact of the initial effort.

5. In summary, the Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that: a. There is no basis to be hopeful about the situation in Southeast Asia until and unless North Vietnam is forced to stop supporting the insurgent activities in Laos and South Vietnam.

b. The best way to achieve this objective is through destruction of the North Vietnamese will and capabilities as necessary to compel the DRV to cease providing such support.

c. If there should be a national decision that the United States will resort to lesser measures to cause the North Vietnamese to make a decision to terminate their subversive activities, then we should not waste critical time and more resources in another protracted series of “messages,” but rather we should take positive, prompt, and meaningful military action to underscore our meaning that after more than two years of tolerating this North Vietnamese support we are now determined that it will stop.

d. Just as it is essential to convey a meaningful “message” to the North Vietnamese, it is obviously also important that we convey to our Allies the will and determination of the United States in this matter. In this connection, your attention is invited to the recent comment of the US Ambassador to Thailand, who, in discussing current attitudes of our important Thai Allies, made this significant statement (reference U.S. Embtel Bangkok to Department of State 2014, DTG 241345Z May 64):5 “It should be clearly evident from recent reporting that events propelling Thai toward massive re-examination value their commitment to West. At this moment they still believe we would honor our undertakings but rapid pace recent events and mini mum U.S. responses are almost visibly eroding confidence manifested last October, when I first arrived.”

6. In summary, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. In any national level discussions of action against North Vietnam, you seek precise delineations of both objectives and their supporting courses of action.

b. In defining objectives, it be recognized that the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that termination of North Vietnamese support efforts in both South Vietnam and Laos can be assured only through destruction of North Vietnamese will and capabilities as necessary to compel the DRV to cease providing such support; based on military considerations, the Joint Chiefs of Staff advocate acceptance of this objective and the initiation now of measures designed to increase readiness for its achievement.

c. If is be determined that a lesser objective is to be adopted, the military implementation thereof be geared to demonstrating an early sharp change in US outlook and determination, generally as discussed in paragraph 4, above; that necessary supporting actions be incorporated in an appropriate scenario, without however diffusing or delaying in any way the impact of the deliberate signal of change.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
J.W. Davis
Rear Admiral, USN
Deputy Director, Joint Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that McNaughton saw this memorandum.

2 Document 199.

3 Top Secret; Sensitive.

4 Not printed.

5 Dated May 24. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS)

192. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 192. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, June 3, 1964.

SUBJECT

The Honolulu Team Returns

1. I have now talked with Dean Rusk, Mike Forrestal, and my brother Bill, and I am on my way to see Bob McNamara, to whom I have talked briefly on the phone. The first reading is that no one is recommending any major decision today or, indeed, in the next few days.

2. Lodge and Westmoreland are marginally more optimistic than McNamara, McCone, Forrestal, and Bill Bundy, and they have moved Dean Rusk a little toward their view. Lodge thinks that we can “jog along” for some undefined period, and Westmoreland would probably be happy with a relatively low-key decision to take military action (imperfectly defined) in Southern Laos.

3. Rusk and McNamara, with different emphases, are also inclined to push military action ahead of them, at least for several weeks, and possibly for quite a lot longer. Lodge remains in favor of selective bombing of the North, but he has a much better understanding than before of the necessity for facing a large amount of noise and the possibility of serious escalation.

4. The plan for selective addition of American advisers, military and civil, in critical provinces is moving ahead and has general support. At the same time, you need to know that Lodge, and to a much less extent Westmoreland, are very wary of major U.S. “encadrement” or “interlarding” and are accepting this plan more because Washington urges it than because of deep belief in it.

5. Rusk reports that Lodge is very eager to have his Political Officer, Manfull, as Deputy Chief of Mission, and shows no desire for any more ambitious reinforcement. The Secretary obviously did not press the question with him, and reports his own conviction that since Lodge will probably be leaving in a few months, it is not worthwhile to make an issue of this. Forrestal and, I think, McNamara strongly disagree with this way of handling it, but I do not yet have any idea as to how you can get past the combined reluctance of Rusk and Lodge.

6. The one major new agreement growing out of Honolulu is that we need to centralize authority for public information on Vietnam, both in Saigon and in Washington. Moreover, there is agreement on the names of the men to do this job: Zorthian of USIA in Saigon, and Bob Manning back here. Manning may need some White House standing in order to control Sylvester and his goons, and I am sure it will be in our interest to give it to him.

7. The political and diplomatic course of action with respect to Laos is probably still the most immediate possible trigger of larger decisions. For the moment, we are doing quite well in our negotiations with and on behalf of Souvanna, and our relatively affirmative position on the Polish proposal has been helpful, but it is agreed that we need to discuss possible further actions with respect to Laos, both among ourselves and with the Thais, the British, and the French.

8. Finally, I believe George Ball will bring a draft of a talking paper for his meeting with De Gaulle.2

9. Unless I learn something more before the meeting, my personal recommendation is that the public statement after the meeting should be quite simply that you have received the report, that there will be further discussions in the coming days, and that no startling new statement need be expected in the immediate future.

McG.B.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File. Memos to the President. McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5. Top Secret

2 See Document 196.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

193. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State 193. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, June 3, 1964.

SUBJECT

Highlights of Honolulu Conference

For your possible use in your discussion with the President this evening,2 I am setting down what I thought were the highlights of the Honolulu Conference. (I must say that the big pluses of the conference seemed to me to be the opportunity for a real strategic discussion with Lodge present, and the work done in the information area. I thought the military planning presentation by CINCPAC was not adequate and served largely to highlight some of the difficult issues we still have. Westmoreland’s plan for the critical provinces was a superb piece of work on short notice, but still needs refinement and thought, as well as careful recruiting, before it can be real good. In general, I think the conference showed the ill effects of short notice and lack of opportunity for you and Secretary McNamara to go over jointly just what you wanted to cover and how, before we left Washington.)

I. Situation in South Vietnam.

The situation is “tenuous but not hopeless” (Westmoreland). Lodge and Westmoreland were a shade more optimistic than McNamara and McCone (and myself), and Westmoreland thinks there could be significant improvement by the end of the year if Khanh stays in power, and that a few victories are badly needed and would be a big help. Lodge thinks the situation can continue to “jog along”, but also thinks that some external action would be a big lift to South Vietnamese morale. Both Lodge and Westmoreland concede the built-in perils of something happening to Khanh or the effects of defeats rather than victories. Basically, the crucial indicators of morale, both military and civilian, are very hard to read; some say the peasant is holding out reasonably well, but such factors as the military desertion rate are clearly serious in their implications. (McNamara would probably add the difficulty of obtaining the needed manpower, but Westmoreland’s latest information on this, received during the conference, showed some improvement for May, and I do not believe myself that a difference of 20,000 or even 50,000 in total manpower strengths will make all that much difference.)

II. Effect of Measures to Improve the Situation within South Vietnam.

A. There is much we can still do. 1. Westmoreland put forward a selective plan for moderate increases in US personnel, both civilian and military (on the order of 500), for eight critical provinces. This plan, which requires completion in Saigon, does offer some hope and should be worked on urgently. Both Lodge and Westmoreland reject any major over-all plan for “inter-larding” or “encadrement” in the sense of US personnel moving directly into a decision-making role; such a plan they consider to be both unwise and presently unacceptable by Khanh and the Vietnamese.

2. Information activities can be greatly improved, and the decisions to put “czar” powers into the hands of Zorthian should help the US press problem over time (overcoming a long-standing Lodge bar to Zorthian doing this job). Vietnamese information and psywar activities are also capable of slow improvement, and a number of useful ideas were developed by a group headed by Carl Rowan.

3. The US Mission is as well coordinated as possible given Lodge’s basic nature, except that there is need for a key change in the DCM in favor of a truly executive man. Relations with the GVN are harmonious and they are responsive to US advice; the tactic of intermittent high-level meetings between the US and GVN on specific policy problems is off to a good start, and Lodge and others believe this method will be more effective and palatable than a more systematic high-level, day-to-day relationship involving putting significant numbers of US personnel directly into the GVN structure.

4. There can be some useful clearing of the decks and a more business-like atmosphere in Saigon, through reductions in social activities and progressive cut-down of dependents at least on the military side. (The timing of possible removal of dependents also was not discussed, and is apparently still thought to be wise only in the context of a decision for wider action.)

B. However, none of these measures for improvement can really affect the dubious prognosis for the next 3–6 months. The best we can hope for is a slight gain by the end of the year, and it is worth noting that—despite all we may be able to do in improving press reporting—there will probably continue to be a press bias toward reporting the unfavorable. Thus, so far as the US public view is concerned, we may well appear to be getting nowhere even though we might ourselves consider that the trend was at least slightly upward. Obviously, if improvement is not in fact achieved, the public impression could be one of really sharp deterioration because of the same press bias.

III. Military Plans and Intelligence Estimates re Wider Actions.

The meeting revealed serious unresolved questions in this area, some of a military nature and some requiring political guidance and more refined assumptions. Examples are: 1. To what degree should we seek to conduct military operations in Laos, especially the likely effect of force requirements for any significant operations against the Panhandle Corridor?

2. To what degree should there be a major build-up of forces prior to taking wider action? This requires a careful balancing of the military advantages of such a build-up (which would clearly be prudent in the event of sharp retaliation) as against the possibility that major measures would, in the intelligence view, tend to make the Vietnamese Communists and Hanoi think our objectives are beyond what they are, and thus drive them to the very drastic action the build-up would be designed to meet.

3. In planning of possible air strikes against North Vietnam we need still more refined targeting and a clearer definition of just what should be hit and how thoroughly, and above all, for what objective as between massive destruction and effect on Hanoi’s will. To most of us, the latter seems the proper guideline, but it has not yet been cranked properly into the military plan.

4. In general, the military timing factors would point to some delay in taking action. The additional Vietnamese aircraft will not be available until mid-July although B–57’s could be provided at any time on a Farmgate basis. The logistic and personnel factors to prepare for a possible maximum commitment of 5–7 divisions, as well as the shipping requirements, can be handled properly only in a period of about two months. The Vietnamese manpower should be built up as much as possible, with Westmoreland preferring to have a reserve of 12 battalions that he could use along the Laos border. The rainy season precludes major offensive action in the Panhandle area of Laos until November. And finally, we would like to have Khanh’s base stronger than it is.

On the other hand, some of the timing factors cut the other way. The rainy season does reduce Communist capability to move ground forces south. Moreover, we are obviously uncertain whether Khanh’s base will in fact improve in the next few months.

In general, it was General Taylor’s conclusion that all the military timing factors related to optimum military operations, and that they could be disregarded, although we would have some sacrifice to capability and prudent preparation.

5. The intelligence estimate on Communist reaction has already run into the variable of a major military build-up, and a new assessment should be made in the light of a more refined planning scenario. The latter should be urgently prepared under the guidance of the Executive Committee.

IV. Over-all Conclusions.

The somewhat less pessimistic estimate of the situation in Vietnam means that we can afford-and as indicated above would clearly benefit from-taking perhaps two more weeks to refine our plans and estimates. Although the Laos situation is somewhat shaky, we believe that we can hold it in line at least for this period by a combination of careful diplomacy and perhaps a few added gestures of force.

Crucial actions for the immediate period appear to be the following: 1. An urgent US information effort to make the basic points now arising in the budding “great debate.” This debate will probably grow in volume, and we must get at the basic doubts of the value of Southeast Asia and the importance of our stake there that are besetting and confusing both key members of the Congress and the public.3

2. Diplomatically: A. We should get started at once with the Thai, laying out at least the general possibility of wider action and initiating joint planning, which in itself should have a very helpful effect on their attitude.

B. We must continue to work closely and urgently with the British. They hold a large share of the key to successful diplomacy and standing firm concerning Laos, and they almost certainly have serious doubts about the basic question of wider action, on which they have now been fully informed.

C. We should also cut in the Australians and perhaps the New Zealanders, probably to the full extent that we have done with the British.

D. We have a dilemma with the Philippines, in that we cannot leave them out of the planning activity wholly, but equally cannot trust them with any clear picture of our possible intentions. We need careful instructions on this.

E. We must make another determined effort to get the French not to cut dead across our possible lines of action. This is the purpose of the Ball Mission.

3. We need an intensive and coordinated information and intelligence effort both for the sake of refining our plans and for preparing materials to use for eventual support of wider action if decided upon. (There is an immediate need for intelligence and information support in the Laos diplomatic arena.)

4. To hold the line in Laos and stand firm on withdrawal as a precondition for a conference, we need careful handling of the present consultations and the Polish proposal and, to hold Souvanna Phouma in line, we probably need at least generalized indications of continuing military firmness. Deployment of forces to Thailand should not, and indeed cannot, be envisaged at least until we have gone further with the Thai, but we should consider some added element of military action such as overflights of North Vietnam in the course of our present admitted reconnaissance operations in Laos.

5. We have an immediate problem of handling the high degree of operations flowing from the conference itself. We want to avoid a boiling up of opinion, but at the same time our posture must continue to appear firm, above all to Hanoi and Peking. This will take careful guidance and consideration of high-level statements and speeches in the next two weeks.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. II, Memos (A). Secret. According to a June 3 covering note to McNamara, Bundy sent copies of “his personal notes” of the Honolulu conference to McNamara, Taylor, and McCone with the qualification that they did not necessarily reflect the views of Rusk who approved the distribution. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381)

A note on the top of the source text in McGeorge Bundy’s hand reads: “Hitting the North is required.”

2 President Johnson met with McGeorge and William Bundy, Rusk, McNamara, Taylor, and McCone from 6 to 8 p.m. on June 3 at the White House. (Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record of this meeting has been found.

3 McGeorge Bundy wrote the following note at this point: “U.S. information how high.”

194. Editorial Note 194. Editorial Note

At the request of Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Averell Harriman, the Central Intelligence Agency prepared a memorandum entitled “Possible Carrots for Hanoi” and submitted it to Harriman on June 4. The memorandum stated that “carrots” should be considered as complementary and supplemental to the ongoing examination of punitive action against North Vietnam meant to compel the North Vietnamese to call a halt to insurgencies in Laos and South Vietnam.

The CIA memorandum concluded that there were “doctrinal differences” in the upper echelons of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam’s leadership, but these differences were related primarily to tactics, and not to long-term goals. While Defense Minister Vo Nguyen Giap and President Ho Chi Minh might be more “nationalist” than pro-Chinese Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly, Troong Chin, all North Vietnamese leaders were dedicated to reunification of North and South Vietnam on their terms. The memorandum therefore concluded that “Hanoi is probably under little present compunction to settle for half a loaf, even temporarily.”

The memorandum then assessed possible concessions to Hanoi in political, economic, and international fields. These potential concessions, however, would have little effect because North Vietnam always subordinated economic and popular needs to political and military ambition. The memorandum concluded as follows: “In sum, though the idea of canvassing our imaginations to develop positive inducements capable of giving the DRV some reason to stop its insurgent activities in Laos and South Vietnam is worthwhile we think it unlikely that any such inducements can be evolved which could both (a) be really tempting to the DRV and (b) not be counterproductive for the US. We feel that this would probably remain the case whether such inducements were publicly offered and negotiated or privately conveyed and discussed through some discreet, privileged channel.” (Library of Congress, Harriman Papers, Southeast Asia, 1964)

195. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House 195. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House1

Washington, June 4, 1964, 1 p.m.

SUBJECT

Visit of Foreign Minister Quat with The President

PARTICIPANTS

The Presiden

Michael V. Forrestal—National Security Council

William H. Sullivan, Department of State

Phan Huy Quat—Foreign Minister, Republic of Viet Nam

Pham Khac Rau—Counselor, Embassy of Viet Nam

The Foreign Minister opened the conversation by stating that he had taken advantage of his presence in New York to come to Washington in order to express to the President and the Government of the United States the gratitude of his people for American assistance. He went on to state that the seriousness of the situation in Viet Nam is not because the Government of Viet Nam misuses American assistance. It is rather because of the nature of the communist attack and the nature of the institutions which the Government of Viet Nam has inherited.

The Minister said that he personally felt the current serious situation can be remedied. Until now, the main emphasis has been on military means. He did not contest the need for a stronger military effort but he felt that this alone would not suffice to solve the problem. There is needed a better administrative organization especially in the villages in order to have a communion between the people and the government.

The Minister said that US agencies have understood this problem and have attempted to improve the situation. However, the Vietnamese themselves have failed in coordinating their own efforts as well as combining their work with US assistance. The new government intends to proceed both to establish internal coordination on the Vietnamese side and better coordination between United States and Vietnamese officials.

As a personal suggestion, the Minister thought it might be worthwhile to have a joint US-Vietnamese team in directing the pacification effort in Viet Nam. He believed that Vietnamese officials should have “no complexes” about attempting this sort of intimate American association with their efforts.

The President thanked the Foreign Minister for his views and said that the United States would explore the Minister’s proposal in our own government. He suggested that the Minister and the Prime Minister discuss the matter with Ambassador Lodge and General Westmoreland. In order for such a proposal to function effectively, it would need the complete support and understanding of the US representatives on the scene.

The President then said that he had two points he wished to raise with the Foreign Minister. First, he wished to stress how important it was that the Government of Viet Nam approach every possible third government to provide assistance. In order to do this effectively, the Vietnamese Government needed to appoint competent ambassadors to those governments. The President said he would like to receive some indication of the countries which the Vietnamese Government approaches and learn the nature of their reactions to these approaches.

Secondly, the President stressed his feeling that it was important to have unity in dealing with the problem of communism. It was important to have unity of the non-communist countries, but equally important to have a unified government in Saigon. He thought this was not the time for petty politics and urged that all non-communist leaders in the country settle their differences and unite for their own salvation.

The Foreign Minister expressed appreciation to the President for this advice on both points and said he would report it faithfully to his government when he returned to Saigon.

1 Source: Department of State, President’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Confidential. Drafted by Sullivan on June 5. The time of the meeting is taken from the President’s Daily Diary. Johnson Library)

Quat was in the United States to attend the sessions of the United Nations. On June 3, he met with Secretary Rusk who urged Quat to try to eliminate political quarrels in Saigon, defuse religious differences, and encourage Vietnamese politicians to drop their business-as-usual attitude.

Quat promised to take this message home and to try to improve South Vietnam’s diplomatic representation and its information policies and programs. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) A subsequent discussion of Vietnamese information policies and program is in a memorandum of conversation between Quat and Rowan. June 5. (Washington National Records Center, RG 306, USIA Psychological Operations Files: FRC 68 A 4933, INFO–PSYCH Operations, 1964) Quat also met with Senator Humphrey on June 5; see footnote 4, Document 208.

196. Memorandum From the President to the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 196. Memorandum From the President to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, June 4 1964.

SUBJECT

Guidelines for your Talk with General De Gaulle

There are four main points which I would like you to get across to the General: 1. The United States is in Southeast Asia because of a commitment to help in keeping peace and preserving the independence of countries which are important to elf of us. We have absolutely no interest in domination, and still less in extending our military influence.

2. Increasing threats from North Viet-Nam and Communist China, combined with doubts of our strength and the strength of those who depend on us, could easily lead to a situation in which, against all my own desire and intent, the United States Government would have to prove its determination by military action.

3. It surely is not in the interest of France or of the United States that doubts between our two Governments, and even division of purpose, should contribute to a result of this sort, which could profoundly affect the peace of the world.

4. In the event that the United States should find itself forced to act in defense of peace and independence, in Southeast Asia, I am confident that I could place reliance upon the firmness of General De Gaulle as a friend and ally, as America properly did in the Cuba crisis of ’62, and if by any chance I am wrong on this point, it is a matter of great importance that we should know it now.

You should emphasize above everything else my own determination to follow a peaceful course if it is at all possible, but at the same time you should leave no doubt of the determination of the United States to meet its commitments in Southeast Asia.

In making these positions clear you are authorized to draw upon the long memorandum of talking points which has been prepared for this purpose,2 but I hope that you will not weary General De Gaulle with an account of our virtues which he must have heard before, and I also hope that you will not be so specific about our contingency planning as to tempt him to any indiscretions with those whom he now seeks to cultivate. I would not wish him to have any excuse to tell them that we have no intention of hurting them significantly.

Finally, I hope you will make it clear to General De Gaulle that I myself am deeply interested in any new blueprint that would assure the guaranteed independence of the nations of Southeast Asia. Our minds are open to further clarification, and anything that General De Gaulle can tell you that would give more concreteness to his thinking on this point would be most helpful. Our interest in this subject is genuine, and we would be quick to give our support to any plan that seemed to give us any real hope of maintaining effective, guaranteed independence.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL FR–US. Top Secret. The unsigned White House copy of this memorandum is published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 315A.

2 Not found.

197. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President 197. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President1

Washington, June 4, 1964.

IMPROVEMENT OF INFORMATIONAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL PROGRAM IN SOUTH VIET-NAM

Sixteen officers representing State, Defense, CIA and USIA, all with long experience in the fields of public information and psychological warfare, met for several hours in Honolulu and discussed thoroughly problems relating to South Viet-Nam. There was a remarkable degree of unanimity with regard to the steps that ought to be taken in order to effect the following:

1. Improve the morale of the people of South Viet-Nam so as to inspire them to pursue more zealously the war against the Viet Cong.

2. Carry our story to the peoples of North Viet-Nam so as to warn them sufficiently of the risks imposed upon them by the Hanoi regime’s continued aggressions.

3. Better inform the American people and our allies in Europe and elsewhere so as to maintain their support for necessary efforts to keep Southeast Asia from falling under Communist domination.

The Committee felt that in passing along its recommendations, I should make two points of over-riding importance.

First—The situation in South Viet-Nam, as described in briefing sessions in Honolulu, is gloomy and quite unsatisfactory on many counts. American newsmen know this (indeed, they contend that they were reporting this when American officials were pretending that things were proceeding satisfactorily) and there is every reason to expect that they will continue to write it. Further, there is no conceivable information program that will make defeats look like victories, or GVN lassitude appear to be fiery enthusiasm. No single thing will do more to provide a positive information-psychological outlook than a few sparkling victories for our side.

Second—There are ways, however, in which a more effective public affairs program can be built, even in the present situation. But it will require, from the topmost level in Washington and Saigon, to the lowest level in the villages and hamlets, a fuller appreciation of the role of propaganda than has heretofore been exhibited. It will require a fuller understanding on the part of our top policy makers that the information-psychological program is not a tangential operation, but must be a planned, built-in part of every program drawn up to meet the crisis in Southeast Asia.

The Committee felt that if the problem is approached with awareness of the two points made above, the following steps will do much to enhance the free world position in Southeast Asia.

How to Improve the Situation in South Viet-Nam

1. Top policy makers pointed out that dynamic or “inspired” leadership has been the key to the solidarity of several Asian nations since World War II. Ambassador Lodge pointed out, however, that no such leadership seems to be available in South Viet-Nam. The Committee expressed the view, then, that nothing is more important than to exert every effort to make the present leadership appear to be inspired leadership. The group recommends that Ambassador Lodge continue to press Premier Khanh vigorously to make fire-side chats on a regular basis. The Committee visualizes the chats as being no longer than ten minutes, and as dealing with such things as the Government’s health program or other socio-economic programs designed to improve the well-being of the peoples of South Viet-Nam.

Because Premier Khanh is obviously busy, it is hoped that he would tape three or four chats at a single sitting. These would be recorded sync-sound so as to make them usable not only as radio broadcasts, but in films where the Premier could then be shown doing the commentary.

The significance of the latter point can be seen in the fact that Vietnamese audiences at USIS film showings last year totalled an estimated 28 million. As the information program is expanded in the provinces, the potential use of these filmed chats will be even greater.

The Committee urged that these chats emphasize what the Government is doing for the people, and not what Khanh the individual is doing. Thus, as the political situation permits, the Committee urged that other leading Vietnamese be brought into this program.

2. Steps must be taken to insure that the people in villages and hamlets hear the talks referred to in Recommendation 1, and that they are reachable through other radio programs. Thus the Committee urged that immediate steps be taken to alter a situation where the great majority of radio receivers are concentrated in Saigon. It urged that USOM move speedily to secure and distribute the 100,000 transistors already allocated to South Viet-Nam and that the State Department request that the Japanese Government contribute another 100,000 transistor radios.

3. In order to facilitate meaningful programming both for radio and the press, every military unit in the field where there is a substantial number of American advisors should have one American whose sole concern is information and propaganda. There are two vitally important functions that this individual would pursue: a. Watch alertly for Viet Cong atrocities and mistakes, the public exploitation of which would win support for the GVN-US effort both in Viet-Nam and in the rest of the free world. For example, if the Viet Cong murdered a Vietnamese who was teaching school or helping people to grow more food, this American would, with the assistance of a GVN counterpart, tape-record the widow’s story of the atrocity with the idea of using it on press and radio so as to arouse contempt for the Viet Cong.

b. Watch for acts of heroism on the part of the GVN soldiers and report it immediately for possible usage in the program referred to in Recommendation 4.

(There are now 42 military men in training for this kind of role in the provinces of South Viet-Nam. It is estimated that their training program will end in November. The Committee urged that steps be taken to condense their training and get them into the field much sooner. It was agreed that USIA would add 7 individuals to its South Viet-Nam staff for service as advisors in the field.)

4. The Committee believes that courage is contagious, and that there would be a double benefit if the American military command would order the continuous collection of stories of heroism by GVN soldiers or units, and insure that these stories are immediately exploited by the newspapers and radio stations of South Viet-Nam. The Committee urged, also, that the American Mission explore with the GVN the possibility of an award of cash or, even better, a plot of land, to GVN soldiers showing extraordinary courage in battle.

This kind of program will, first of all, inspire courage on the part of other GVN soldiers and will refute in the most effective way reports now emanating from Viet-Nam that people of that country are unwilling to fight their own battle.

5. The U.S. Mission should press for a start to the long-promised land reform program in the Delta area.

6. The Committee hailed the CIA program under which more than 200 small propaganda (agitprop) teams have been formed in the villages, largely to spread by word of mouth the GVN story. The Committee urged full support for additional teams, many of which are being formed voluntarily, or at the urging of village chiefs.

7. It was recommended that USIA and the State Department explore the role that U.S. youth might play in firing up South Vietnamese youth to greater activity on behalf of their Government. It was recommended also that a more vigorous effort be made in the United States to recruit American (and possibly Canadian and other third nation) professors for Vietnamese institutions.

8. The Committee felt other more “sophisticated” propaganda steps can be taken in the near future. For example, it was noted that in every war, the American sense of unity has been enhanced by such popular songs as “Remember the Alamo,” “Remember Pearl Harbor,” etc. It was recommended that an effort be made to find a Vietnamese who can write a GVN version of “God Bless America.”

Propaganda Directed to the North

It was the Committee’s belief that many of the efforts listed above would be meaningful assets in the propaganda program directed at North Viet-Nam. For example, the Committee expressed the belief that radio programs and other efforts showing Khanh as a popular, inspired leader, or detailing the success of a socio-economic program in the South, would also be good for the Northern audience. The Committee recommended also that steps be taken to provide more Vietnamese radio talent. It was noted that [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] the U.S. needs to launch a much larger in-service training program. USIA pledged the use of VOA facilities and/or personnel in such a program.

It was recommended that USIA provide personnel to advise and guide a portion of the radio programming on Radio Hue, also known as “The Voice of Freedom.” USIA agreed to assign such personnel when needed.

Information to the United States and the Rest of the World

The Committee felt that this category was of vital importance and offered more difficulties and perhaps less opportunity for governmental influence than the two areas listed above. The Committee made several recommendations, however, based on an utterly frank appraisal of the present situation.

1. The U.S. Government must take steps to restore some measure of credibility with American correspondents covering the war in Viet-Nam. Information specialists on the scene reported that, to a man, American newsmen feel that the U.S. Government, particularly the military people, have lied to them on several occasions. Belief was expressed that much of the reporting coming out of Viet-Nam is tinged with hostility born of this belief.

The Committee recommends, therefore, that the Government issue a new information directive that would wipe out the several directives now on the books which some military information people interpret as requiring them to lie under certain circumstances. The Committee expressed the belief that Lt. Col. Baker, present head of the Military Information Unit, has been so discredited because of previous requirements to lie, that he no longer is useful in his present position.

2. The Committee felt that to solve the aforementioned problem and to meet the equally great need to provide cohesion to our press program in Viet-Nam, a single individual ought to be given across-the-board authority-under the direction of the Ambassador. The Committee recommended that this individual be one with the confidence of Lt. General Westmoreland and Ambassador Lodge, and that he be included in all meetings and briefings so as to be fully informed of what is taking place on both the military and civilian side.

This individual’s role would be to advise the Ambassador and the MACV Commander as to which newsmen to see and as to the points they ought to make; he would direct efforts to refute immediately misinformation in press reports from Viet-Nam; he would direct the development of a program designed to get the positive side of the story to Americans and other newsmen. In doing so, he would have the authority to call upon all the resources of the Embassy, the Military, USOM and USIA. It was anticipated that this overall press advisor would be given personnel from all the agencies involved to the extent necessary to do the job effectively. (The principals in Honolulu agreed that Barry Zorthian, the chief Public Affairs Officer, should have this responsibility and a telegram to the field spelling out his new responsibilities is being prepared.2

3. It was recommended that steps be taken to assure the immediate availability of transportation for newsmen. Military members of the Committee pointed out that Col. Baker “is bumming rides every day,” and never can be sure of his ability to get newsmen to a development where reporting is in the national interest. The Committee recommended that aircraft be specifically and permanently set aside for use by the press whenever decided by the overall Press Counselor.

4. The Committee, and most vocally the Military members, felt that high priority should be given to the improvement of the quality of Military public information officers. It was asserted that most of those sent to Viet-Nam lack experience or the general ability to do the kind of job required under the present circumstances. It was pointed out that several qualified information officers have resigned rather than go to Viet-Nam, but the view was expressed that there are adequate information people of the highest competence in the Military, and that all that is required is a vigorous effort to get them into this area where they are almost desperately needed.

5. It was recommended that the Military launch a more vigorous internal education program. It was pointed out that virtually all of the damaging articles written by correspondents like Jim Lucas were really almost direct quotes from gripe sessions by Military men which are overheard by correspondents. It is the Committee’s belief that even a modest educational campaign will reduce the incidents where soldiers “sound off” to the press in such a way that the press reports themselves make the soldiers’ task more difficult.

The Committee made the overall observation that every effort must be made to push the Viet-Nam Government to move from general agreement on an informational-psychological program to putting it into effect. It was recommended that the Director of USIA develop further a helpful relationship with the Minister of Information and that Ambassador Lodge continue to press the GVN, in general, as to the importance of the information-psychological program in the execution of the war.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. 11, Memos (A). Secret. Rowan sent this memorandum to the President with a covering memorandum explaining the issue was discussed at Honolulu. Rowan believed the steps proposed were “of great importance” and hoped that the President would find time to read the report. It is uncertain whether the President did so. McGeorge Bundy received the original and Forrestal got a copy.

2 Document 203.

198. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 198. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 5, 1964—2 p.m.

2412. Literally eyes only for Rusk and McNamara from Lodge.

1. It would help here, and possibly in Laos and Thailand, if there were some screams from North Viet-Nam that they had been hit. They are really looking much too tall, particularly considering the military potential of both sides, which is so heavily in our favor. They are able to enjoy the great advantage of total silence which makes them look still bigger, whereas the U.S. looks as though we are talking a great deal without doing very much.

2. There must be a number of different ways to make them scream. Could rocket carrying planes, flying along the North Viet-Nam-Laos border, let something go on the pretext that they had been fired on and were firing back? Could something be done some night in North Viet-Nam, possibly using personnel and equipment which would be Vietnamese [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]; can Tchepone not be hit immediately?

3. We want a scream from them that they had been hit by something coming from our side. I would not object if they blamed us. They could prove nothing. We could either be totally silent, or challenge them to provide proof, or say we are looking into it.

4. In a situation such as is described above you don’t have to escalate if you don’t want to. Surely this kind of limited carefully modulated action does not require approval of Congress-especially when it is against North Vietnamese targets which are thoroughly illegal.

5. Not only would screams from the North have a very tonic effect and strengthen morale here; it is also vital to frighten Ho. Do not believe our 34A operations bother him much, if at all. If he is sufficiently frightened and could do so without losing face, he might cease his intrusion, save many lives and avoid the much greater cost to him and to us involved in the procedures discussed in Honolulu. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] should, above all, be able to hold out the prospect of the cessation of punishment and not just a shipment of rice and a verbal assurance that the Americans are really very angry.

6. In this part of the world and in this kind of situation, silence and action often the best ways to achieve results.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Nodis Received at 4:18 a.m.

199. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 199. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Taylor) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, June 5, 1964.

CM–1451–64

SUBJECT

Comments of the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, on JCSM–471–64, “Objectives and courses of Action—Southeast Asia”2

1. This memorandum transmits the views of the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff upon the subject paper in which the Joint Chiefs of Staff (less the Chairman) express their views on two possible alternatives for air strikes against North Vietnam. The first would have the objective of seeking “through military actions to accomplish destruction of the North Vietnamese will and capabilities as necessary to compel the Democratic Government of Vietnam (DRY) to cease providing support to the insurgencies in South Vietnam and Laos”. They favor adopting this course of action. They note, however, as a possible lesser alternative the employment of “limited military action which, hopefully, would cause the North Vietnamese to decide to terminate their subversive support of activity in Laos and South Vietnam”. If the latter alternative is adopted, they recommend two target complexes in the Appendix of JCSM–471–64 (Vinh and Dien Bien Phu) as appropriate for initial attack.

2. As I understand the distinction between the two alternatives, the first calls for a concurrent attack upon North Vietnamese will and capabilities in order to induce the North Vietnamese to cease their attacks upon their neighbors and in addition, by destroying in large part their military capabilities, to assure that they cannot resume these attacks. The second alternative places more emphasis on changing the will of the enemy and less emphasis on the destruction of capabilities although the attacks considered upon Vinh and Dien Bien Phu require hundreds of sorties and thus are not of inconsiderable weight.

3. I do not feel these two alternatives as stated are an accurate or complete expression of our choices. It appears to me that there are three patterns from among which we may choose to initiate the attack on North Vietnam. In descending order of weight, they are the following: a. A massive air attack on all significant military targets in North Vietnam for the purpose of destroying them and thereby making the enemy incapable of continuing to assist the Viet Cong and the Pathet Lao.

b. A lesser attack on some significant part of the military target system in North Vietnam for the dual purpose of convincing the enemy that it is to his interest to desist from aiding the Viet Cong and the Pathet Lao, and, if possible, of obtaining his cooperation in calling off the insurgents in South Vietnam and Laos.

c. Demonstrative strikes against limited military targets to show US readiness and intent to pass to alternatives 3b or 3a above. These demonstrative strikes would have the same dual purpose as in alternative 3b.

4. The forces required to execute these strike alternatives would vary from a maximum effort by VNAF, Farmgate and US aircraft for alternative 3a to VNAF alone (perhaps stiffened by Farmgate) for alternative 3c. Similarly, the time for executing the attacks would vary from several weeks in the case of alternative 3a to one or two days for alternative 3c.

5. I would not recommend alternative 3a at the outset because it is probably unnecessarily destructive for the purpose of changing the will of the adversary; it limits any possibility of cooperation from Hanoi in calling off the insurgents; and represents such a challenge to the Communist Bloc as to raise considerably the risks of escalation. I would prefer alternative 3b, reserving judgment on the precise target system chosen for the initial attack pending further photography and analysis. However, I feel that it is highly probable that political considerations will incline our responsible civilian officials to opt for alternative 3c and, hence, feel that the Joint Chiefs of Staff should recognize this possibility and develop a plan for possible implementation.

6. In summary, I recommend that JCSM–471–64 be noted and used as appropriate in considerations of a strike program based upon the implementation of alternative 3b, and that the Joint Chiefs of Staff be asked to develop a strike plan based upon a decision to follow alternative 3c.

Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret.

2 See Document 191.

200. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President 200. Letter From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the President1

Saigon, June 5, 1964.

Dear Mr. President: This is intended to be helpful advice in connection with the matter of a Congressional resolution regarding Southeast Asia. I would, of course, be very happy to have you show this letter to Dean Rusk and Bob McNamara if you perceive no objection.

First, I am not yet persuaded that such a resolution is in fact required. The argument that developments in Southeast Asia could theoretically involve calling out the reserves and that, therefore, a resolution is necessary does not seem valid when you consider that we did all of these things—and many more—in Korea without a Congressional resolution. But you are far closer to the situation in Congress and to public opinion than I am and can judge this much better than I can.

Clearly a very strong, if not impregnable, argument can be made for the proposition that Southeast Asia is of vital concern to the United States. Indeed if this were all that were involved in the debate on the resolution, there would be nothing to worry about.

I do worry about committing seven divisions of the U.S. Army to the mainland of Southeast Asia, as is contemplated. This goes against the belief that has been held by many Americans, including myself, for a long time. The climate and other conditions in this area are of incomparable difficulty for Americans.

Also the testimony which I have heard did not show that our seven divisions would constitute but a small proportion of the total army, just large enough to get us the command, as the small British army at Waterloo was large enough to get the command for Wellington. On the contrary, I understand that a single Thai division and a few extremely mediocre Laotian battalions are all that can be expected to be in the line in addition to the Vietnamese—and the Vietnamese are fully committed now.

It is apparently not planned to bring in Chinese Nationalists, even though this would definitely be an action against Chinese Communists in which their presence would be appropriate. Nor is it planned to use ROK troops who, according to recent telegrams, would probably come if their expenses were paid—which they should be.

This, therefore, would be neither an encapsulated action, as it were, with a good possibility of clearly limited results and a quick departure, nor is it a large campaign in which the U.S. provides a small proportion of troops in order to get the command. On the contrary, it is a largely U.S. venture of unlimited possibilities which could put us onto a slope along which we slide into a bottomless pit.

I still have faith that naval and air power, with clearly limited and very specific actions on the ground, can give us what we need. If the Chinese communists attack on the ground in a place of their own choosing, I cannot see why we must oblige them and why we cannot retaliate in a place and in a way of our own choosing. It is dangerous for us to put the manpower of a nation of 190 million against the manpower of a nation of 900 million and thus put us on the short end of the stick. We should instead put our overall military power in confrontation with their military power and thus put us on the long end of the stick.

Based on past experience, I assume that there are vigorous differences of opinion in the Pentagon on this whole question. I suggest, therefore, that this is a matter of sufficient importance for you to get the most eloquent protagonists of the various schools of thought into the room with you so that there may be a forthright discussion among them in the hope that thus you can get at truths which will satisfy you.

All of the above is but another manifestation of the problem which we constantly face as the world’s most powerful nation, to wit, how to apply our power. We cannot—and must not—be on the horns of the dilemma of either doing nothing or doing something imprudent. It is, for example, obviously, a simple, though disastrous, matter to sit still and do nothing and let Southeast Asia go down the drain. It is equally simple, and also disastrous, to trigger off World War III. We should, while mindful of what is possible, concentrate on what is probable.

We must be able to apply our power in sharp focus, in carefully tailored ways to gain specific objectives. This is complicated and difficult but not impossible. President Kennedy did it last October when he used U.S. power to bring about a change of behavior in the government of Viet-Nam.

There ought to be a way to apply American power to North VietNam and in addition use the threat of our tremendous superiority in overall military power to keep the Chinese communists at bay.

As President you carry a very great load under the best of circumstances. It is not right to ask all-embracing commitments of you when all that you want to accomplish is something which, though utterly necessary, is precise and limited.

With respectful regards,

Very sincerely yours,

Cabot L.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XI. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 001490.

201. Paper Prepared for the President by the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 201. Paper Prepared for the President by the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, June 5, 1964.

SOUTH VIETNAM ACTION PROGRAM

I. Strengthen the situation within SVN by: A. Expanding the U.S. and Vietnamese activities in the 8 Critical Provinces. 1. Move in additional Vietnamese troops.

2. Assign control over all troops in each of the provinces to the province chiefs.

3. Develop detailed hamlet by hamlet “oil spot” and “clear and hold” operational plans for each of the approximately 40 districts.

4. Introduce a system of population control (curfews; identification papers; intelligence network; etc.)

5. Increase the provincial police force.

6. Expand the information program (introduce approximately 40,000 radios; install transmitters at provincial capitals; provide taped programs; etc.).

7. Develop a special economic aid program for each province (distribution of medicines; school construction materials; etc.).

8. Add additional U.S. personnel (initially from within SVN): a. 320 military provincial and district advisers.

b. 40 USOM provincial and district advisers.

c. 74 battalion advisers (2 for each of 37 bns).

434

9. Transfer military personnel to fill existing and future USOM shortages where necessary (110 to 180 men).

10. Establish joint US–GVN teams to monitor the program at both the national and provincial levels.2

B. Intensifying the information program within the country. 1. Distribute between 100,000 and 200,000 radio receivers.

2. Increase the quantity and quality of in-country radio programs including “fireside” chats, etc.

C. Strengthen the administration of the Country Team.

D. Actions not taken:

1. Lodge opposed: a. A shift from a government of politicians to a government of technicians.

b. A shift in the U.S. role from one of “advice” to one of “direction”.

c. Removal of dependents unless accompanied by military moves.

d. “Interlacing” [Interlarding?] of U.S. personnel within the national and provincial governments.

II. Near-term Forecast.

A. The actions referred to above will have little or no effect within the next 3 to 6 months.

B. At best, during that period, the situation will jog along about as it is (assuming Khanh is not assassinated)-it may continue to deteriorate slowly.

C. Because visible improvement is unlikely, we can expect increasing criticism of U.S. policy and U.S. operations by the public and by our allies.

III. U.S. Information Program.

To offset the expected criticism and to develop the “peace offense” theme (with members of Congress; the press; the public; foreign diplomats; etc.).

IV. Congressional Resolution.

About mid-July consider requesting a Congressional Resolution supporting U.S. policy in Southeast Asia.

V. Strike against North Vietnam.

A. Continue to prepare political and military plans for such operations, recognizing that all efforts to achieve our objectives by peaceful means must be exhausted before military action is undertaken. It is unlikely that a strike against the north would be desirable at any time within the next 3 to 6 months, although this estimate may be affected by events in Laos.

B. Carry on a dialogue with the DRV through the Canadians.

C. Initiate joint military planning with the Thais.

VI. Military pressures short of combat operations.

A. Periodically review a list of military moves designed to demonstrate the U.S. intention to prevent further communist advances in Southeast Asia and determine whether any of such moves are timely (see list attached).

RMcN

Attachment

Illustrative Military Moves Designed to Demonstrate the U.S. Intention to Prevent Further Communist Advances in Laos and South Vietnam3

1. Continue high and low-level reconnaissance over Laos.

2. Continue high-level reconnaissance over DRV (20 flights per month).

3. Introduce GVN recon. teams into Laos (with or without U.S. advisors)—4 approx. 6/15; 16 by 8/15.

4. Authorize hot-pursuit into Cambodia.

5. Initiate selective low-level recon. into DRV along supply lines feeding the Laotian corridor.

6. Re-introduce a MAAG into Laos (shift from Thailand).

7. Re-introduce White Star teams into Laos—(15 teams in 20 days).

8. Introduce GVN harassing forces into Laotian corridor (with or without U.S. advisors—60 days.

9. Send 500 additional military advisors to SVN to expand the counter-insurgency program (announce immediately; complete in 120 days).

10. Expand T–28 operations in Laos, then use of U.S. military pilots.

11. Accompany U.S. recon. flights over Laos with fighter escort.

12. Authorize VNAF air strikes against DRV activities in Laotian corridor.

13. U.S. Force movements: a. 1 or 2 B–57 squadrons into SVN—24 hours.

b. 1 interceptor squadron into SVN—24 hours.

c. 1 or 2 fighter squadrons into Thailand—24 hours.

d. 1 Army Brigade (5150 men) into Thailand (5 to 12 days).

e. 1 Marine Brigade and Air Group (5700 men and 40 aircraft) into SVN on exercise or assignment (8 days).

f. 1 Army Brigade to Philippines from Hawaii (5 to 12 days).

g. 1 Army Brigade to Okinawa from Hawaii (5 to 12 days).

h. Reassign carrier task force from Pacific Coast to South China Sea (2 weeks).

i. 10 fighter squadrons CONUS to Philippines or WestPac (2 to 10 days).

j. 1 Marine Division and Air Wing (22,900 men) CONUS to Okinawa (40 days).

k. 1 Infantry Division (11,500 men) CONUS to Hawaii (45 days).

[Here follow a paper entitled “Memorandum for Discussion on Friday, June 5, 6 p.m., Laos,” and a paper entitled “Memorandum for Discussion on Friday, June 5, 6 p.m., Outline Information Program,” which summarized Document 197.]

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security Files, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XI, Memos. Secret. Published in part in Declassified Documents, 1978, 62C. A title page indicates that this memorandum was for the President’s use at a meeting at 6 p.m. on June 5. The President met with Rusk, McGeorge Bundy, and McNamara from 6:52 to 7:43 p.m., June 5. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record of this meeting has been found.

2 These first 10 steps were sent to Saigon in telegram 2184, June 5, 8:01 p.m., as actions to be taken to expand U.S. and Vietnamese activities in the 8 “super critical provinces.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) Telegram 2184 is published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 147E.

3 Confidential.

202. Telegram From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the Department of State 202. Telegram From the Under Secretary of State (Ball) to the Department of State1

Paris, June 6, 1964—1 a.m.

Secun 3. For President and Secretary from Ball. Following is a memorandum of conversation between General De Gaulle and Under Secretary Ball at Elysee Palace June 5. Also present were Amb Bohlen, Burin des Roziers and Roger Vos (interpreting).

After replying to General De Gaulle’s inquiry in regard to his trip, Mr. Ball handed the General the President’s letter2 and stated that President Johnson appreciated De Gaulle’s courtesy in seeing him. De Gaulle then read the letter in English and made only one comment, repeating the phrase in the letter that referred to Mr. Ball as “my close and trusted associate.”

De Gaulle said that he found the letter gratifying and was obviously pleased with it. He said he would, of course, reply directly to the President. He then turned to Mr. Ball and said: “I am ready to listen.”

Ball said that President Johnson had asked him to explain our views on the situation in Southeast Asia and to solicit De Gaulle’s comments and advice. He had had a useful and long conversation with M. Couve de Murville this morning3 during which they had discovered a considerable area of agreement. The differences between them, he thought, dealt more with methods and procedures rather than with objectives. He said that they had found themselves in agreement on the following points: 1. That a Communist takeover in Southeast Asia would be a catastrophe for the whole free world.

2. That the central problem was that of South Vietnam and that Laos and Cambodia were by-products of the South Vietnamese problem;

3. That Hanoi has organized and directs the subversive operations in South Vietnam and that Ho Chi Minh and his colleagues are in a position to intensify or reduce subversive activities in SVN if they so wish.

He said he and the Foreign Minister had been in general agreement in regard to the need to create an independent Vietnam which would be capable of resisting the Communist subversion.

The US had no economic or commercial interests in the area, no wish to establish military bases here, and no ambition to dictate to the Asians. Since 1954 the US had been giving economic and military assistance to Vietnam. There were only 15,000 American military in Vietnam. They were there as advisers. Until about May 1961 we had thought that progress was being made in dealing with insurgency in SVN. Then the religious disputes began. The Diem govt had progressively lost control of the country and, as General De Gaulle knew, there had been two coups which had threatened governmental stability.

General Khanh, present head of the govt, seemed to us to have qualities of leadership even though inexperienced. But the situation was clearly fragile and the govt weak.

Our objectives in South Vietnam are clear. We seek the creation of an independent viable govt. We see two possible ways to achieve this: One, to continue to help the Vietnamese Govt to develop sufficient strength to deal with the insurgency problem; or two. to bring sufficient military pressure to bear on the North in order to convince Ho Chi Minh and Peking that aggression was too costly. We were now at the point where, if there was no improvement in the situation and the problem of insurgency was not resolved within a reasonable time, we would be required to bring increasing military pressure on Hanoi in order to change the Communists’ course of action. This was not an effort on which the US would embark lightly. We are fully aware that action against the North would bring the danger of Chinese involvement. We were prepared to take such action only if it was the sole means of preventing a takeover by the Communists. We hoped it will not be necessary. Ho Chi Minh and his colleagues could prevent such an eventuality and we hope that he understands the firmness of the US intention.

Our ultimate objective was a political solution that would insure the independence of South Vietnam. We do not believe this could be achieved unless US power were present to assist the Vietnamese Govt at least until it had attained full competence and control of its own territories. Even after that it was essential that the Western govts remain in a position to come to the assistance of the Vietnamese Govt, if this was asked for.

We did not feel we could rely only on the guarantees of the powers concerned. We had no trust in Hanoi or Peking in his regard. It was therefore essential that the South Vietnamese have the right to call for help from whatever outside source it wished.

We agree with what we understand to be General De Gaulle’s idea-that stabilization in the area requires the agreement and acquiescence of Peking. But we do not see the present situation presenting the balance of force which would make this possible.

There are certain elements of the problem that seem to be a matter of disagreement between the US and France. One results from a different appreciation of the phasing of the Communist revolution in China. We see that the Chinese revolution is in a phase reminiscent of the primitive Soviet Communism of 1917 which was both bellicose and expansionist. We do not think that Peking would accept any arrangement that would limit or prevent the spread of Communism in Southeast Asia or that it would abide by any such arrangement if made.

In our experience agreements with the Communists only succeed when there were countervailing powers that produced a kind of equilibrium. Examples were Austria and Finland. But if there is no countervailing force in the area the Communists will continue their subversive efforts. They will profit by the advantage that accrues to those who engage in covert and dishonest operations as compared with the open and aboveboard operations of their adversaries. He said we would have to insist on some countervailing force in the area.

Mr. Ball said that he had attempted to give General De Gaulle an outline of our views and would be most appreciative of the General’s comments.

General De Gaulle said he had listened with great attention to what Mr. Ball had said. There was little surprising in it since he had suspected for some time the difficulties of the situation. The US has taken on itself alone the responsibilities which the French had borne in the past.

He said he agreed that South Vietnam was the main problem, with Laos and Cambodia as accessory problems. He referred to our hope that we can bring about a suppression of the insurgency by supplying Vietnam with arms, credits, military advice, etc. I take note, said General De Gaulle, of your hope but I cannot agree with it. I do not believe that you can win in this situation even though you have more aircraft, cannons, and arms of various kinds.

The problem was primarily a political and psychological problem. He was not referring merely to General Khanh but to the people. To them the US was a very big foreign power. “I do not mean that all of the Vietnamese are against you but they regard the US as a foreign power and a very powerful foreign power.”

The more the US becomes involved in the actual conduct of military operations the more the Vietnamese will turn against us, as will others, in Southeast Asia.4

He said he understood the immense difficulties which the US faced. The US has the possibility and the means of going to war. We could destroy Hanoi, Canton and even Peking. We could link Chiang Kai-shek on the Chinese Mainland and even American troops if we desired. But what would happen when the war began? What would be its consequences? He could not say.

In 1900, at the time of the Boxer Rebellion, it had been very easy. The only problem was that of frightening the Empress. Now continents were involved.

War was, of course, a possibility which the US could envisage. General MacArthur had thought it was a good idea. However, he said, the French would never resume war in Asia. He had told this to President Kennedy. The French consider that Southeast Asia is a “rotten” territory in which to fight. Even if the US were involved France would not get into a war in Asia, as an ally or otherwise.

If the US did not make war we still appeared to think that by reinforcing the existing situation we could strengthen the Vietnamese and win the current struggle. He did not agree with this. The United States might maintain the struggle in this manner for an extended period of time, but we could not bring the affair to an end. Once we realized this, i.e., that we could not put an end to the situation, we might come to the conclusion that we would have to make peace. This would mean peace with China and others in the area.

He said he noticed that we thought that China was like Russia in 1917—intransigent, warlike, and expansive. He did not know whether this was true or not. Personally he doubted it. He thought it possible that China would see the advantage to itself, at least for a few years, in a passive posture. He did not mean that this would last forever but it might for a few years. China needs rest, it needs help, it needs commerce and technical assistance from other countries. The Russians had been in a different position. Russia had had an intelligentsia, an army, and agriculture. China has none of these things. In any event, the French thought that we should try to see what China was up to.5 He then asked for Mr. Ball’s comments.

Mr. Ball said if we were now to undertake diplomatic efforts with Peking or Hanoi this would threaten the collapse of the existing resistance in South Vietnam. General De Gaulle had said—and he agreed—that the problem was more political and psychological than military. Our task was to help the South Vietnamese create a govt in which the people would have confidence, and to which they would feel allegiance. But if we began, or attempted to begin, negotiations of the type that General De Gaulle was speaking about. the result might be a general failure of the will to resist.

Either we must increase the Vietnamese will to resist or we must reduce the subversive efforts of the North. To negotiate before either of these objectives was achieved would destroy the only basis on which we can hope to build in the future. Moreover we said [had?] no reason to believe that an agreement made with the Communists would be carried out. We remembered the agreement of 1962 for the neutralization of Laos, and the attitude of Hanoi and Peking toward it.

De Gaulle said that if a diplomatic operation were undertaken by the US alone, it would, of course, not succeed. What he had in mind was a vast diplomatic operation which would include the participation of France, India, China, Japan, and other countries. This would provide the Vietnamese people—and he was not speaking of General Khanh—with a sense of support and assurance for the future. He doubted that even Ho Chi Minh could continue to kill South Vietnamese while taking part in a conference. World opinion would make it impossible.6

He repeated, however, such a diplomatic effort could not be done by the Americans. A large conference had been attempted in 1954 and although the talks had taken a very long time he felt that this in itself was not a bad thing. If a world conference of the type he was thinking of could be put into operation it would change the state of mind of the Vietnamese people and produce a detente. This would render it very difficult for Ho Chi Minh to keep on with his activities. If such a diplomatic operation were undertaken a resulting detente would bring about a new political situation. This, however, was not possible under conditions of civil war.

7 Mr. Ball said the situation in South Vietnam presented problems of exceptional difficulty. If we were dealing with conventional warfare—with regular armies drawn up in opposing formations—it would be possible to agree to a cease-fire and police it. But in South Vietnam there were scattered groups of guerrillas. Many only came out at night. It would be extremely difficult to police any cease-fire. Moreover, it was not realistic to assume that the insurgents would be willing to lose momentum and thus would be willing to accept a cease-fire. Ho Chi Minh would probably argue with contrived innocence that he had no connection with what was going on in Vietnam. At the same time he would covertly maintain the subversive action. There was enormous danger that a conference would play into the hands of the Communists who would exploit it covertly and dishonestly. Thereafter it might well be impossible to infuse any vitality into a Vietnamese Govt. We would be reluctant to take such a risk.

De Gaulle replied: “All policy involves risks. If it is a policy that does not involve risks there is no choice of policy.” He thought a conference of Europeans, Asians and US would produce a very powerful impact on the Vietnamese people and succeed in changing the whole situation, at least for a certain period of time. The present situation, he said, would not result in anything. France has had experience which proved it.

De Gaulle then remarked first he had had the opportunity of seeing Mr. Anderson,8 who had been sent by the President, and now he had been very glad to see Mr. Ball. Keeping contact was very useful.

He then added—as an afterthought—that he understood the extreme difficulties in which the US finds itself. Everyone who had been involved in the Southeast Asian situation had had the experience that those on the spot—the military and particularly the press—became caught up by the general excitement and created an atmosphere that was not agreeable. There was a tendency to blame others for difficulties incurred. France had done this in the past. Now the United States tended to blame France. He would like to ask how could France take any action when it had been eliminated from the scene and had no power for action? He could assure Mr. Ball that France was not seeking to hamper the US. We ought to stop this criticism.

Mr. Ball said that whatever rumors the US press might print as to the culpability of French policy, the Johnson administration does not hold such views. “You, Mr. President, are held in the highest esteem by everyone in the administration, beginning with the President himself.”

Mr. Ball then thanked General De Gaulle for receiving him and said he would report faithfully to President Johnson. He was sure that President Johnson would study General De Gaulle’s comments very carefully because of his respect for General De Gaulle and for the French nation. He believed it important that we keep in close touch on these and other matters.

Mr. Ball said he wished to emphasize in conclusion that President Johnson was, above all, a man of peace. If the United States was forced to actions involving war in regard to Southeast Asia it was only because we had learned by the experience of the last three decades that aggression must be checked at an early stage. Otherwise the costs become progressively higher.

Comment: Both Amb Bohlen and I had the impression that General De Gaulle is merely waiting for events to come his way. He is confident that they will. He is certain no improvements will result from present efforts. He probably envisages that some time in the not too distant future we will begin to consider seriously his suggestion of a conference. He quite likely assumes that we will then ask the French to take soundings with the Chinese and the North Vietnamese.9

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated priority to Saigon. Received at 10:30 p.m., June 5, and sent to the White House.

2 Dated June 6. (Ibid., Presidential Correspondence: Lot 66 D 204, De Gaulle-President Johnson, 1964)

3 Reported in Secun 1, June 5, 10:05 p.m. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 Written comments appear on the source text in different hands, none of which is attributable. At this point is written: “French experience.”

5 At this point is the marginal comment: “Wow!”

6 At this point is the marginal comment: “Nonsense.”

7 At this point is the marginal comment: “How fuzzy can one be!”

8 Robert B. Anderson, former Secretary of the Treasury in the Eisenhower administration, undertook a number of unofficial and semi-official diplomatic missions for President Johnson. Anderson met De Gaulle on June 1 at the French President’s invitation. De Gaulle wanted to establish a personal line of communication to Johnson via letter or telephone, and gave Anderson his private telephone number for the President’s use. A report of the conversation between De Gaulle and Anderson is in a memorandum from McGeorge Bundy to Johnson, June 1. Johnson Library, National Security File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President, Vol. 5)

9 In telegram 2424 from Saigon, June 6, commenting on this meeting, Lodge noted that De Gaulle had returned to his recurrent theme that the United States sought a military solution in South Vietnam when the problem could not be solved militarily. Lodge wanted the following points to be made to De Gaulle: 1) U.S. objectives in South Vietnam were political and not military; 2) military action was designed to reinforce political objectives by providing security; and 3) the Khanh government was the best that South Vietnam could expect under the current circumstances. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

203. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 203. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, June 6, 1964—1:13 p.m.

2192. Saigon pass COMUSMACV. Joint State/Defense/AID/USIA message. The President has approved the decision to place one man in overall control of dealing with the American and foreign press in Saigon and of prosecuting a vigorous program to assure that the true story of our efforts is reported in the United States and elsewhere. The appropriate agencies here have spelled out that decision in the following details: 1. Barry Zorthian, presently the Country Public Affairs Officer, will assume the responsibilities of over-all press counselor. He will retain the title of Country Public Affairs Officer with jurisdiction over the total information effort. He will delegate such of his responsibilities as he considers necessary to his deputy in order that there be no lapse in the execution of all our information programs.

2. It will be most important that Mr. Zorthian be kept fully informed on all significant activities and plans, both political and military, so that he can, under the guidance of the Ambassador, undertake advance planning of informational and psychological activities.

3. Mr. Zorthian will service both the Ambassador and COMUSMACV in their contacts with American and foreign correspondents. They can look to him for advice concerning the desirability of seeing certain correspondents, concerning the substance of information in which those correspondents are interested, and concerning the reliability of those correspondents in handling sensitive information.

4. It will be Mr. Zorthian’s responsibility to conduct a continuing effort to publicize such information as will refute and counteract erroneous and misleading reports now emanating from Viet Nam. It is expected that the agencies concerned will contribute sufficient personnel to assist him in the conduct of such a program.

5. It will be Mr. Zorthian’s responsibility to help newsmen cover the positive side of the news in order that the American and world public may get a more balanced picture of GVN operations. In order to do this, it is expected that the US military commands will make readily available appropriate transportation for this purpose. There is much misinformation in the world press about ARVN willingness to fight, about the ratio of their combat losses to the enemy, and about their so-called brutality. On the other hand, there is very little reporting of Viet Cong terror, especially against civilians, Viet Cong defections, and Viet Cong military losses.

6. Under the Ambassador’s direction and in consultation with other country team members, it will be Mr. Zorthian’s responsibility for developing further aspects of the informational program in the Psychological Operations Committee which he chairs. It is expected that all agencies will make available to the Committee such resources as are required to do an effective job.

It is our hope and expectation that, with this concentration of authority, effective pressure can be brought upon the GVN to secure active cooperation on their part so that their efforts are invigorated and they carry their share of the burden. This work must be done not only in Viet Nam in order to have the desired effect upon the population of South Viet Nam; it must also be done internationally through official Vietnamese missions abroad. The story of Viet Nam is of critical significance to every nation and every person in the Free World. We and the Vietnamese must do our utmost to see that it is well and accurately told.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, INF 8 US–VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Rowan and Sullivan and cleared by Forrestal and McNamara. Repeated to CINCPAC

204. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 204. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, June 6, 1964.

SUBJECT

Possible Successor to Lodge

Partly because I think you ought to have a person right from the center of the present management, and partly because these are the people I know, my own nominations for Lodge’s successor are the following. I do not put these men in any particular order because they are good at different things.

1. Sargent Shriver—I think this is more important than poverty, and the right man harder to find. Shriver has energy, skill, a peaceful imagination and determination. He would have great standing in Vietnam and his reputation here is excellent. I do not think he speaks French and he has less experience in international politics and military matters than my other nominees. Nevertheless, I recommend him strongly.

2. Ros Gilpatric—I think Gilpatric has standing, style and judgment. I doubt just a little whether he has the energy and the political insight to take the call to the provinces and the case to the people. It would be hard to pry him loose from the Kravath firm, but I think he would come at your call.

3. Bob McNamara—You know everything I can tell you about him. My one reservation is that he has been trying to think of ways of dealing with this problem for so long that he has gone a little stale. Also, in a curious way, he has rather mechanized the problem so that he misses some of its real political flavor.

4. Robert F. Kennedy—I come back to this suggestion, although I know you have thought it wild in the past, for two reasons: the first is that the Attorney General has tremendous appeal to younger people and to non-Americans all around the world. He would give a picture of idealism and peace-seeking which our case will badly need, especially if we have to move to stronger measures. I have heard it said that he would take this challenge with some relish, but I have never talked to him about it myself.

5. William Gaud—Among the people at the next level down in the Administration, he has the right combination of qualities to a greater degree than anyone else I know: Energy, loyalty, skill, understanding of different kinds of action, and the trust of all services. He looks disarmingly young, but in fact he is a man of 56 with wide and deep experience in Southeast Asia, in the war, in the Pentagon, and in the jungle of New York law, and in AID.

6. Myself—I am no judge of my own skills, and it is certainly true that I have never run an embassy or a war. On the other hand, I think I do understand the issues. I know I care about them. I speak French and I have a heavy dose of the ways of thinking of all branches of the U.S. team in South Vietnam.

McG.B.2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5. No classification marking. A note on the source text indicates Bundy dictated, but did not read, this memorandum.

2 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

205. Memorandum by the President 205. Memorandum by the President1

Washington, June 6, 1964.

MEMORANDUM FOR

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Director, AID

The Director. USIA

It has come to my attention that in a number of instances departments and agencies have had difficulty in getting needed consent from individuals who are recommended for service in South Vietnam.2

This country has no more important job right now than to get the very best men in every field for more effective service to our embattled friends in South Vietnam. If in any case direct word from me can be helpful, I expect to be called on. I would want no U.S. officer to be in doubt of the value of service in South Vietnam and of the importance which I personally attach to it.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XI, Memos. No classification marking.

2 In an earlier draft of this memorandum a sentence at the end of this paragraph reads as follows: “I am informed that in at least one case a nominated individual resigned rather than accept such an appointment.”

206. Editorial Note 206. Editorial Note

On June 6 and 7, two U S. reconnaissance aircraft were shot down over Laos. On June 8, the President met with McNamara, Harriman (acting for Rusk), Wheeler, William Bundy, Manning, U. Alexis Johnson, Sullivan, McNaughton, Carter, Cooper, Colby, and Forrestal to discuss the situation. Bromley Smith was the notetaker. The meeting began at 3 p.m. without the President. Harriman, Johnson, and William Bundy arrived a few minutes late because they had been conferring by telephone with Rusk who was vacationing in Newport, Rhode Island. Harriman stated that Rusk favored a retaliatory airstrike against Pathet Lao antiaircraft guns in Laos; he continued: “Mr. Harriman said the purpose of the strike would be to convey a message to Hanoi. Unless we take some action to convince Hanoi that we are serious, negotiations with Ho Chi Minh will not be productive. Secretary McNamara agreed.”

The discussion then turned to the details of the reconnaissance mission and the mechanics of a possible retaliatory strike, particularly a 24-hour postponement: “Secretary McNamara said: ‘Suppose we decide not to make the strike? What would we do if we cancelled it?’ Mr. Sullivan pointed out that Canadian International Control Commission (ICC) representative Seaborn would be in Hanoi on June 15. The message he is to convey would not be appropriate if we had not acted in some way in response to the shootdown of our reconnaissance planes. He, in effect, would be going to Hanoi with a broken stick.”

“There was discussion of low-level reconnaissance of North Vietnam as a possible alternative. The general view was that such reconnaissance would not be safe.”

“General Wheeler recommended strongly that the air attack be authorized. He opposed any delay and said that we had no other plan to respond to the shoot-down.”

“Secretary McNamara said we do not have to recommend the air attack but that no other action we can take to convey a message to Hanoi is comparable to an air attack. The possibility of some of our planes being shot down was a real one but the possibility that there would be a catastrophe was one chance in a million. The risk of not doing anything is greater than doing what is proposed. We must put additional pressure on Hanoi now.”

“In response to a suggestion that Laos and South Vietnam are separate issues, Alexis Johnson said the relationship between the problems in the two countries is exemplified by two chess boards, some plays being made on both boards.”

“Secretary McNamara said he and Deputy Secretary Vance had talked to several Senators during the day, including Senators Saltonstall and Russell. They had encountered less opposition than they had anticipated.”

The President joined the meeting at 3:45 p.m. and the group reiterated the discussion. The President was dubious about the strike and wondered if its results would offset criticism that the United States was violating the 1962 Geneva Accords on Laos. Harriman and McNamara argued that unless the United States reacted quickly North Vietnam might conclude that the United States talked tough but acted weakly. The President was skeptical, but he approved the strike with grave reservations. (Memorandum of conversation by Bromley Smith, June 8; Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on Southeast Asia, Vol. I)

On June 9, eight F–100 aircraft attacked a Pathet Lao antiaircraft installation at Xieng Khoung.

207. Memorandum From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State 207. Memorandum From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Secretary of State1

Saigon, June 8, 1964.

SUBJECT

U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam

1. The problem here is clearly essentially political, with the military as an utterly indispensable aid, but as an aid nonetheless. Under these circumstances, Washington would look to the Ambassador for inventive and creative proposals such as could only come from the man on the spot. For this reason, the Ambassador should be an inventive and creative thinker in the political-governmental-diplomatic field.

2. He would also have to meet other issues. One is the creation of a proper political atmosphere here which, as the late General Bedell Smith indicated in 1954, is the indispensable pre-requisite to military victory. This means educating the Vietnamese in political ways at least as intensively as we have done militarily.

3. This in turn means leading and coordinating all American activities here. First and foremost is the military effort to achieve security. Then he must lead and coordinate the economic and social effort of USOM, the psychological programs of USIS and the work of CIA.

4. He should synthesize the American views in Saigon so that they focus on the same question at the same time and thus present Washington with clearcut suggestions. Washington will thus not be drowned in uncoordinated papers coming at different times on different topics, and in which the issue is never joined. This would deprive no one in Saigon of his own channel to his own agency in Washington. President Kennedy required this synthesis of me in the month before the coup. The time may come when President Johnson may need the same service.

5. We may be sure that our Communist antagonist handles his political-military-economic-social-propaganda and subversive activities as one program, and that for one country—if not for one region—there is one Communist boss.

6. In addition to having a head for all of this it is most useful for the Ambassador to speak French. If this is not possible, there should be a first class interpreter—who understands the issues.

7. The Ambassador should also consider himself expendable. He should not consider his “next post” and should not have one.

8. Also it helps to be a “personage” who has already made somewhat of a name for himself.

9. Undoubtedly it is impossible to meet all these requirements.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Correspondence—L. No classification marking. Lodge sent this memorandum to Rusk under a cover of a brief letter, June 8, which explained that the memorandum represented “some of the thoughts which I said I would send you regarding the job of the U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam.”

208. Memorandum From Senator Hubert H. Humphrey to the President 208. Memorandum From Senator Hubert H. Humphrey to the President1

Washington, June 8, 1964.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia

PREFACE

At your request I have attempted in this memorandum to give you my personal view as to the course we should follow in Southeast Asia. As a result of confidential discussions with Vietnamese officials and with Americans who have served recently in Vietnam and who know the military and political situation in Vietnam intimately, I feel that there is a clear and positive alternative to either pulling out of Southeast Asia, or of launching what is essentially a Korea-type conventional war in the area.

Attached to this memorandum is a detailed proposal “Concept for Victory in Vietnam”,2 which I strongly urge that you personally read. It was prepared by a small group of men3 who have impressed me with their brilliance, their patriotism, and their tough and sophisticated approach to the task of winning a U.S. victory in Vietnam. They are all veterans of campaigns where we gave the Communists memorable lickings. They have written about what they themselves would be prepared to go out and do.

I shall also hope to have attached by the time this memorandum is delivered a third memorandum, prepared at my request by a high Vietnamese official, covering the subject of his conversation with me last week.4

I. Situation

A. General Situation 1. The military/political situation is no more hopeless than it was in 1954, but it is extremely critical.

2. The restoration of security in South Vietnam and the neighboring states is not something that can wholly be accomplished in a short period (probably requiring a commitment of 8 to 10 years before the total job is finally done). Hearteningly, however, marked progress can be shown in a year.

3. Neither the Vietnamese, the Viet-Cong, the Chinese Communists, nor people of Southeast Asia are now convinced that we are there to stay until there is a free and independent Southeast Asia.

4. The area must be considered integrally, for what happens in South Vietnam will inevitably affect Cambodia, Thailand, and further east. If South Vietnam is lost, Cambodia, Thailand and Burma will follow.

B. Military Situation 1. The Viet-Cong are allowed virtual control of most of South Vietnam at night. Vietnamese forces and U.S. forces generally hole-up at night behind barbed wire and concrete and the countryside is, in effect, controlled by the V.C. There is little effective counter-action by Vietnamese armed forces. The security situation is extremely bad. The Mekong Delta is mostly under control of a Viet-Cong Government with taxation powers, virtually independent logistically, although support also comes in by ship to Cambodia and then down the canals. Experienced observers believe that cutting off all outside support to the Viet-Cong would not materially affect the outcome of the war. (See the accompanying report on pacification in Long An Province for details of Vietnamese and U.S. ineffectiveness.)5

2. The strategic hamlet program has essentially failed to provide security for the peasants, partly because of the lack of back-up security. At first 18 or 20 armed villagers could either kill or repel the two or three Viet-Cong intruders at night. Then when the Viet-Cong organized their larger-scaled 40-or-50-men attacks with automatic weapons (followed by ambushes of relief columns from the larger military centers) the effect was to lose the confidence of the villagers in the hamlets that they could be backed up and secured. Now one current practice apparently is to fire off artillery in the direction of a hamlet being attacked, which often indiscriminately kills friendly villagers. The use of aircraft and artillery has too often been a “substitute” for effective night and day ground action.

3. Relatively little intelligence about the whereabouts of Viet-Cong guerrillas can be obtained from a population which is both intimidated by the Viet-Cong and which has nothing but dislike or even hatred for the Vietnamese regular forces. It appears within the capability of the Viet-Cong to mount two or three dramatic strokes for psychological effect within the next weeks or months—such as the occupation for 24 hours of a provincial capital.

4. The Vietnamese Army suffers from having a large number of its people who have been in combat too long and are playing it safe; their principal mission is to stay alive. There has been an extraordinarily low proportion of Vietnamese officer casualties compared to enlisted casualties. The attitude of officers toward men is too often a master-servant relationship, and there seems to be a lack of trust between officers and men. Officers are unwilling, and not encouraged, to assume responsibility. The attitude of both officers and men toward the civilian population is bad, on the whole. There is real estrangement between the people and the Army. Such incidents as Vietnamese soldiers driving U.S. furnished trucks down through the streets of villages and killing children and livestock, without stopping, plus the relatively indiscriminate use of heavy weapons and napalm are not calculated to win the support of the people.

5. While there is an overwhelming number of U.S. personnel in Vietnam, too many are in Saigon. The prevailing attitude of the U.S. commanders has been to press the war against the Viet-Cong and if anyone gets in the way that is too bad-“war is hell”, etc. The result has been a concentration on heavier weapons, with nearly zero attention to civic action, nearly zero attention to winning the people of Vietnam to the side of the Vietnamese Government and the Vietnamese Army. Air Force flyers, for example, have too often followed a policy of shooting anything that moves-on the theory that only the Viet-Cong will be running away from a strafing airplane.

C. Political/Psychological Situation 1. In general the Vietnamese people are not so much anti-government as indifferent to the Government, and the general attitude is “a plague on both houses.” They are weary of twenty or more years of war. Clearly there is little commitment and motivation, nor belief in a government program for the people, although there is a considerable reservoir of idealistic young people who could be organized into a national movement.

2. The Vietnamese Government appears uncertain as to how to proceed, with the U.S. advisers overconscious of the national sovereignty of the Vietnamese, with relatively little rapport with the Vietnamese leaders, and neither the understanding nor ability to insist upon political/psychological emphasis in the war. The Vietnamese leadership is divided and mistrustful of each other.

3. The Vietnamese Government has promulgated no goals for the people that are believed, and has begun no action programs that would give the people something to be for. Although there is a fair-sized budget for “civic action” by the Vietnamese Army, it has not been spent with any effective results in the countryside.

4. There is no consistent or effective program of troop indoctrination-in sharp contrast to the very heavy and steady indoctrination employed by the Viet-Cong forces.

D. American AID personnel, particularly those in rural development work of increasing agricultural production and food distribution, are working with a small team of 40 some people in the rural areas, and are not hindered by the Viet-Cong. The people have confidence in these men, who are by and large young and idealistic and are recognized as such by the Vietnamese people. They have been making rather dramatic advances in agricultural production and other improvements wherever they are working. However, the Vietnamese Army and Government, who should get the credit, obtain little benefit from the work of these Americans. Too often such Vietnamese do not participate in meaningful ways in the activities of the rural development people.

II. What Should Be Done

A. There should be a U.S. decision to stay, stabilize, and help the Vietnamese build. To pull out now or to permit a “neutralist” solution at this time when the security situation is so difficult will be to signal to the people of Southeast Asia that we have lost confidence in them and that the game is lost.

B. There should be a U.S. determination and an announcement of our primary goal-not of creating an anti-Communist bastion in Southeast Asia, but the creation of an independent and free Southeast Asia.

C. The Vietnamese must be skillfully and firmly guided, but it is they (not us) who must win their war.

D. The two most urgent fundamental needs in Vietnam are: stabilizing the Vietnamese leadership and giving some hope to which the Vietnamese people can rally. Vietnamese civilian leaders appear to have an effective plan for stabilizing leadership which should be supported. A political base is needed to support all other actions toward gaining victory. The winning of the people’s minds and hearts is imperative. No amount of additional military involvement can be successful without accomplishing this task.

E. Political Goals 1. The Government of Vietnam should announce a sweeping program of economic and social reform and progress, and the identification of its own role as a caretaker. Looking toward more self-government and democratic rule, a practical program for establishing a new Constitution, for eventual national elections, and a return to civilian government must be set forth.

2. There should be widespread propaganda and information disseminated about specific political and economic goals-such as land reform, increasing agricultural production by x percentage in one or two years, the construction of new schools in every hamlet, etc.

3. The VN Army must undergo a thorough and detailed indoctrination to change its attitude and practices toward the civilian population, to ensure that their primary mission is understood to be to protect the people of South Vietnam and their secondary mission to help them.

4. Vietnamese civilian administrators and village teams must be recruited on a volunteer basis, not bureaucrats sent out unwillingly from the capital. Young people who are willing to work with the peasants in the villages and on the farms should be given encouragement and incentives to do so.

F. Military Program 1. Since SEATO has shown itself to be apparently an impractical instrument for defending Southeast Asia from Communist subversive insurgency, SEATO either should be changed drastically or a substitute organization created to permit some multi-lateral military action in Southeast Asia. One practical alternative would be the creation of the kind of international volunteer group which was once created in the Philippines, which would accept volunteers for service and act, nominally, perhaps, under contract with the Vietnamese Government as advisers and technicians.

2. Training and combat in night fighting must be instituted and the concept of close infantry combat substituted for the present reliance upon heavy weapons, especially napalm, bombs, and heavy artillery, except under specialized circumstances. Experienced counter-guerrilla forces from other nations, especially in Southeast Asia, ought to be invited in-such as the Filipinos with Huk campaign experience.

3. A possible dramatic stroke to demonstrate the U.S. intention to stay and help defend the Southeast Asian people would be a multilateral military cordon established across the area from Thailand eastward, and westward from the South Vietnamese coast immediately below the 17th parallel-joining across Laos. While this would have only a relatively small role in drying up the logistic support for the Viet-Cong guerrillas, it would have a tremendous dramatic impact throughout Southeast Asia. Perhaps SEATO could undertake this task.

III. Methods

A. The key would appear to be not to increase the number of U.S. personnel committed in Vietnam, but to restructure the command and control organization. This could be done by sending in a seasoned team of men who have demonstrated their ability to defeat Asian insurgents who fight by Mao Tse-tung’s doctrines of guerrilla warfare. The team that went into the Philippines to help Magsaysay defeat the Huks was effectively only three men. The team that went into Vietnam in 1954 to help Diem stabilize the country was effectively only ten men. To emphasize the relative non-importance of additional numbers of people, the rural development program in South Vietnam, which is one of the great successes, is being run by only about 40 dedicated and motivated men.

B. Basic changes in the U.S. advisory effort in Vietnam are required: 1. Advisers must be motivated and convinced that the way to win in Southeast Asia is to win the minds and hearts of the people and they must want to do so. The present emphasis is on killing the Viet Cong and God help anything that stands in the way. Advisers who become personally committed must be encouraged to extend their tours, or return after leave.

2. Key advisers, having the confidence of the key Vietnamese leaders, and the backing of the U.S. Government, must be positioned to coordinate the U.S. and Vietnamese efforts, exercising when necessary strong, firm guidance, practically effective control, in both military and civilian areas. Clearly the present U.S. advisory leadership is both over-sensitive about Vietnamese “sovereignty”, and too little sensitive to the feelings and needs of the Vietnamese people.

3. Effective support must be given to U.S. advisors at lower echelons, so that the advised, if they disregard their advice, know that their actions will be promptly and effectively brought to the attention of Vietnamese and U.S. advisors at as high an echelon as might be necessary. Major errors must be rectified, or their perpetrators suitably dealt with, even at risk of infringements on sovereignty.

C. The Vietnamese Government should be moved and effectively assisted to make the necessary public announcements regarding political and economic goals, to develop an active program of civil action and indoctrination of the troops, and to engage in an intensive program of training and combat in night fighting.

D. To deal with North Vietnam, a committee on national liberation should be formed in South Vietnam with announcements that the eventual goal is the unification of a free and independent Vietnam. This would regain some of the psychological initiative that the North Vietnamese now have. The committee could use the new SOKW VOA transmitter (with a changed frequency) which is now in Vietnam.

E. Direct U.S. military action against North Vietnam, U.S. assumption of command roles, or the participation in combat of U.S. troop units are unnecessary and undesirable.

IV. Proposal

That a team be immediately selected by the President from among those men who have had experience in inspiring and guiding counter-guerrilla forces in Asia, who are known to and have the confidence of the Vietnamese leaders, who are motivated to win the political and psychological war, as well as the military war, in Vietnam, and who have a similar direct authority stemming from the President of the United States that Gerald Templer had in Malaysia and that Edward Lansdale had in Vietnam in 1954.

At least two key individuals ought to be called in by. the President personally to discuss the possibility of organizing such a team: Major General Edward G. Lansdale, presently serving in the White House on Food for Peace; and Rufus Phillips, presently head of his own engineering company in the Washington area, who, up until 6 months ago, was the director of rural affairs for AID in South Vietnam. Both Lansdale and Phillips served in the pacification program in South Vietnam in 1954 and 1955—Lansdale as the key adviser to Diem, and Phillips in the field as an airborne officer. Both are highly motivated, highly trained, decisive and imaginative people. Lansdale, whose biographical sheet is attached,6 was the key American figure in Magsaysay’s defeat of the Huk forces in the Philippines, the key figure in the development of counter-insurgency work in the Defense Department, as well as being the key adviser to Diem in the first two years of his reign. He was an adviser to President Kennedy on South Vietnam and is known to McNamara, the Joint Chiefs, and Lodge. It is strongly suggested that the President ask Lansdale to discuss this whole matter with him.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol III, Memos (A). Secret.

2 Not attached, but a copy is in the Hoover Institution, Lansdale Papers, Saigon Liaison Office, “Concept for Victory in Vietnam.”

3 Edward G. Lansdale, Rufus Phillips, and Charles T.R. Bohannan.

4 Not found. Humphrey met with Foreign Minister Quat on June 5. Rusk telephoned Humphrey on Friday, June 5, at 5:09 p.m., to hear about his conversation. The transcription of the call reads as follows:

“See said President had asked him to call H to hear his interesting remarks on his meeting with Quat. He said he was preparing a detailed memo and would have that Monday. H said in summary that Quat said he wanted to talk to H not as Foreign Minister but as private individual; he was not speaking publicly and could not; US had respected Vietnamese sovereignty but now if something not done so that US takes over a good deal more, we are not going to have any sovereignty; Vietnam does not have administrators; we need not an adviser but a brother; someone who is not afraid to criticize; Quat paid tribute to AID people; there were not yet any policy goals which aroused Vietnamese people; this could not be said publicly; Quat said he thought the military situation could be stabilized. H asked for a detailed memo, unsigned, that he could have to be very careful with, give it only to Sec or to President. He said since then he had called in Fraleigh of AID and Gen Lansdale whom he found interesting. H said the impact of the total conversation with Quat was that military can help stabilize but cannot win in that way; said Quat told him interesting facts re infighting in his own administration. Sec said he was looking forward to getting the material. H said he would get it to Sec Monday morning.”

“H said he told President last night that we have no one for spokesman up here; H wanted to know more; many of us are just confused; H said he thought we had to lay down some fundamentals and see what we can do. Sec said he needed more time with the Committee.”

“H said further on the Quat talk, he gathered there is good enough formal relationship with the Embassy but there is a lack of people who really understand the area; he said he was not certain of Quat’s meaning in this regard.” (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

5 Not attached. Apparent reference to a supplement to the “Weekly Report: The Situation in South Vietnam,” May 8, entitled “Situation in Long An Province.” Johnson Library. National Security File. Vietnam Country File, Vol. IX, Memos)

6 Not found.

209. Memorandum From the Board of National Estimates to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) 209. Memorandum From the Board of National Estimates to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)1

Washington, June 9, 1964.

SUBJECT

Would the Loss of South Vietnam and Laos Precipitate a “Domino Effect” in the Far East?

1. The “domino effect” appears to mean that when one nation falls to communism the impact is such as to weaken the resistance of other countries and facilitate, if not cause, their fall to communism. Most literally taken, it would imply the successive and speedy collapse of neighboring countries, as a row of dominoes falls when the first is toppled—we presume that this degree of literalness is not essential to the concept. Most specifically it means that the loss of South Vietnam and Laos would lead almost inevitably to the communization of other states in the area, and perhaps beyond the area.

2. We do not believe that the loss of South Vietnam and Laos would be followed by the rapid, successive communization of the other states of the Far East. Instead of a shock wave passing from one nation to the next, there would be a simultaneous, direct effect on all Far Eastern countries. With the possible exception of Cambodia, it is likely that no nation in the area would quickly succumb to communism as a result of the fall of Laos and South Vietnam. Furthermore, a continuation of the spread of communism in the area would not be inexorable and any spread which did occur would take time—time in which the total situation might change in any of a number of ways unfavorable to the Communist cause.

3. The loss of South Vietnam and Laos to the Communists2 would be profoundly damaging to the US position in the Far East, most especially because the US has committed itself persistently, emphatically, and publicly to preventing Communist takeover of the two countries. Failure here would be damaging to US prestige, and would seriously debase the credibility of US will and capability to contain the spread of communism elsewhere in the area. Our enemies would be encouraged and there would be an increased tendency among other states to move toward a greater degree of accommodation with the Communists. However, the extent to which individual countries would move away from the US towards the Communists would be significantly affected by the substance and manner of US policy in the period following the loss of Laos and South Vietnam.

4. Southeast Asia. In the remaining piece of Indochina, Sihanouk would probably accelerate his movement toward accommodation with the Communists, in anticipation of a Communist victory he considers inevitable. Thailand would almost certainly shift toward a neutralist position, hoping thus to forestall any vigorous Communist move against the regime for as long as possible. Cooperation with the US would be reduced. Already, Thai leaders have made clear their worries about the firmness of US commitments in the area and their doubts about the wisdom of ready responsiveness to Washington’s immediate policy desires. Burma would be less affected, having already virtually severed its ties with the US. Ne Win would see the ouster of the US from Indochina as confirming the wisdom of the isolationist, somewhat pro-Peiping course he has already embarked upon.

5. London, Canberra, and Kuala Lumpur have been counting ultimately upon US support for Malaysia against Indonesian aggression. They would be badly disconcerted by a US failure in Indochina, and would almost certainly seek some clear US commitment to help them defend Malaysia. Indonesia, for its part, would be emboldened in its efforts to crush Malaysia.

6. US Western Pacific Bases. US military strength in the Far East is based on the chain of islands from the Philippines to Japan, not on the Asian mainland. As long as the US can effectively operate from these bases, it will probably still be able to deter Peiping and Hanoi from overt military aggression. Furthermore, the protection of these island countries from Communist subversion efforts is a different problem from that of protecting countries on the mainland. In the Philippines, there would be some impetus to the tendency of ultranationalists, such as former Foreign Minister Lopez, to press for reduced cooperation with the US and a softening of the Philippines’ anti-Peiping stand. They would also seek restrictions on US bases similar to those presently enforced in Japan. We do not think this would affect Philippine government policy, at least as long as the present administration is in power in Manila.

7. On Taiwan, Chiang Kai-shek and his followers would be greatly disheartened, but they would not be likely to seek an accommodation with the Communists. As in the case of the Philippines, the Nationalist Chinese leaders appreciate the efficacy of US sea and air power, and their nation has proved among the least vulnerable in the Far East to Communist infiltration and subversion.

8. In Japan, the loss of South Vietnam and Laos would almost certainly produce some increase of neutralist sentiment. There would be more questioning of the desirability of remaining committed to the US side and continuing to be made a prime Communist target by the presence of US bases. The mutual defense treaty and the US bases in Japan and Okinawa would come under even greater attack than at present. At a minimum, political pressures for further restrictions on the use of these bases would be greatly intensified, and the government would probably make a few concessions to these pressures. We do not believe that there would be major changes in Japanese policy.

9. Communist Asia. Aside from the immediate joy in the DRV over achievement of its national goals, the chief effect would be upon Communist China, both in boosting its already remarkable self-confidence and in raising its prestige as a leader of World Communism. Peiping has already begun to advertise South Vietnam as proof of its thesis that the underdeveloped world is ripe for revolution, that the US is a paper tiger, and that local insurgency can be carried through to victory without undue risk of precipitating a major international war. The outcome in South Vietnam and Laos would conspicuously support the aggressive tactical contentions of Peiping as contrasted with the more cautious position of the USSR. To some degree this will tend to encourage and strengthen the more activist revolutionary movements in various parts of the underdeveloped world.

For the Board of National Estimates:
Sherman Kent
Chairman

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. III, Memos (B). Secret. A June 11 covering memorandum from McCone to McGeorge Bundy reads as follows:

“Attached is a memorandum from Dr. Sherman Kent on the ‘doming effect’ in the Far East resulting from loss of South Vietnam and Laos.”

“You will recall the President made inquiry concerning this subject last Saturday. I call your specific attention to numbered paragraph 9, the final paragraph in the memorandum.”

On another copy of this memorandum, Forrestal wrote the following note: “Mac: This is obvious but good. Might help answer one of the Pres’s questions.”

2 This memorandum assumes a clear-cut Communist victory in these countries, i.e., a withdrawal of US forces and virtual elimination of US presence in Indochina, either preceded or soon followed by the establishment of Communist regimes in Laos and South Vietnam. The results of a fuzzier, piecemeal victory, such as one staged through a “neutralist” phase, would probably be similar, though somewhat less sharp and severe. [Footnote in the source text.]

210. Summary Record of a Meeting 210. Summary Record of a Meeting1

White House, Washington, June 10, 1964, 5:30 p.m.

PRESENT

Secretary Rusk (later), Secretary McNamara, Secretary Dillon, Attorney General, Under Secretary Harriman, Director McCone, Director Bell, Director Rowan, Mr. Rostow, Assistant Secretary Bundy, Assistant Secretary Manning, Assistant Secretary McNaughton, General Goodpaster, Deputy Under Secretary Johnson, Special Assistant Sullivan, Mr. Chester Cooper, Mr. William Colby, Mr. McGeorge Bundy, Mr. Douglass Cater, Mr. Bromley Smith

[Here follows discussion of the situation in Laos.]

The group then turned to consider item three of the agenda, i.e., next steps in South Vietnam.2 Mr. Sullivan reported on the existing situation. The most important element in the South Vietnam picture is the will and determination of the Khanh government and the South Vietnamese people. Their morale would be deeply affected by the position we take in Laos. If we stand firm they will be encouraged to adopt our new suggestions with respect to adding U.S. advisory personnel to the Vietnamese civil and military structure. They must, however, have a clear idea of what we plan to do in the future. If we go to a Geneva conference without gaining our preconditions, there will be crisis of confidence in South Vietnam. If we ask and obtain a Congressional resolution in support of our Southeast Asia policy, the Vietnamese will be greatly encouraged. The Manning information operation here and the Zorthian USIA operation in Saigon are efforts in the right direction. We will need to indoctrinate our own people so that they are not conveying to the Vietnamese that we are Gung Ho for a military victory, but, rather, are in South Vietnam for the long term. Our training people can convince the South Vietnamese that we are sticking with them. With the takeover of the military command by General Westmoreland, we can shift from trying to kill every Viet-Cong, to protecting the Vietnamese population. The country team in Saigon has taken three provinces in which pilot projects will be initiated. These three are among the eight provinces recommended by the Honolulu meeting. The Vietnamese Foreign Minister Quat is returning to South Vietnam and, hopefully, will speed up the dispatch abroad of South Vietnamese ambassadors. In addition, the South Vietnamese government has wired [hired?] a U.S. public relations firm to assist it in drawing public attention to its accomplishments. He concluded by repeating that if the Vietnamese can be convinced we are sticking with them and not withdrawing, they will agree to our plans for greater participation in the government structure of South Vietnam.

Secretary Rusk asked why the South Vietnamese doubt that we are sticking with them. Mr. Sullivan responded that they are upset by the statements which Senator Morse makes almost daily, by Agence France Presse reports from Saigon, by whispering which constantly goes on in Saigon involving neutralization proposals, and by the diplomatic activity which we are engaged in involving the problem of Laos.

Secretary McNamara said there is no question but that we face a morale problem in South Vietnam. Many South Vietnamese doubt that we will take actions necessary to save the situation. We must be prepared to take what actions are necessary to maintain morale which has weakened in the last two or three weeks.

Mr. Sullivan said that events in Laos have weakened morale in South Vietnam. He referred to certain evidence that the South Vietnamese think we lack firmness in our policy toward the Laos situation.

Mr. William Bundy disagreed. He suggested that we wait until we had further evidence of the effect of our actions in Laos on the state of morale in Saigon. The air strike in Laos has helped morale in South Vietnam. Secretary McNamara agreed that as a result of our air strike in Laos morale in South Vietnam has improved in the last two days.

Mr. Cooper asked how we could realistically change South Vietnamese morale. The situation in Laos might have affected morale in South Vietnam, but we cannot say flatly that it was the result of our actions in Laos. It may have been the result of the improved situation in Laos.

Mr. Sullivan said it was necessary to reassure the South Vietnamese every day. Secretary Rusk agreed and said that this necessity applied to several other countries, even including Germany. We cannot build our policy on the constant need to reassure nervous friendly countries.

Secretary McNamara said he concluded, following the Honolulu meeting, that the situation in South Vietnam was weakening. He acknowledged that Ambassador Lodge thought things were getting better there. However, Secretary McNamara felt that the U.S. would not have to take any major action in South Vietnam in the next two or three months. We should review the situation and the actions we are taking every two weeks. Mr. Sullivan agreed that we did not have a short fuze on the South Vietnamese situation. He noted that the Viet Cong had eased up on their attack on South Vietnam military bases and are concentrating their propaganda on trying to erode South Vietnamese support of General Khanh’s government, to weaken U.S. support of that government, and to bring U.S. domestic public opinion pressure on the U.S. Government to reduce its support of General Khanh.

Secretary Rusk suggested we might initiate an operations checklist which might have as many as one hundred items on it. This checklist would be reviewed every few days. Pluses and minuses would be placed after each item on the list. Items would include such subjects as the countries giving aid to South Vietnam, the appointment of South Vietnamese ambassadors, the religious question, and pay and housing for troops. These detailed actions are the essence of our program rather than big diplomatic moves. The checklist would be a stimulus to continued action on the many small proposals.

Mr. Cooper said the weekly combined report now being prepared on South Vietnam meets part of the Secretary’s suggestion.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy suggested that Mr. Sullivan’s group was the proper group to draw up a list of current problems with comment as to progress being made on each. Mr. Rowan volunteered to prepare a study on South Vietnam morale, based on press reports from Saigon.

Secretary Rusk felt it would be helpful to the President to know that we are reviewing South Vietnam actions comprehensively and in detail.

Director McCone expressed some concern over the prospect that we might be confronted in South Vietnam with a sudden Communist thrust. There is some evidence to indicate that the Communists may be holding back their forces and building up for a new attack. The Watch Committee is closely following this subject. There has been a period of relative quiet for the past two weeks in Vietnam, during which there have been no large enemy military actions. Conceivably, the Viet Cong may be assembling resources for a major blow at the Khanh government. Mr. Alexis Johnson said that the Viet Cong may be turning away from military actions to attacks on the morale of the South Vietnamese, as had been pointed out earlier by Mr. Sullivan.

Secretary Rusk asked that the closest watch be kept on the deployment of the Communist Chinese air forces. He emphasized the extreme importance of any movement of these air forces.

Mr. Sullivan summarized the views of Mr. Burdett, an English correspondent who had spent considerable time in Communist areas in the Far East. Mr. Burdett’s view is that the Viet Cong is not seeking a military victory in Vietnam but is trying to turn South Vietnam into another Laos by creating political confusion for the Khanh government and spreading confusion throughout the countryside.

The group then turned to consideration of a draft Congressional resolution3 which was summarized by Mr. William Bundy. The draft resolution tries to convey a firm posture but also emphasizes the peace motive and the readiness to negotiate, plus the willingness to use SEATO and the UN. The objective is to enlist the support of as many Senators as possible, minus Senator Morse. Paragraph two of the draft resolution is modeled on the Near East resolution rather than on the Offshore Island resolution or the Cuban revolution.4 The whereases are important in the effort to gain maximum support. Section three of the draft is considered by the lawyers to be very important but it could be dropped as not being absolutely necessary.

The group then turned to Mr. McGeorge Bundy’s paper, “Alternative Public Positions for U.S. on Southeast Asia for the Period July 1–November 15.”5 Mr. Bundy said the only time to seek the Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia would be at the end of the Civil Rights debate, which may occur within ten days or two weeks. However, if there were a crash situation in Southeast Asia. a resolution could be dealt with at any time.

Secretary Rusk said the ideal situation would be a short resolution adopted unanimously by Congress. It would be disastrous if Congress refused to vote a resolution proposed by the Administration or if the resolution was basically weakened during the course of Congressional debate. We should ask for a resolution only when the circumstances are such as to require action, and, thereby, force Congressional action. There will be a rallying around the President the moment it is clear to reasonable people that U.S. action is necessary.

Secretary McNamara said we would not be in a position to ask for a Congressional resolution before July 1.

The Attorney General foresaw great difficulties in obtaining approval of a Congressional resolution if the Administration’s course of action was not crystal clear. He felt the difficulties on the Hill would be great if events are not pushing us to prompt action. It would be much simpler to obtain approval of a resolution if U.S. actions are forcing the pace. Heavy ground work with Congressmen will be necessary.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy said the Congressional ground work would be difficult if we are not committed to seek a resolution. Secretary McNamara doubted that we could go to Congress before July 1. Secretary Rusk said there was no basis for a resolution in the existing situation or on decisions which the Administration has so far taken.

Secretary McNamara said a Congressional resolution before September was unlikely unless the enemy acts suddenly in the area, which is also unlikely. Our actions proposed to date are not such as to require a resolution.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy asked that the group not dismiss the proposal to seek Congressional resolution without taking into account the great benefit such a resolution would have in conveying our firmness of purpose in Southeast Asia.

Secretary Rusk said we can get a resolution passed only with great difficulty unless the President has already taken basic decisions as to what we would do in Southeast Asia. Success in obtaining the Cuba resolution and then support we obtained from NATO countries followed the announcement of our decision to act. Before we reach a higher climax resulting in firm U.S. decisions, our Congressional problem will be considerable.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy agreed to beef up the last page of his paper which deals with how we can meet the situation in Laos prior to a Congressional resolution or without seeking one.

Secretary McNamara suggested that a press campaign should be launched which would be of such a nature as to avoid building up public pressure for drastic action. Mr. Manning said perhaps the public information program should be aimed at continuing the present disinterest in the Laos and South Vietnam situations. This is a different objective than trying to sell a Congressional resolution.

Secretary Rusk said the Congressmen he had met recently were reacting as if they were unconcerned and not as if there were a crisis. Secretary McNamara pointed out, however, that there was dissatisfaction in Congress with what we are now doing. Mr. Manning said one very thin sample of public opinion consisted of letters being sent to the State Department. About one-third of the letters received dealt with Southeast Asia. Most of these were “soft” in the sense of inquiring as to what we are doing in Southeast Asia, but were not as “soft” as they had been earlier.

Secretary McNamara suggested that in the event of a dramatic event in Southeast Asia we would go promptly for a Congressional resolution, but we would not plan on one and that our public information program would not be aimed at getting support for a resolution.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy called attention to the problem of how far we could go in influencing the situation in Southeast Asia without taking actions which could be initiated only with a Congressional resolution. Secretary McNamara replied that the thirteen actions he had recommended could be taken without a Congressional resolution and that these actions go quite far. Mr. McGeorge Bundy agreed that even air defense actions in Southeast Asia would be possible without a Congressional resolution.

Secretary Dillon said the arguments for a Congressional resolution could be reversed. If we get a resolution and then do not act promptly, there could follow a crisis of morale.

Mr. Alexis Johnson asked whether, if the Pathet Lao attacked, we had sufficient authority to hit back. Mr. McGeorge Bundy felt that under the NATO [SEATO?] Treaty such a response would be possible. Director McCone said that putting U.S. troops on the ground in Southeast Asia would require a Congressional resolution. He reminded the group that the idea of a resolution arose when we were discussing how to deal with a Communist reaction to an attack by us on North Vietnamese targets.

Secretary Rusk requested that the paper on the Congressional resolution be rewritten to reflect the views expressed during the meeting.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on Southeast Asia, Vol. 1. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Smith. The source text indicates the President did not attend.

2 Items 1 and 2 on the attached agenda were: “The immediate situation [in Laos]: Report by Mr. William Bundy;” and “Laos—alternative steps: Presentation by Mr. Forrestal.”

3 See Document 169 and attachment 3 to Document 214.

4 For text of the Middle East resolution, March 9, 1957, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1957, pp. 829–831. The Formosa or Offshore Islands resolution, January 29, 1955, is ibid.: Basic Documents, 1950–1955, pp. 2486–2487. The resolution on Cuba, October 2, 1962, is ibid.: Current Documents, 1962, pp. 389–390.

5 Document 211.

211. Draft Memorandum by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 211. Draft Memorandum by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 10, 1964.

SUBJECT

Alternative public positions for U.S. on Southeast Asia for the period July 1–November 15

It is agreed that the U.S. will wish to make its position on Southeast Asia as clear and strong as possible in the next five months. The immediate watershed decision is whether or not the Administration should seek a Congressional resolution giving general authority for action which the President may judge necessary to defend the peace and security of the area. It is agreed that if such a resolution is sought, it should be general in tone. It is also agreed that the best available time for such a move is immediately after the Civil Rights bill clears the Senate floor. Finally, it is agreed that no such resolution should be sought unless careful Congressional soundings indicate rapid passage by a very substantial majority. The question that remains is whether on these assumptions such a resolution is or is not desirable, and the argument which follows is designed to explore the consequences of having and not having such a resolution.

A. Scenario for a Congressional resolution2

The first necessity, if we are to have a resolution, is to prepare the case in favor. This requires that the Administration be ready to give answers to a whole series of disagreeable questions. Some of the more significant questions and possible answers follow: 1. Q. Does this resolution imply a blank check for the President to go to war over Southeast Asia?

A. The resolution will indeed permit selective use of force, but hostilities on a larger scale are not envisaged, and in any case any large escalation would require a call-up of Reserves and thus a further appeal to the Congress. More broadly, there is no intent to usurp the powers of the Congress, but rather a need for confirmation of the powers of the President as Commander in Chief in an election year. The basic precedents are the Formosa Resolution, the Middle East Resolution, and, in a sense, the Vandenberg Resolution.3

2. Q. What kinds of force, if any, are possible under this authorization?

A. No force will be used if the President can avoid it. If the continued aggression of others should require a limited response, that response will be carefully aimed at installations and activities which directly support covert aggression against the free people of Laos and South Vietnam. There is no intent or desire to enlarge the action beyond what is absolutely required, and specifically, there is no intent to overthrow existing governments in North Vietnam or in Red China, however much we dislike those regimes.

3. Q. What change in the situation requires such a resolution now?

A. 1. This answer should include a candid account of the existing situation and hazard and the growing dangers both in Laos and in South Vietnam.

A. 2. This part of the answer should refer to the need for international awareness that the U.S. is not immobilized by a political campaign.

4. Q. Isn’t the situation in Southeast Asia one which really requires action (a) by the people on the spot, or (b) by allies. or (c) by the U.S. through other than military means?

A. All of these other kinds of action are needed, and all will be sought to the limit of U.S. ability. Specifically: (a) The resolution is designed to give encouragement to those on the spot in their own effort at self-help.

(b) We will seek as much help as possible from allies, but in realistic terms we must recognize that our most reliable friends have their own commitments on other fronts.

(c) The political, economic, and social efforts of the U.S. in Southeast Asia, in support of the free governments there, are being intensified to the limit of our wit and resources.

5. Q. Does Southeast Asia matter all that much?

A. Yes—because of the rights of the people there, because our own commitment, because of the far-reaching effect of a failure, and because we can win if we stay with it.

A strong campaign in defense of this resolution will require a substantial increase in the commitment of U.S. prestige and power to success in Southeast Asia. The resolution would need to be preceded by a Presidential message. Such a message should not come as a bolt from the blue; it should itself be preceded by a clear indication of the increasing firmness of the Administration’s position, and the reasons for that firmness. Such indications could be given only by public statements of high officials or by such devices as a White Paper.

In sum, a Congressional resolution would require a major public campaign by the Administration. A very important element in such a campaign would be early and outspoken support by leading members of Congress.

This is not a small undertaking, and it would have heavy implications.

The great advantages of an early Congressional resolution are international. It would give additional freedom to the Administration in choosing courses of action; still more important, it would give a signal of this new freedom of action and firmness of purpose in a number of important capitals, the most important of which are in Southeast Asia, on both sides of the line.

B. Without a Congressional Resolution

If we do not seek a Congressional Resolution, the international disadvantages are obvious, in that we may seem to have a relative lack of freedom of action and will not have built the major new base of commitment and of authority which in the best of cases such a resolution, with its attendant debate, might provide. On the other hand, if we do not have a resolution, we do not have the risks of a contest at home, nor do we pin ourselves to a level of concern and public notice which might be embarrassing if in fact we do not find it wise to take drastic action in the months immediately ahead. Thus we need to consider how much our course of action may be limited if we do not seek a Congressional Resolution. First, it should be recognized that there are alternative forms of bipartisan support for action: consultation with Eisenhower and the Republican candidate; discussion with bipartisan leadership of Congress; direct Presidential appeal to the people; ample, if not always encouraging, precedent for Presidential action, as in Korea.

Second, there is a wide range of actions which are plainly permissible without a resolution. These include direct military action by South Vietnamese forces, and very substantial deployments of U.S. air, sea and ground forces. Within the framework of SEATO, and in defense of the agreements of 1962, we can plausibly move troops even into Vietnam, Thailand and Laos itself if the appropriate governments request it. Short of direct U.S. military action against North Vietnam, we could almost surely maintain adequate freedom of action even without a Congressional Resolution.

Third, the only time we can get a resolution, in the absence of acute emergency, is within the next three weeks. A strong case can be made that we do not now need to commit ourselves so heavily, and that if the situation changes drastically, we could readily respond by emergency session, certainly in November, and conceivably in September too.

On balance, it appears that we need a Congressional Resolution if and only if we decide that a substantial increase of national attention and international tension is a necessary part of the defense of Southeast Asia in the coming summer.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Southeast Asia, Vol. 111. Top Secret.

2 For drafts of the proposed resolution, see Document 169 and attachment 3 to Document 214.

3 Regarding the Formosa and Middle East resolutions, see footnote 4, Document 210. The Vandenberg resolution, June 11, 1948, is printed in Foreign Relations, 1948, vol. III, pp. 135–136.

212. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 212. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, June 10, 1964.

SUBJECT

Our current work on Southeast Asia

1. We spent the day in two rather indecisive meetings,2 but I think in fact a good deal was learned, and some underbrush cleared away.

2. Lodge’s answer3 makes it clear that the basic next step in policy toward South Vietnam is the selection of his successor. I continue to believe unrepentantly that this is the most important single job you have to fill before the election, and that there is no one whom you should not take if you think he has the qualifications. You know my list,4 and I promise you there is not a name that I would remove from that list on any theory that the individual is more valuable to you where he is.

3. Moreover, I have not heard any additional names that strike me as good enough. It is perhaps immodest to speak this way about a list in which I have included myself, but I am trying to be honest.

4. Until we get a new Ambassador, we cannot really mount a sound program for crash action—political, social, and economic—in South Vietnam. Nevertheless, planning can begin and under your spur we have begun an intensive study of new and additional steps that could be taken on the basic theory that Americans can and should do more. This theory is shared by the men making the study.

5. On the situation in Laos, we have made a first cut at a diplomatic timetable which would be slower and less explosive than the one we started on three weeks ago. This paper is at Tab A,5 and it is the one which triggered a strong objection from the Secretary of State. He insists that our real objective is to force strict compliance with the ’62 Accords. Most of us think that while we should press for such compliance, we should not expect it and should be ready to settle for less. The Memorandum at Tab A states the survival of Souvanna as the real objective, and I think it is right.

6. The other subject on which we made progress today was whether or not to go for a Congressional resolution soon. The memo which we used for discussion on this subject is at Tab B,6 and the summary conclusion of the discussion was that we do not now recommend an attempt to get an early resolution. We think the risks outweigh the advantages, unless and until we have a firm decision to take more drastic action than we currently plan.

7. Finally, it was agreed that we will not be ready for a general meeting with you tomorrow, but that it will be very important to have Dean Rusk, Bob McNamara, and me to meet with you briefly at the 12:45 hour which is now scheduled by Jack Valenti.7

8. If for any reason this program is not satisfactory, you can reach me anytime tonight or early in the morning.

McG.B.8

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5. Top Secret. An “L” on the source text indicates that the President saw this memorandum, and a handwritten note reads: “returned by Pres. 6/12/64.”

2 See Document 210. The reference to the second meeting is unclear.

3 Apparent reference to Document 207.

4 Document 204.

5 Not attached, but apparent reference to a draft memorandum from William Bundy to the President, June 8, entitled “Diplomatic Action Concerning Southeast Asia.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. II, Memos (A).

6 Document 211.

7 This off-the-record meeting did not take place until 4:45 p.m. on June 11. It lasted until 5:45, although Rusk left at 5:13 p.m. (Johnson Library, President’s Daily Dairy) No record of this meeting has been found.

8 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

213. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 213. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 12, 1964–3 p.m.

2459. Eyes only for Rusk from Lodge. Comment: I suggest that the distribution of what follows be limited to those knowing about proposal for Congressional resolution on Vietnam. End comment.

1. I became worried about likelihood that General Khanh would announce his re-organization of the Government of Vietnam just at the worst possible time from the standpoint of Congress and that this might have a very serious effect on passage of a resolution, assuming that it is planned to have one.

2. I therefore called on him this morning and recalled what he already knew, that preparatory work was going on in Washington affecting Vietnam about which I could not give him any details, but I did want to say that these activities in Washington must not be upset by news of more changes in Vietnam which would give a further impression of instability. I therefore asked him what was his timing on his proposed re-organization of the government?

3. He said first that he felt he was considerably affected by what was being done in Washington and felt he had the right to be kept informed, and that he would assure me here and now that his reorganization would not be done at a time which would be embarrassing to Washington. In other words, his re-organization would take place after we had done what we needed to do in the US. He asked whether I thought 30 days from the present date would be enough time, and I said that offhand I thought it was.

4. I then asked whether he would give me plenty of notice ahead of time and a list of all principal personnel involved, and he said that he would. He also said that he would make proper public relations preparation, i.e., communiques, speeches, etc.

5. I then told him of Hoan’s suggestion to me reported in Saigon 23382 that the village administrative councils be given the right to vote “no confidence” in the village administrator, this procedure to be used only in flagrant cases of corruption, torturing, etc. I had wondered whether this might not be a useful gesture provided it was undertaken on the stipulation that a two-thirds vote would be needed and that the central government in Saigon could dissolve the village council at will.

6. Khanh said that this had been considered at length and that there was no doubt that in the present state of development of the Vietnamese people, it could lead only to anarchy and disorder and would be a made-to-order opportunity for the Viet Cong to make trouble and bring about paralysis in local government which was paralyzed enough already. Village councils could make written complaints, which was enough. He said that when the matter had come up at the Council of Ministers, that out of 15 present, only 2 had voted for it—Hoan and one other.

Comment: I am disposed to accept Khanh’s view of this idea. End comment.

7. I then told him of the oral message which I had received from Hoan on Wednesday,3 to wit, that Hoan threatens to leave the government if General Khanh re-organizes it. I told Khanh that suspecting a trap, upon receiving this message, I had sent back word that I did not know what Hoan was talking about.

8. The message also expressed a desire on Hoan’s part to have an informal talk with me, not in official circumstances. I have sent back word that I understood he was going to be at the Australian Embassy tonight, Friday night, in honor of the Australian Foreign Minister, and that we would have a chance to talk there. I told Khanh that I intended to tell Hoan that this is an extremely bad time for him to leave the government.

9. On a totally different subject, I pointed out to Khanh that in our Civil War, Abraham Lincoln had made very effective use of a promise to veterans of the Union Army to be given land in the West and wondered whether something similar could not be done in Vietnam. Khanh said yes, the idea had great merit, particularly as regards lands in the high plateau which the French authorities in the colonial days had always described to the Vietnamese in very frightening terms so as to keep them out. Khanh felt the idea definitely had great merit.

10. As I was leaving, he said: “You will be pleased to hear that I am following your advice and am working on General Minh. He is coming in to see me here at 11 o’clock. I hope you will agree that I am a good pupil.”4

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Exdis.

2 Dated May 28. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

3 June 10.

4 In telegram 2258 to Saigon, June 12, Rusk told Lodge that he received telegram 2459 just after he drafted one to Lodge expressing concern about sweeping changes in the Khanh government. Rusk stated that the line Lodge took was “precisely what I had in mind.” While Rusk realized that Khanh’s government was “less than ideal,” and that Khanh needed men he could trust to share his responsibilities, a sweeping reshuffle would give the impression of “confusion, internal bickering and misdirection.” (Department of State. Central Files. POL 15–4 VIET S)

214. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 214. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, June 15, 1964.

There will be a meeting in the conference room of the Secretary of State at 6:00 p.m. today2 to consider the attached papers.

The principal question for discussion will be to assess the desirability of recommending to the President that a Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia should be sought promptly.

A second question is what the optimum recommendation for action should be if in fact a Congressional resolution is not recommended. A short supplementary paper on this point will be available later in the day.3

McGeorge Bundy

[Here follows an index of attached papers.]

Attachment 1

Washington, June 13, 1964.

Draft Memorandum by the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan)4

MEMORANDUM ON SITUATION IN SOUTH VIET NAM

I. United States Programs for South Viet Nam:

As of last March we recommended a series of actions to be taken which would give the Vietnamese more ability to carry out General Khanh’s Pacification Program. The main thrust of these recommendations was to increase and improve the organization of para-military forces, which would be better paid, better equipped, and better trained than in the past. These forces, recruited locally and inspired with the purpose of protecting their own families, would be a key element in the “holding” phase of the pacification “clear and hold” programs.

At the same time, we recommended that the Vietnamese Air Force be re-equipped. T–28’s and B–26’s were to be phased out by A–1H’s and A–1E’s. The size of the air force was to be expanded and the number of pilots capable of flying the new aircraft were to be expanded in order to provide a better pilot to plane ratio. This program is well advanced; new aircraft are arriving in Viet Nam; pilots are being upgraded; and the training program is moving ahead.

After the Honolulu meeting,5 we recommended sharpening the focus of this effort by the selection of eight critical provinces in the vicinity of Saigon where there would be a greater infusion of American personnel and the execution of “clear and hold” pacification programs. Americans would be introduced as advisors to the para-military forces, and together with Vietnamese counterparts as a joint team, would go into these provinces actually to perform some of the executive and administrative functions necessary to the execution of the “clear and hold” programs. Similarly, in Saigon, a joint US Vietnamese group would be established to supervise this effort.

In the economic and social fields, we have expanded the American effort significantly. Because the increase in pay, allowances and dependents benefits for the military forces have strained the Vietnamese budget, we have increased our own financial contributions both in terms of direct grants and in terms of expanded imports. Against this increase we have negotiated with the Vietnamese for more flexible budgetary and financial systems within their own government structure. We have authorized the addition of nearly 200 American civilians to the AID Mission. We are doubling the number of AID provincial representatives throughout the country, expanding the administrative training program, and have hired a new highly qualified team to direct the rural affairs program.

We have doubled the amount of fertilizer being provided the Vietnamese farmers and hope that the subsequent increase in rice production will result in expanded Vietnamese rice exports and consequent foreign exchange earnings. This year’s crop has been better than earlier predictions suggested and it now appears that as much as 150,000 tons of rice may be exported. We have encouraged land reform and General Khanh has taken several measures which should have an attraction to the Vietnamese farmers. We are continuing to press for better marketing arrangements. better agricultural methods. and more attention to rural needs.

We have pressed friendly countries to show their solidarity with South Viet Nam by making tangible contributions to the Vietnamese Government. We have had favorable responses from Australia, New Zealand, China, the Philippines, and Korea. We expect actions by Germany, Japan, Italy, the United Kingdom and Thailand. The Vietnamese Government and our own mission in Saigon have established a coordinated mechanism to solicit and accept these contributions.

We have persuaded the American medical profession to take more interest in the medical needs of Viet Nam. A team of American physicians, under the sponsorship of MEDICO and CARE, are now in Saigon working out a program for the introduction of American volunteer physicians on a rotating basis in Viet Nam. This is a technique which MEDICO has used successfully in Algeria and which we believe can be applied in Viet Nam. It will require a recruiting campaign during the summer months here in the US.

The Vietnamese information effort, both internally and throughout the world has been far from satisfactory. We have quadrupled our own U.S. advisory staff in the field of psychological operations and are attempting to improve the quality of Vietnamese propaganda directed toward the population of South Viet Nam. We have constructed new radio stations; we are providing 100,000 radio sets; we are asking the Japanese to provide an additional 100,000 and we are working directly with the Vietnamese Information Service in programming the content of their broadcasts and their written propaganda. We have established an American press officer with General Khanh to act as his personal press advisor. We have pressed the Vietnamese to increase their embassy establishments abroad and particularly to augment their information staffs. We have encouraged them here in their plan to contract with an American public relations firm.

II. Additional Measures Being Contemplated:

We have examined for some time the question of how we can make the US effort more directly effective in Viet Nam. Most U.S. officials who have served there firmly believe that there is needed a closer integration of US personnel within the Vietnamese structure. This concept, however, raises a number of problems, especially problems of national sensitivity. We have under review proposals which would address this idea in various forms. Among them are the “encadrement” of US personnel into the provincial administrative structure and into the pare-military forces; the establishment of a “catalyst team” of specially chosen individuals who would operate as shadow advisors to key personnel in the Vietnamese government; the collocation of US and Vietnamese military headquarters so that US and Vietnamese officials are working in and out of the same building; the establishment of “joint operations centers” in which there would be binational participation in the direction of various programs.

Another possibility which we are exploring is the reestablishment of direct US participation in the Montagnard guerrilla operations. These Montagnard forces were originally trained and assisted by US personnel but have subsequently been turned over to Vietnamese special forces control. Because of ancient antipathy between the Montagnards and the ethnic Vietnamese, there are indications that this program has faltered. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] DOD are examining the possibility of reconstituting the program with more direct American participation.

We have reviewed several times the question of removing US dependents from Viet Nam. Ambassador Lodge, at the Honolulu meeting, recommended against such action unless we were willing to accompany it by a fairly dramatic operational commitment against North Viet Nam. An alternative proposal which has recently been raised is the construction of a US housing compound, on the outskirts of Saigon, where American families could live in a more secure but isolated area and where they would be less exposed to the possibility of Viet Cong terror tactics.

We are continuing to study the possibility of introducing a US naval presence more or less permanently based out of Viet Nam. A CINCPAC team is inspecting Cam Ranh Bay as a possible location for such a naval station, and as an area where the US fleet plus Marine forces could conduct amphibious training operations. We have similarly located B–57 aircraft in the Philippines which could be introduced into Viet Nam if we wish to increase the capability of jet bomber potential from South Viet Nam. We are examining the requirements for a US air defense contribution to protect South Vietnamese cities in the event there is a more direct air threat from the North.

III. Problem Areas:

In attempting to accomplish many of these programs, we have encountered resistance both from the Vietnamese and from our own US Mission. Ambassador Lodge has been most reluctant to increase a civilian staff, especially in the rural areas. He fears that this will augment American casualties and undermine American support for the effort in Viet Nam. He also fears that the increased introduction of Americans would give a colonial coloration to our presence there and would cause the Vietnamese to depend more and more on our execution of their programs. The Vietnamese have resisted for a number of reasons. They, too, worry about American civilians in the provinces whom they are unable to protect. They have some fear of appearing to be American puppets by excessive American presence in civilian ministries. Finally, there is some indication that they are reluctant to associate themselves too closely with the Americans there until they feel more confident of ultimate American intentions.

At the current moment, there is great doubt and confusion in Viet Nam about US determination. The daily speeches of Senator Morse, the columns of Walter Lippmann, the New York Times editorials, the AFP distortions of George Ball’s meetings with General De Gaulle, the diplomatic negotiations with respect to Laos, and the absence of any clear signal concerning US intentions in Southeast Asia have worried the Vietnamese. As a leading Saigon newspaper said on June 12: “We must be vigilant and we must be ready to meet any eventuality so as to avoid the possible shameful sacrifice and dishonor to our country as in the past.”

Given this sort of atmosphere in South Viet Nam, it is very difficult to persuade the Vietnamese to commit themselves to sharp military confrontations with the communists if they suspect that something in the way of a negotiated deal is being concocted behind their backs. Consequently, many of the actions which we are pressing on the South Vietnamese are flagging because of this uncertainty. Recruitment for the army and the pare-military forces, expansion of the civil service, and a willingness to accept more Americans in the administrative measures are all affected by this attitude.

Both Ambassador Lodge and General Westmoreland, at the Honolulu Conference, expressed the opinion that the situation in South Viet Nam would “jog along” at the current stalemated pace unless some dramatic “victory” could be introduced to put new steel and confidence into Vietnamese leadership. General Westmoreland defined “victory” as a determination to take some new vigorous military commitment, such as air strikes against Viet Cong installations in the Laos corridor. Ambassador Lodge defined “victory” as a willingness to make punitive air strikes against North Viet Nam. The significant fact about both the Ambassador’s and the General’s suggestions was that they looked toward some American decision to undertake a commitment which the Vietnamese would interpret as a willingness to raise the military ante and eschew negotiations begun from a position of weakness.

While it is almost impossible to establish measurements of Vietnamese morale, we are able to say that there is not at the current moment a single galvanized national purpose, expressed in the government leadership and energizing all elements of the country with a simple sense of confidence. The internal divisions of South Viet Nam are historical and, under the stress of years of war, have persisted rather than disappeared. General Khanh inherited an internal political and religious situation which was badly divided and he contributed to further division by his action against the four generals who had run the November coup. He has moved with some success over the last few months to paper over these various divisions and has achieved a measure of external unity.

However, he has still not been able to crystalize a spirit of leadership or to develop a leadership team in South Viet Nam. Leadership and control of their own destinies is something which has been alien to the Vietnamese for so long that it becomes difficult for many in the country to view their status in anything other than in a client relationship to the great powers. There is a general impression, to some degree enhanced by their heavy dependence upon the US, that South Viet Nam’s role in working out its own destiny is essentially passive, and not the primary determinant.

IV. Vietnamese Capabilities:

If we assume that the first step that has to be taken is the inspiration of confidence and a spirit of leadership, we still have to examine whether such an inspired leadership would find capable resources to command. In general, our assessment on this point remains affirmative. The Vietnamese army is well trained and well equipped. The Vietnamese soldier, when properly led, has proved himself in battle time and again. The resistance and tenacity of the peasant in the face of constant harassment over twenty years is nothing short of remarkable. The native intelligence and industriousness of the Vietnamese people are extremely high.

There are, however, some major shortcomings. The highly sophisticated nature of the Viet Cong guerrilla warfare requires a sophisticated response. General Khanh has developed a pacification plan which, to all observers, is essentially sound. This plan requires extensive, articulated actions on a military, political, and economic scale. The Vietnamese government doesn’t possess the executive and administrative apparatus to put this plan effectively into action. This is partly because the French left them with only a shadow of administrative apparatus, partly because the Viet Cong have deliberately assassinated government officials, and partly because of the absence of clear direction and leadership from Saigon.

The military situation in South Viet Nam is far from perilous. While the Viet Cong retain an effective capacity for continuous harassment on a nation-wide scale, they are not yet militarily capable of winning a stand-up, open battle with government forces. Consequently, they cannot militarily seize and hold any significant areas in South Viet Nam. Government forces, which can be mustered in superior numbers and fire power against any Viet Cong concentration, can move into and clear any position which the Viet Cong attempt to establish.

On the other hand, by their system of harassment, terror, and secret cellular organizations, the Viet Cong deny security to major elements of the Vietnamese population. Their constant effort is to extend this sense of insecurity further and further into those territories where Vietnamese Government control exists. The sort of pacification campaign which is required of the government to reverse this effort and to extend the areas of security guaranteed to the South Vietnamese population is extremely complex. The task of organizing the extensive executive machinery necessary to accomplish victory is an enterprise in which there must be a direct and continuing US involvement.

If we can obtain a breakthrough in the mutual commitment of the US and Viet Nam to a confident sense of victory, we believe that we can introduce this sort of executive involvement into the Vietnamese structure. Moreover, we believe that the Vietnamese structure itself, in such an event, would be more effective and more responsive to such involvement. There is no one who can define with precision just how that breakthrough can be established. It could come from the external actions of the US, internal leadership in Viet Nam, or from an act of irreversible commitment by the US.

V. Conclusions:

The general conclusion from this analysis is that we can anticipate no sharp upturns in the Vietnamese willingness or ability to press for the extermination of the insurgency if the current situation continues. Indeed, if they continue to worry about American will and determination, we could expect further political fragmentation and increasing disabilities. On the other hand, we cannot guarantee that a dramatic “victory” or active commitment by the US would produce the sharp infusion of spirit which both the Ambassador and General Westmoreland predict.

It is clear, however, that unless some improvement in spirit and leadership can be introduced, we will have great difficulty in introducing more effective American assistance or in obtaining more effective Vietnamese utilization of that assistance. There is no immediate sharp crisis in South Viet Nam at the current moment. However, there are the rumbling undertones of crises which, as they emerge, will more likely appear in the form of a crisis of confidence rather than a military debacle. Communist propaganda and communist tactics over the last few months have accentuated the campaign against the will and determination of the Vietnamese as well as the will and determination of the Americans. This is currently the most critical factor to which we now have to address ourselves.

Attachment 2

Washington, June 12, 1964.

Draft Memorandum Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)6

MEMORANDUM ON THE SOUTHEAST ASIA SITUATION

Probable Devalopments and the Case for a Congressional Resolution

Now that we have worked through the immediate problem of the shooting down of our aircraft over Laos and have Souvanna Phouma’s clear understanding that reconnaissance flights may continue over the Plaine des Jarres and “South Laos” and with escort as necessary, we should now draw back and examine the total picture as it may develop in the next three to four months and what our central plan should be.

1. We do not expect at the present time to move in the near future to military action against North Viet-Nam. At the same time, a significant change in the local situation, largely beyond our control, might compel us to reconsider this position. Such a significant change might come in the form of: a. A re-estimate of the South Viet-Nam situation more gloomy than the one that was reached at Honolulu and indicating that we cannot expect some signs of improvement over the summer and may indeed be facing significant and visible deterioration.

b. Major continued Communist attacks in Laos, threatening the extinction of Kong Le’s forces, Luang Prabang, or the areas along the Mekong (including Saravane and Atopeu).

c. Creation of a separate Communist government in Laos and a de facto partition of the country. This might be less compelling toward wide action against the north, but such action would certainly have to be weighed.

2. The principal present elements in the situation are that: a. We have entered a negotiating track on Laos that we hope will lead to the convening of the Polish consultations in the next 3–4 weeks and their continuation over a period of time with Souvanna, the British and the Canadians at least holding firm that Communist withdrawal remains a precondition of any 14-nation “Geneva Conference.” At this moment. the Soviets and British have not yet agreed on the form of invitation to the Polish consultations, and it is still possible that the whole project will hit a serious snag before it can even be convened. However, we must assume that it will in fact get under way; if it does not, we then would have an immediate sharp acceleration of the whole problem.

b. By our public statements and the crisis atmosphere of the last two weeks, including the Honolulu conference, we have created an impression in the area that we are very firm indeed but have also left the area and the US public in some uncertainty as to just what firmness in fact means.

c. By the shooting incidents in connection with our reconnaissance operations in Laos, as well as the continuing T–28 operations, we have set up a fairly good picture of military firmness in the area, and specifically in Laos, and we can maintain this to some degree by continuing escorted reconnaissance operations on precise plans to be worked out.

d. Through our speeches and our military actions we have undoubtedly gotten some kind of signal through to Hanoi, and this will be reinforced by the message being conveyed by the Canadian ICC representative to Hanoi on June 15. Hanoi has been conspicuously silent about our air activities over Laos, and there is recent Hanoi broadcasting indicating that alert measures have been intensified. Nonetheless, we are faced with two grave problems in keeping our signal clear to Hanoi: (1) Hanoi tends to believe that our stronger gestures come in fits and starts and that by toning down its own actions for a time it can lull us (for example, the President’s speech7 and the speculations of early March, plus our initiation of extensive reconnaissance at that time over North Viet-Nam, undoubtedly gave them pause for a short time, but by early May this signal seemed quite clearly to have worn off).

(2) The Communist stereotype generally is that we simply do not move hard in an election year, and some of our European friends constantly lend support to this thesis. A related point is that Hanoi has throughout used salami tactics, seeking to avoid any single action strong enough to cause us to react hard and fast.

3. Our ideal objectives in relation to Laos are: a. To use the Vietnamese consultations to compile strong evidence of the Communist military aggressions of May.

b. To use the Polish consultations to build up a clear picture that the Communists have been far more in the wrong in the political sphere and that Souvanna’s position must now be strengthened and affirmed, to get the ICC functioning more clearly, and to put maximum pressure on the Communist side to withdraw substantially from the areas occupied in May.

c. If we get a Communist withdrawal, to use the Geneva Conference to place maximum pressure on the Communist side on the basic violations that have been in existence right along—the presence of North Vietnamese forces in Laos and the use of the Laos corridor by the North Vietnamese to support the war in South Viet-Nam.

In short, our ideal objective in Laos remains a full and effective implementation of the 1962 Geneva Accords. We do not seek a unified non-Communist Laos because this is simply not capable of achievement without a complete war on the ground. But on the contrary we do strongly prefer a Geneva Accords to a de facto partition that would remove third-country interest in the Laos situation and tend to ratify the Communist position in the corridor areas—which sooner or later must be dealt with if we are to obtain security in Viet-Nam.

4. In practice, we doubt very much if we can fully accomplish these objectives through any combination of negotiating and military firmness that we can devise. For the Communists to give up their gains of May and to accept fully Souvanna’s political position would be for them to accept a very major breakdown. The Soviets and Poles may well go with us on a great deal of tidying up of the internal political situation, on which they appear to be supporting Souvanna’s position. Moreover, the Polish consultations could well produce major improvement in the performance of the ICC. These two points in themselves would be significant gains and well worth the Polish consultations in themselves.

However, the Soviets and Poles, and Indians too, probably cannot be expected to go along at all on any agreed demand that the Communists withdraw militarily. It is just possible that the Communist side might permit some reestablishment of the neutralists in the Plaine des Jarres, but it seems considerably more likely that the parallelogram of forces would produce a Soviet-Polish-Indian position that would drop or drastically weaken the withdrawal point and demand an early 14nation conference. The British and Canadians would be hard to hold in line at this point, and Souvanna himself would be under considerable diplomatic pressure to go along, although on the other hand he would be under great right-wing pressure within Laos not to do so.

The net of this is that we would face a serious dilemma at the time that the Polish consultations approached an impasse on the withdrawal issue. Thus, in the absence of any of the developments named in paragraph 1 above, we would like to see the Polish consultations continue over a considerable period, at least into September, and hopefully even beyond.

We must recognize, however, that stringing out the Polish consultations to these lengths will not be easy, nor can we guarantee to achieve this. Pressures to slide off toward Geneva may build up well before this time, and our resistance to these would then confront us with a situation of considerably heightened tensions that could in itself change our timetable. But in any event-however long the Polish negotiations can be strung out-we have the problem of continuing to demonstrate firmness.

5. This practical chain of events raises serious problems about our additional courses of action. If we weaken on our ideal objectives, we would clearly go far to demoralize Khanh and the politically sensitive people in South Viet-Nam, and even the continuation of negotiations would tend over time to cause growing concern that we are moving toward negotiated solutions for both Laos and South Viet-Nam. Whatever success we may achieve in the Polish consultations also depends on a steady strong signal that we are willing to use force if necessary.

The central problem then is what we can do in addition to maintain and demonstrate our firmness to Souvanna and to people in Laos and South Viet-Nam and, above all, to Hanoi. The range of possible actions includes the following: a. Additional military action in the area. We had been thinking last week that the desired added element of firmness could be obtained by starting reconnaissance over North Viet-Nam and escorting it if necessary. However, we would not now think of conducting such missions unescorted, and the use of escort missions, as the Laos experience has now shown, would almost certainly get us into a degree of shooting in North Viet-Nam that would in itself sharply raise the tension level and tend to force our hand.

Another military action we should consider would be to conduct not only continued reconnaissance operations over Laos, but a carefully calculated series of “reconnaissance” strike operations such as that of June 9. The Communist side has clearly found it difficult to respond to these or to make heavy propaganda play of them, partly because it is unwilling to let the ICC inspect any Communist areas. On the other hand, these attacks do tend to worry and weaken the Indians and to some extent the British, and it does not appear easy to find such clearly isolated targets, without civilian damage, as was selected on June 9. If we started to hit Lao civilians, even in the vicinity of military installations, Souvanna might throw another fit. We also have the problem of further US aircraft losses if we do this; even though the US public has not reacted drastically to the losses of last weekend, a repetition of these could well create serious problems, particularly if the Communists in Laos lie low on the ground. This course of action seems at first glance the most promising we might follow, but it does need further study.

One further military action could be taken, namely permitting the Vietnamese Air Force to attack targets in the corridor area of Laos. This would have a very helpful tonic effect on Vietnamese morale and would perhaps somewhat cut down Communist capacity to use the corridor. It would convey a modest signal to Hanoi, but not as much of a one as an action conducted by the US.

b. We have a wide range of possible troop deployments to the Western Pacific and perhaps to Thailand. Some of these, such as additional carriers to the area, probably do have a useful signaling value. Others, such as the move of additional ground and air units, may have some short-term value, but they have the weaknesses that this signal tends to peter out, that these are moves we would prefer to make in the context of an even stronger over-all policy, and that they may create uncertainty and doubt in the US as to just where we are headed. As to deployments to Thailand, it is doubtful that the Thai will accept these in the absence of some change in the situation on the ground, and this move particularly—having been taken once before—conveys a very limited and indeed a somewhat defensive signal.

c. To hold the political situation within Laos and to strengthen Souvanna, there are a number of actions we can and should take in any event—to route our assistance directly through Souvanna rather than through the Right Wing, etc. However, these measures will not have any wider signal value to the north.

6. In sum, there are military moves that we can take that would contribute to a continuing impression of firmness as we try to keep the Laos negotiations moving and to preserve our options concerning Viet-Nam. But it is at least doubtful that any combination of the moves listed above would in fact do the trick. Moreover, it must be emphasized that the Polish consultations may well not play out to the extent we desire, and that the moment we face pressures to slide off to Geneva and resist these, we might have to consider still further military measures or at least be able to make a convincing threat of such measures.

Finally, we must never lose sight of the fact that the situation in South Viet-Nam—without necessarily any dramatic event—could deteriorate to the point where we had to consider at least beginning stronger actions to the north in order to put greater pressure on Hanoi and lift morale in South Viet-Nam.

7. For all of these reasons there is a very strong argument for a continuing demonstration of US firmness and for complete flexibility in the hands of the Executive in the coming political months. The action that most commends itself for this purpose is an immediate Congressional Resolution, subject to the following conditions: a. A formula must be devised, in consultation with the Congressional leadership, that would ensure rapid passage without extended and divisive debate. The draft resolution must support any action required but must at the same time place maximum stress on our peaceful objectives and our willingness to accept eventual negotiated solutions, so that we might hope to have the full support of the school of thought headed by Senator Mansfield and Senator Aiken and leave ourselves with die-hard opposition only from Senator Morse and his very few cohorts.

b. Timing must be considered. Because of proximity on either side to the Republican convention, July appears very difficult. Early August is likewise difficult because the Congress will probably be rushing to complete other measures and adjourn before the Democratic convention. We thus conclude that the only feasible time for presentation would be shortly following the conclusion of the Civil Rights debate, i.e., during the week of June 22. In addition to being virtually inevitable from a political standpoint, this timing does fit very well with the probable date of the convening of the Polish consultations and with the time when our existing and planned signals to Hanoi may begin to taper off.

It may be argued that a Congressional Resolution under present circumstances faces the serious difficulty that there is no drastic change in the situation to point to. The opposing argument is that we might well not have such a drastic change even later in the summer and yet conclude—either because of the Polish consultations or because of the South Viet-Nam situation—that we had to act.

c. The line of argument to be followed in presenting the resolution requires careful thought. A separate memorandum deals with the suggested theme of presentation and with basic questions that would be raised and the line of answer that would be followed.8 From this theme, and these questions and answers, appropriate Presidential messages, testimony by Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, special presentations to the Congress (e.g., of the evidence concerning North Vietnamese involvement), and other necessary elements would be drawn.

8. Conclusion

It is recommended that the President urgently review with the Congressional leadership a resolution along the lines covered in the accompanying folder.

Attachment 3

Washington, June 11, 1964.

Draft Congressional Resolution9

WHEREAS,

The aim of the United States in Southeast Asia is to achieve and preserve peace and security in the area;

The United States has no territorial, military or political ambitions in Southeast Asia, but desires only that the peoples of Southeast Asia should be left in peace by their neighbors to work out their own destinies in their own way;

The peace and security of Southeast Asia are seriously threatened by a systematic and deliberate campaign of Communist aggression and subversion against the nations and peoples of that area;

In particular the Communist regime in North Viet-Nam, with the aid and support of the Communist regime in China, has flouted its obligations under the Geneva Accords of 1954 and has engaged in aggression against the independence and territorial integrity of the Republic of Viet-Nam by carrying out a systematic plan for the subversion of the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam, by furnishing direction, training, personnel and arms for the conduct of guerrilla warfare within the Republic of Viet-Nam and by the ruthless use of terror against the peaceful population of that country;

In violation of its undertakings in the Geneva Agreements of 1962 the Communist regime in North Viet-Nam, with the aid and support of the Communist regime in China, has engaged in aggression against the independence and territorial integrity of Laos by maintaining forces on Laotian territory, by the use of that territory for the infiltration of arms and equipment into the Republic of Viet-Nam, and by providing direction, men and equipment for persistent armed attacks against the Government of National Union of the Kingdom of Laos;

The United States is a party to the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty for the preservation of peace and security in Southeast Asia and for collective defense against Communist aggression and subversion and by a Protocol to that Treaty the nations of Laos and the Republic of Viet-Nam are unanimously designated as within the protective scope of the Treaty;10

The loss of any of the free nations of Southeast Asia to Communism would upset the world balance of power and pose a direct threat to the security of the United States;

The United States stands prepared to seek through the United Nations or otherwise a peaceful settlement in Southeast Asia which would effectively ensure that the peoples and nations of that area would live in freedom and independence;

It is essential that the world fully understand that the American people are united in their determination to take all steps that may be necessary to assist the nations of Southeast Asia to maintain their independence and political integrity;

Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled:

Sec. 1. That the maintenance of international peace and security in Southeast Asia and the preservation of the political independence and territorial integrity of the non-Communist nations of the area, including the Republic of Viet-Nam and Laos, is required by the national interest of the United States:

Alternative Drafts of Section 2

Alternative Based on the Middle East Resolution of 1955 [1957]:

Sec. 2. To this end, if the President determines the necessity thereof, the United States is prepared, upon request from any nation in Southeast Asia, to take, consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, all measures including the use of armed forces to assist that nation in the defense of its political independence and territorial integrity against aggression or subversion supported, controlled or directed from any Communist country. Any such measures shall be reported to the Security Council of the United Nations.

Alternative Based on the Cuba Resolution of 1962:

Sec. 2. That the United States is determined to prevent by whatever means may be necessary, including the use of arms, the Communist regime in North Viet-Nam, with the aid and support of the Communist regime in China, from extending, by force or threat of force, its aggressive or subversive activities against any non-Communist nation in Southeast Asia.

Alternative Drafts of Section 3

First Alternative:

Sec. 3. This Resolution shall expire when the President shall determine that the peace and security of Southeast Asia is reasonably assured by international conditions created by action of the United Nations or otherwise, and shall so report to the Congress.

Second Alternative:

Sec. 3. This Resolution shall expire on January 8 (7), 1965 [date of convening of the next Congress].11

Attachment 4

Washington, June 13, 1964.

Paper Prepared by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)12

BASIC THEMES IN PRESENTING THE RESOLUTION

We confront a serious and continuing crisis in Southeast Asia in which our objective is to preserve and restore the peace through getting North Vietnam and Communist China to let their neighbors alone. We have no wider objective.

The basic decision that the Congress is asked to support is that the US should employ all necessary measures to prevent the spread of Communist influence in Southeast Asia.

In the coming months, we shall be seeking to achieve our ends by a combination of assistance to the Government of South Vietnam and negotiation in respect to Laos. At any time, developments in either South Vietnam or Laos may force us to consider limited forms of military action so as to make progress in South Vietnam and to keep Laos negotiations moving forward.

The situation is unlike any past crisis in which the Congress has enacted similar Congressional Resolutions. It is more serious and imminent than the situation that accompanied the Middle East Resolution of 1955 [1957], but at the same time less immediately critical than the Cuba situation at the time of the Congressional Resolution of October 1962. But the essential basis of seeking Congressional support in the form of a Resolution is the same-that there is a continuing crisis and that the hand of the Executive must be strengthened and given all flexibility by an emphatic statement of Congressional support.

The fact that this is an election year makes such an affirmation of extra importance. Over the next six months, we shall be engaged in continuing political debate and in certain fixed political events, notably the Conventions, that will affect the availability of the Congress. Moreover, the crisis is of such a nature that a need for action may well arise without the type of dramatic event that would inevitably call for convening the Congress.

In this situation, the Communist side must be convinced that America means business. We believe that our actions to date have had considerable impact in this direction. But in the absence of a Congressional declaration of support there is a serious danger that the Communist side would assume that the US is unlikely to act firmly during election year. Any real or assumed irresolution on the part of the United States may well encourage further aggressive acts or refusal to accept reasonable negotiating proposals, and thus make necessary more serious US military measures.

We must also give the nations of the area clear evidence of our determination. A Congressional Resolution should raise their morale and make less likely any deterioration of their internal situations that would make US military action more necessary or drastic than otherwise.

The nation’s vital interest in Asia will not be enhanced by speculation on possible actions in Southeast Asia. Successful action in the area demands a flexible and carefully controlled strategy.

Even during the election period, the President will consult regularly with Congressional leadership. He has no desire for a blank check, but neither does he wish to ignore the realities ahead during an election period.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 092 Vietnam. Unclassified with Secret and Top Secret Attachments. Attachment 5, a “Question Index” of 14 questions about a possible Congressional resolution, is not printed. The questions as well as draft answers are published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 90B. The answers were not part of the original attachment.

2 The meeting took place in the Department of State and lasted from 6 p.m. to approximately 7:20 p.m. Rusk, Ball, Sullivan, Rostow, Cleveland, and Manning attended for the Department of State. McNamara, Vance, McNaughton, Taylor, and Goodpaster represented the Department of Defense and JCS. Bell and Gaud attended for AID, McCone and Colby for CIA, Wilson for USIA, and McGeorge Bundy and Cater represented the White House. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) No record of this meeting has been found.

3 Document 215.

4 Secret. The source text indicates erroneously that this paper was drafted on July 13; it should have been June 13.

5 June 1–2; see Documents 188 and 189

6 Secret. The source text indicates this is a “second draft.”

7 Apparent reference to the White House statement on Vietnam, March 17: for text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 962–963.

8 Attachment 4 below.

9 Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979 89D.

10 For text of the treaty and protocol, September 8, 1954, see 6 UST 81.

11 Brackets in the source text.

12 Secret.

215. Memorandum Prepared for a Meeting at the Department of State 215. Memorandum Prepared for a Meeting at the Department of State1

Washington, June 15, 1964.

SUBJECT

Elements of a Southeast Asian Policy that does not include a Congressional Resolution

The following outline is a sketch of the actions that would remain open to us in varying combinations in the event that we do not now decide on major military operations against North Vietnam and do not now decide to seek a Congressional Resolution. No effort has been made to design a precise scenario. Indeed, if a decision is made not to seek a resolution, what we should have instead is reasonably broad planning authority within which operating officers would be encouraged to work with a relatively free sense that specific recommendations which did not violate general guidelines could expect a sympathetic hearing over the next months.

1. Possible military actions.

a. Reconnaissance, reconnaissance-strike, and T–28 operations in all parts of Laos.

b. Small-scale reconnaissance strike operations, after appropriate provocation, in North Vietnam (initially VNAF?).

c. VNAF strike operations in Laotian corridors.

d. Limited air and sea deployments toward Southeast Asia, and still more limited ground troop movements. (Major ground force deployments seem more questionable, without a decision “to go north” in some form.)

The most interesting of these operations are those involving reconnaissance-strikes and VNAF attacks in the corridors. It is suggested that a detailed and precise roster of such attacks should be prepared, together with estimates of the situations to which they would be a good response, and the ways in which their tactical conduct could reinforce their political purpose

2. Political actions.

a. Internationally—a continued and increased effort to maximize support for our diplomatic track in Laos and our political effort in South Vietnam. Higher authority particularly desires a maximum effort with our allies to increase their real and visible presence in support of Saigon.

b. Laos—an intensive effort to sustain Souvanna and to restrain the right wing from any rash act against the French. Possible increase of direct support and assistance to Kong Le in appropriate ways.

c. South Vietnam—rapid development of the critical province program and the information program, strengthening of country team, and shift of U.S. role from advice toward direction; emphatic and continued discouragement of all coup plots; energetic public support for Khanh Government.

d. In the U.S.—continued reaffirmation and expanded explanation of the above lines of action, with opposition to both aggressive adventure and withdrawal, and a clear open door to selected action of the sort included in paragraph 1.

This outline does not preclude a shift to a higher level of action if actions of the other side should justify or require it. It does assume that in the absence of such drastic action, defense of U.S. interests is possible, within these limits, over the next six months.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Southeast Asia, Vol. 111, Memos (B). Top Secret. No drafter is indicated on the source text, but according to the William P. Bundy manuscript, Chapter 13, p. 25, McGeorge Bundy drafted this memorandum. (Department of State, Bundy Files, William P. Bundy Manuscript) This is the paper prepared for the meeting described in footnote 2, Document 214.

216. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Secretary of State 216. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, June 16, 1964.

SUBJECT

Reassurance in South Viet Nam

In the course of the meeting June 152 on this subject, I was asked to put forward suggestions for the sort of action which the United States might take in order to reassure South Viet Nam concerning the degree of our commitment there. The following proposal, which is fashioned to meet the most prevalent suggestions both from the Vietnamese and from our own U.S. representation in Saigon, represents the sort of step which might meet the problem.

1. As a first step, we should send somewhat inconspicuous representatives (I would nominate Forrestal and myself) to talk privately with General Khanh about the problem. We should pick him up on his discussions with Ambassador Lodge about “prolonging the agony” and on his discussions with you and Secretary McNamara about taking action against North Viet Nam. We should tell him that the United States is prepared to consider shortening the “agony” by reaching a political agreement which would result in the termination of guerrilla insurgency in South Viet Nam.

2. We should make clear to him our realization that negotiations toward such an agreement would essentially involve only four representatives-Communist China, the United States, North Viet Nam and South Viet Nam. However, we should indicate our willingness, if Khanh agrees, to slide into such negotiations through the diplomatic machinery which is being rigged around the Laos question, and should particularly indicate that this might involve participation in a Fourteen Nation Conference.

3. In discussing such negotiations, we should emphasize that we consider our current bargaining position totally inadequate. We could therefore seriously contemplate such discussions only if we had better bargaining counters which would serve as some measure of a match for the position now enjoyed by the communists. Specifically, this would require that North Viet Nam be undergoing some punitive action which could be posed as an equivalent to the “agony” being suffered by the South Vietnamese in the hands of the Viet Cong.

4. Given the relative circumstances [of] South and North, such a punitive equivalent would appear available only in the form of limited air strikes against North Viet Nam. This is the sort of action which General Khanh has on several occasions proposed and we should indicate that we are now ready to discuss with him the form which such action would take. Ideally, we believe that the action should be initiated by South Vietnamese aircraft with South Vietnamese crews. The U.S. would be willing to assist in the development of these strikes by the provision of pre-strike reconnaissance, target planning, and post-strike observation of results. More importantly still, we would be willing to provide air defense for South Viet Nam and political support as insurance against North Vietnamese ground retaliation.

5. It would be our suggestion that such air action against North Viet Nam be openly announced and acknowledged by General Khanh, that the United States would openly condone and support such actions, and that we would immediately enter into diplomatic negotiations at about the same time the air action began. The essential understanding would be that the air action would continue during the diplomatic negotiations just so long as the guerrilla action continues in South Viet Nam. A “cease fire” would involve cessation of both the air action and the guerrilla action simultaneously.

6. If General Khanh accepts this sort of arrangement, we should insist on having further understandings with him. A central point on which we should reach agreement would concern the South Vietnamese attitude toward eventual unification of Viet Nam and consequently the nature of the “carrot” which we would eventually be willing to offer an independent North Viet Nam. Similarly, we need understanding from him concerning his immediate acquiescence in the rapid infusion of American assistance in his pacification program and in the general acceleration of South Vietnamese activities in their own provincial programs. We need it clearly understood that the improvement of Vietnamese governmental processes and bureaucracy are essential to making it possible for the United States to consider a political agreement which would leave South Viet Nam independently able to manage the improvement of its people’s welfare once the insurgency is brought under control.

7. Finally, it should be understood that, especially as a counter to the points outlined in the preceding paragraphs, Khanh may insist upon more active U.S. association with the air action. In that instance, we should be prepared if necessary to concede the inclusion of Farmgate strikes and perhaps, as an outside limit, the deployment of B–57 aircraft into South Viet Nam to be manned by U.S. “volunteers.”

The foregoing package of proposals would certainly give Khanh the sort of reassurance that he personally has sought over the past few weeks. It also would lay out for him a program of preparations that would consume at least eight weeks before negotiations and actions could be brought into train. The uncontrolled factor which could impel more rapid acceleration of this schedule is, of course, the situation in Laos. Either military actions by the communists, or more likely diplomatic actions by the several busybodies which are now concerning themselves with this problem, could move the time schedule for decision on these matters into the latter days of next month.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XII, Memos. Top Secret.

2 See footnote 2, Document 214

217. Memorandum From the Secretary of the Treasury (Dillon) to the Secretary of State 217. Memorandum From the Secretary of the Treasury (Dillon) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, June 17, 1964.

On Monday, June 15, French Finance Minister, Valery Giscard d’Estaing, gave a luncheon for the other Ministers and Central Bank Governors attending the financial meeting in Paris. I found myself seated on his right. Toward the end of the meal the French Finance Minister turned to me and asked how we viewed the current situation in Indochina.

I told him the situation was extremely serious, that we had reached a decision that we would not retreat any further, and, if necessary, would resist further military measures by force. I told him it would be perfectly possible for us to mount very substantial air attacks on North Vietnamese objectives from aircraft carriers. Should we be forced to any such action, I said we would make very clear that we had no idea of doing anything except persuading the North Vietnamese to stop their adventures in neighboring countries. We would make clear that we were not interested in upsetting the government of North Vietnam, or of taking any part of North Vietnam. I said I doubted if there would be any need for large scale ground action, in view of the weight of air power that could be brought to bear. I said the facts of this situation were the exact opposite of that in Korea when, in the face of Chinese warnings, we crossed the 38th parallel and moved up to the Chinese border. In this case we were taking the position that the Communist Chinese took during the Korean episode, namely, trying to make clear that we had reached the limit of our patience and that no further Communist advances would be permitted. Whether or not the situation escalated had now become a question for the Communists to decide.

Giscard d’Estaing then asked me if I had been at the Honolulu meeting. I told him I had not. He then inquired whether I was a member of, and present at National Security Council meetings. I told him I was a regular attendant at such meetings. The conversation ended on this note. I have no doubt that he will report our conversation promptly to De Gaulle. I would hope that this might result in an additional signal to the Communists to go easy.

Giscard d’Estaing also commented that the French felt the present military government in South Vietnam could not, on its own, handle the situation there over the long run. I told him we were very conscious of the need for better civil organization at the regional level. We planned to make a major effort to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of civilian provincial governments but this type of work naturally would take some time before results could be seen.

Douglas Dillon

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL FR–US. Top Secret; Exdis. Also sent to McNamara and McGeorge Bundy.

218. Telegram From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Department of State 218. Telegram From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Lodge) to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 18, 1964—10:28 a.m.

[document number not declassified] Literally eyes only to Secretary Rusk from Ambassador Lodge.

1. The following brand new and totally unexpected dilemma has just arisen:

2. I am reliably informed that my presence in the U.S. as a private citizen can make a great difference in deciding whether or not the leadership of one of our two major parties falls into hands which in foreign affairs would be imprudent and impulsive and unsatisfactory for other reasons in domestic affairs. I remember well your saying here how vital it is that both major parties nominate men who could be trusted with the atomic bomb.

3. I feel therefore that at this juncture the highest duty for me is to go home and take part in the important struggle now being waged for Gov. Scranton.

4. I say this in full realization of the importance of my duty in Viet-Nam and of all that is at stake here.

5. I should be in U.S. as soon as possible consistent with smooth transition here and obviously must be there as a private citizen.

6. Perhaps you can send Alexis Johnson here who could handle this job magnificently I am sure.

7. Realize how difficult this is for you and will, of course, always keep faith with you.

Note: Delivery requested at beginning of business day.2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Lodge Resignation and Taylor Appointment. Top Secret; No Distribution. [1 line of text not declassified] Received at 11:39 p.m., June 17.

2 In message [document number not declassified], June 18, Rusk expressed his regret at Lodge’s decision to leave, but stated that he understood the “personal considerations and decisions involved.” Rusk thought that the President would try to meet Lodge’s wishes as quickly as possible and asked for a letter of resignation to the President suitable for publication. (Ibid.)

Lodge sent his letter of resignation to the President via Rusk in [document number not declassified], June 19. (Ibid.) Lodge’s letter and the President’s letter accepting the resignation are printed in Department of State Bulletin July 13, 1964, pp. 46–47.

219. National Security Action Memorandum No. 308 219. National Security Action Memorandum No. 3081

Washington, June 22, 1964.

MEMORANDUM TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Director of Central Intelligence

The Director, U.S. Information Agency

The Administrator, Agency for International Development

Domestic understanding and support are essential to the success of United States operations in Southeast Asia. The national interest requires full understanding of our policy and purpose in this area. I am not satisfied with the performance of the several departments in this area; we require stronger arrangements.

I have therefore designated Mr. Robert J. Manning, Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs, to generate and to coordinate a broad program to bring to the American people a complete and accurate picture of the United States involvement in Southeast Asia, and to show why this involvement is essential.

Mr. Manning is instructed to draw as necessary upon the resources of all government agencies in obtaining and disseminating the facts needed by the American people. He will call as necessary upon the senior policy and information officers of your agency. I request that you take the steps necessary to ensure that he receives their unstinting cooperation on a priority basis. I have instructed Mr. Manning to inform me if he encounters any delays or obstructions.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Department of State, S/S-NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 308. Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1984, 001493.

220. Editorial Note 220. Editorial Note

At a press conference on June 23, 1964, President Johnson released a statement explaining the resignation of Ambassador Lodge and announcing the appointment of General Maxwell D. Taylor as the new Ambassador to the Republic of Vietnam. In addition, the President announced that U. Alexis Johnson would hold the new position of Deputy Ambassador to Vietnam. The President’s statement is printed as part of his press conference of June 23 in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson; 1963–64, Book I, pages 802–808.

Taylor, in Swords and Plowshares, pages 313–314, recounts how, why, and on what conditions he accepted the appointment. U. Alexis Johnson, in The Right Hand of Power, pages 402–403, provides similar information on his appointment.

221. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant (Cater) to the President 221. Memorandum From the President’s Assistant (Cater) to the President1

Washington, June 23, 1964.

Pursuant to your urging this morning that we consider all the things we need to be doing in Viet Nam and Laos,2 I would like to raise the following questions which need to be asked of the appropriate experts. Some have been raised in the past but laid aside because conditions were not so urgent. Certainly, they deserve to be examined before General Taylor and Alexis Johnson depart for Saigon.

1. What new projects of real or symbolic value can we sponsor to affirm (a) our determination not to retreat from this area, (b) our overriding interest in building peace rather than waging war?

The Mekong River Development Plan certainly falls into this category. We have already contributed financially to five tributary dams under construction there. It might be highly appropriate to select an additional project, either in Laos or South Viet Nam and publicly call on the Soviets to join us in building it.

AID might be called on to provide a list of the economic and social projects that have been put on the shelf which would constitute an impact program for the area.

2. What reform measures—land, tax, credit system, etc.—could we persuade General Khanh to pursue vigorously as signal of a new deal in Viet Nam? An indication of Presidential interest might give the necessary push to reforms which have been long postponed.

3. What is the current status of the Pentagon’s effort to apply all the skill of modern weaponry to the problem of waging guerrilla warfare? Have we utilized every conceivable device for detection of Viet Cong fighters?

4. Senator Humphrey has sent you a report3 which contained a number of action proposals by Major General Edward Lansdale. My understanding is that he was extremely effective in waging anti-guerrilla warfare in the Philippines. The question arises whether he and his team might accompany General Taylor to Viet Nam.

I suggest the above questions as ones you may wish to put at the next meeting of your Secretaries. Alternatively, I would be happy to forward them to the appropriate working groups, including the Sullivan Committee and John McNaughton in the Pentagon.

Hold for your own use?

Forward to appropriate officials?4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Southeast Asia, Vol. 111, Memos (A). No classification marking.

2 Apparent reference to the statement on Vietnam at the President’s press conference at 11:04 a.m.; see Document 220.

3 Document 208.

4 President Johnson checked this option and wrote the following note: “Doug, This good—carefully comb Humphrey for all ideas and then forward to appr. officials. L”.

222. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 222. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, June 24, 1964—3 p.m.

2567. Herewith my comment on Seaborn’s first report.2

1. It seems to me that it is very mildly encouraging. Pham Van Dong’s non-polemic tone, the way in which he read Pearson’s letter and welcomed the opening up of the Channel, and the tone of obvious concern are in contrast with the kind of rough stuff of which Communists are capable.

2. Seaborn’s report did not mention the fact that Pham Van Dong brought up the matter of a commando raid over the frontier from Laos. Dong made it clear that it not like this at all.

3. I would like to see Seaborn go back before the middle of August.

4. If we can give them a very neat bloody nose by knocking out a machine tool factory or a bridge or something of the kind without killing non-combatants, it might be worth doing. If so, it should be keyed to some Viet Cong outrage here.

Lodge

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis.

2 The report [8 pages of source text] was not declassified. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File)

223. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 223. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Sullivan) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, June 24, 1964.

SUBJECT

Third Country Assistance in South Viet Nam

You asked me yesterday what action the White House could take to assist in obtaining concrete offers of support from third countries for the effort in South Viet Nam. There are three specific categories of action which I would propose: 1. The President should make absolutely clear to General Taylor, and through General Taylor to the U.S. Mission in Saigon, the political requirement for this third country assistance. There is ample indication that our own mission, specifically the military element, looks upon third country assistance with very little zeal. This is partly because of their experience in allied commands, such as Korea, in which the care and feeding of these third country elements has always proved far more trouble than it is worth. It is also been reflected in the fact that such an organization as the British Advisory Mission, which is composed of skilled counterinsurgency and police officers, has sat for nearly three years in Viet Nam with only limited relationships with the United States command. It may therefore be necessary for the President to put in writing an indication of the importance which he attaches to these third country contributions and the necessity that the U.S. Mission bend over backwards to accommodate them.

2. I will draft today a circular telegram to various ambassadors in posts which have lagged in the production of voluntary contributions. This telegram will be as from the President and will pin upon the ambassadors personally the responsibility for obtaining these contributions. I will send it over to you for your clearances during the course of the day.2

3. As a last resort, we may require that the President actually address appeals to foreign chiefs of state or chiefs of government. For example, in Canada our representations have lain on the Minister of External Affairs’ desk for over a month. It may require a letter or a telephone call to the Prime Minister if our ambassador is unable to deliver.

William H. Sullivan3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File. Vietnam Country File. Vol. XII, Memos. Confidential.

2 The telegram was not sent for reasons explained in a memorandum from Forrestal to McGeorge Bundy, June 26:

“Bill Sullivan and I have agreed to hold up getting the President to sign off on a tough cable to some of our embassies abroad until we have received an answer to our request to Saigon for a list of the categories of people and units which would be useful to the war effort.”

“This list was expected today, but has not yet come in, and we have queried the field again. We felt that it would not be satisfactory to have the President write a general message to the ambassadors without having a concrete idea of what it was he was asking them to do.” (Ibid.)

A draft of the circular telegram, June 25, with extensive revisions by McGeorge Bundy and a marginal note that it was “not used” is ibid., Vol. XIII.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

224. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President 224. Memorandum From the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) to the President1

Washington, June 25, 1964.

SUBJECT

Authorization of Combined US/GVN Planning and Training for Cross-border Operations from South Vietnam into Laos

NSAM 288 of 17 March 19642 authorized, among other things, South Vietnamese ground operations into Laos for border control purposes (Recommendation 11) and also directed preparation of a full range of Laotian border control actions (Recommendation 12).

Unilateral U.S. planning has been completed for both covert and overt cross-border operations into Laos and for a full range of Laotian border control actions. The essential US/GVN negotiations, planning and training to attain the desired state of readiness for these operations have not been initiated, except for limited covert intelligence collection patrols authorized into Laos.

In view of the present situation in Laos and South Vietnam, it is recommended that you now authorize such negotiations with the GVN and such combined US/GVN planning and training as is necessary to achieve a state of readiness to conduct cross-border operations from South Vietnam into Laos in the event a decision is made to initiate such actions. This would not involve any commitment to carry out such operations.

Enclosure

Washington, June 24, 1964.

Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)3

JCSM–541–64

SUBJECT

US/GVN Combined Planning (U)

1. Reference is made to NSAM 288, dated 17 March 1964, in which the President directed the following actions: a. Recommendation 11. To authorize continued high-level US overflights of South Vietnam’s borders and to authorize “hot pursuit” and South Vietnamese ground operations over the Laotian line for the purpose of border control. More ambitious operations into Laos involving units beyond battalion size should be authorized only with the approval of Souvanna Phouma. Operations across the Cambodian border should depend on the state of relations with Cambodia.

b. Recommendation 12. To prepare immediately to be in a position on 72 hours’ notice to initiate the full range of Laotian and Cambodian “Border Control” actions (beyond those authorized in Recommendation 11, above) and the “Retaliatory Actions” against North Vietnam and to be in a position on 30 days’ notice to initiate the program of “Graduated Overt Military Pressure” against North Vietnam.

2. In order to comply with the NSAM the following US military operations plans have been prepared:4 a. COMUSMACV OPLAN 98–64, Covert Cross-Border Operations into Laos. (To implement Recommendation 11)

b. COMUSMACV OPLAN 98A–64, Overt Cross-Border Operations into Laos. (To implement Recommendation 11)

c. CINCPAC OPLAN 37–64, Military Actions to Stabilize the Situation in RVN. (To implement Recommendation 12, but includes also the operations visualized in Recommendation 11)

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff are concerned over the general lack of progress in implementing these recommendations. Their status is as follows: a. Recommendation 11. Although this recommendation authorizes “hot pursuit” and ground operations into Laos under varying circumstances, agreement has been reached with the Department of State only for limited covert intelligence collection patrols. The full range of operations authorized has not been discussed with the GVN, nor has combined planning and training for these operations been initiated. The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on this matter are contained in CM–1332–64, dated 23 April 1964.

b. Recommendation 12. Unilateral US planning has been completed; however, the essential US/GVN negotiations, planning, and training necessary to attain the desired state of readiness for US/GVN operations have not been initiated.

4. In view of the present situation in Laos and South Vietnam, it would appear prudent that we reduce the lead time required for the military operations envisaged in these operations plans by obtaining authorization for noncommitting negotiations with the GVN to the extent necessary to permit the combined US/GVN planning and training which is required to attain a state of readiness for US/GVN operations. Such authority need not include authority to launch operations at this time. As a collateral benefit, it should be noted that such negotiations, planning, and training could be used to convince Hanoi further of US resolve to take such action as necessary to defend the US position in Southeast Asia.

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that you sign the attached draft memorandum to the Secretary of State5 which recommends that authority be granted for such preliminary negotiations and combined US/GVN planning and training as is required to attain the proper degree of readiness to conduct operations in the event a decision is made to initiate US/GVN military operations.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Maxwell D. Taylor
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIII. Top Secret. A note on the source text indicates that the original memorandum went to Forrestal.

2 Document 87.

3 Top Secret.

4 A second enclosure, a memorandum from the Deputy Director of the Joint Staff to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs, June 25, DJSM–1069–64, contained brief summaries of the three operations plans. It is not printed.

5 Not printed; the draft memorandum basically reiterated the arguments presented above.

225. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 225. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, June 25, 1964.

SUBJECT

Your 6 PM Meeting with Taylor, Johnson et al2

The main purpose of this meeting is to meet with Alexis Johnson before he leaves. His plane goes from Andrews at 10:30 AM tomorrow. The subjects are three: (1) Ambassador Taylor’s basic directive; (2) Staff; (3) Your reassertion of basic policy.

(1) Ambassador Taylor’s basic directive.

Attached at Tab A is a letter3 which is worth reading aloud before you sign it. What it does is to give Max full control over everything in South Vietnam. This is something the military never let the Ambassador have before, and now that we have a man whom the military cannot refuse, it is time to establish the principle. This letter represents Taylor’s own desire and has been checked with State but not with McNamara.

(2) Staff.

Taylor and Johnson have been working on this very hard in the last 24 hours and can give their own report. The two key questions are: head man for AID and a new DCM.

(3) Basic policy.

If I understand your feelings correctly, the following is a possible outline of what you might want to say.

1. You want the strongest possible U.S. effort to move ahead within South Vietnam. Large-scale moves “to the North” are not the present answer, though we will be ready to consider new decisions at any time, as we did in the case of reconnaissance over Laos.

2. We all know that two things are needed: (a) an effective government in South Vietnam;

(b) an absolutely first-rate team.

We are now getting an absolutely first-rate U.S. team, for the first time since the situation became acute.

The first task of this U.S. team is to strengthen the effectiveness of Khanh and his colleagues, at every level, and by every means.

3. We have had plenty of plans and proposals; what we now need is execution. (This is what Taylor and Johnson want to hear.)

4. But there is still need for all the good ideas we can get. We count on initiative at every level. We shall send out our ideas for comment, and we shall expect energetic demands for support from the field. (This is what they are less eager about but need to hear from you. Today is not the day for a catalogue of new proposals.)

5. You particularly want the new team to get life and energy into Vietnamese efforts to bring other flags in. And the U.S. team too must show imagination and hospitality in making such allies feel welcome and useful. (Max Taylor is bearish on this and needs a spur.)

6. You also particularly want to carry out an information and propaganda effort twice as big as what Eisenhower has asked for

7. But an ounce of real progress is worth a pint of propaganda and a peck of threats.

8. Washington will back you up.

9. The spirit of Taylor and Johnson, who said “Yes” at once. will be the spirit of the whole U. S. effort.

McG.B.4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy, Vol. 5. Secret.

2 This off-the-record meeting took place at the White House from 6:20 to 6:50 p.m. on June 25, with the following in attendance: the President, McNamara, Taylor, U. Alexis Johnson, Bell, William Bundy, Forrestal, Rowan, McGeorge Bundy, McCone, and Sullivan. (Ibid., President’s Daily Diary)

3 For the letter as sent, see Document 228.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

VII. Taylor’s First Month as Ambassador; the Increase in U.S. Advisory Forces in Vietnam, June 25–July 31VII. Taylor’s First Month as Ambassador; the Increase in U.S. Advisory Forces in Vietnam, June 25–July 31

226. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President

Washington, June 29, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Leonard C. Meeker and Carl F. Salans of L, cleared by Norb Schlie of the Department of Justice and by William Bundy. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 002145.

227. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State

Washington, July 1, 1964, 7:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Imhof and approved by Rusk. Copies were sent to William and McGeorge Bundy.

228. Letter From the President to the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor)

Washington, July 2, 1964.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–161–69. Confidential. Taylor was appointed Ambassador to Vietnam on July 1, arrived in Saigon on July 7, and presented his credentials on July 14. The White House copy of this letter is published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 219C.

229. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 8, 1964–7 p.m.

Source: Department of State. Central Files. POL 1 US–VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 8, 1964—9:09 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Mendenhall, cleared by William Bundy, and initialed and approved by Ball. Repeated to Ottawa.

231. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President

Washington, July 11, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, CO 312 Viet Nam. No classification marking.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 14, 1964—midnight.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis.

233. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 15, 1964—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to JCS and CINCPAC. McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this cable to the President on July 16, under cover of a memorandum that reads as follows: “This is a cable which I think Bob McNamara mentioned to you yesterday. The critical paragraph is the last one. I see some advantage in a careful build-up, carefully explained from every point of view, but we obviously cannot make decisions until we get more detailed accounts. Bob and I would expect this matter to be ready for discussion and decision sometime next week, but not before.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIV, Memos)

234. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 15, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC, the Department of Defense, and CIA.

235. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, July 15, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIII, Memos. No classification marking.

236. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 17, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–VIET S. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC, the White House, Department of Defense, and JCS.

237. Memorandum of a Conversation, Secretary of State Rusk’s Office, Department of State

Washington, July 20, 1964, 12:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Imhof and approved by Rusk on August 10. Copies were sent to FE, EUR, WE, the White House, and the Embassy in Paris.

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 20, 1964—9:33 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared by William Bundy, and initialed and approved by Rusk. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 91A.

239. Memorandum From the Secretary of State 1s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Forrestal) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, July 22, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIV, Memos. Secret

240. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 22, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw the memorandum. Copies were also sent to Harriman, William Bundy, Hughes, and Llewellyn Thompson.

241. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 24, 1964—7:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 VIET N–VIET S. Secret; Flash; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 91B.

242. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 25, 1964—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 9–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared with William Bundy and McNaughton. Published in part in Declassified Documents, 1979, 91D.

243. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 25, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 VIET N–VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 8:10 a.m. and passed to the White House. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 512–513.

244. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 25, 1964—4:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority, Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared by Forrestal and Harriman.

245. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 25, 1964—4:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared by Forrestal, Manning, McGeorge Bundy, and Ball. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 91C.

246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, July 25, 1964—5:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Drafted by Forrestal, Poats, and Montgomery and cleared by William Bundy. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 297A.

247. Research Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 25, 1964.

Source: Department of State, INR Files: Lot 81 D 343, Vietnam, INR Studies, 1964–1965. Secret.

248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos

Washington, July 26, 1964—6:21 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by McNaughton, cleared in draft with Wheeler and William Bundy, and initialed and approved by Forrestal. Repeated to Saigon. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, p. 514.

249. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 27, 1964—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash. Repeated to CINCPAC, the White House, and McNamara. McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this cable to the President under cover of a memorandum, July 27, which reads as follows: “We have just received this report of Max Taylor’s interview today with Khanh. Underneath is the outgoing which went to him after our Saturday meeting. The tickers are beginning to carry Khanh’s announcement of U.S. reinforcement, and for the moment Khanh’s positron seems somewhat strengthened. Nevertheless, the first paragraph of Taylor’s message shows that the underlying problem of Khanh’s mood persists.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File. Vol. XIV; regarding the Saturday meeting, see Document 246)

250. Telegram From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State

Vientiane, July 27, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon. Passed to the White House, Department of Defense, and CIA on receipt in the Department of State. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 515–517.

251. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, July 27, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Vientiane.

252. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense

Washington, July 27, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret. Notes on the source text indicate that Vance and McNamara saw this memorandum. A copy in the Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 11, Tab 9, indicates that McGeorge Bundy saw it.

253. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) to the President

Washington, July 28, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIV, CIA. Top Secret; Sensitive.

254. Memorandum From the Secretary of State 1s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State

Washington, July 31, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. The source text bears Rusk’s initials. A copy was sent to William Bundy.

226. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President 226. Memorandum From the Secretary of State to the President1

Washington, June 29, 1964.

SUBJECT

Legal Basis for Sending American Forces to Viet-Nam

The enclosed memorandum2 is submitted in response to your request of June 22 for a consideration of the legal basis for sending American forces to Viet-Nam.3 The conclusions of the memorandum may be summarized as follows: 1. The sending of American military personnel to serve in an advisory, non-combatant role rests on specific authority contained in the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and on a Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement with Viet-Nam.

2. The assignment of United States military personnel to duty in Viet-Nam involving participation in combat rests on the constitutional powers of the President as Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces, as Chief Executive, and in precedents in history for the use of these powers to send American forces abroad, including various situations involving their participation in hostilities. In the case of Viet-Nam, the President’s action is additionally supported by the fact that South Viet-Nam has been designated to receive protection under Article IV of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty; both the Treaty and the Protocol covering Viet-Nam received the advice and consent of the Senate.

Dean Rusk4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Leonard C. Meeker and Carl F. Salans of L, cleared by Norb Schlie of the Department of Justice and by William Bundy. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 002145.

2 Not printed here; published ibid.

3 Apparently the request was oral. (Memorandum from Meeker to Rusk, June 26; Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–VIET S)

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

227. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State 227. Memorandum of a Conversation, Department of State1

Washington, July 1, 1964, 7:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia: The Polish Proposals; Discussion of the French Position; Cambodia

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. Johannes V. Imhof, French Desk, WE

Ambassador Alphand, French Embassy

M. Roger Duzer, Counselor, French Embassy

Ambassador Alphand, at his request, called on the Secretary at 7:15 p.m. on July 1. One of the subjects discussed was Southeast Asia.

[Here follows discussion of Laos.]

Discussion of the French Position

The Secretary said he wished to discuss frankly the French position on Southeast Asia and the points which troubled us. As we saw it, the French position was based on the following points: 1) there should be no Communist takeover in Southeast Asia; 2) the problem cannot be resolved by military means; 3) there was no solid political structure in South Vietnam and it was unlikely that it would be possible to create such a solid structure; 4) there should be a political solution and France should reserve herself for an initiative in this direction; 5) a political solution required strong U.S. military presence in the area. Ambassador Alphand did not dispute any of these points.

The Secretary continued that we had three problems with regard to this position. One was fundamental, the two others were of a psychological nature. The fundamental problem was that we did not understand what was meant by a “political solution.” We realized, of course, that the war could not be won by military means alone, but, in our opinion, a political solution for the area had been reached through the 1954 and 1962 accords. We could not see any new solution which would not be much worse for the interests of the West.

Ambassador Alphand agreed that the 1962 agreement on Laos was an acceptable political solution. All that was required were the reconstitution of the three political tendencies and perhaps stronger controls. As to Vietnam, the only new element to be added to the 1954 accords was the concept of neutrality. The Secretary asked whether neutrality would apply to both North and South Vietnam. Ambassador Alphand said that it should, but suggested that it should be applied to South Vietnam first and that it should be gradually extended to the North.

The Secretary said that if the other side would leave South Vietnam alone, U.S. forces would be withdrawn. The only reason for U.S. military presence was the continued interference by Hanoi in South Vietnam. Ambassador Alphand agreed that U.S. military presence in South Vietnam was a result of the military activities of the other side. On the other hand, the U.S. had exerted a dominant political influence in South Vietnam immediately after the French withdrawal in 1954. The French had warned against this because they had been concerned about the reactions of the other side. The Secretary repeated that we had no desire to control South Vietnam and that our presence there would end as soon as the other side stopped its interference.

Ambassador Alphand said that the U.S. and France had a different evaluation of the situation in Communist China. The French felt that the Chinese were beset by their domestic problems. The Chinese were also in difficulties with the Soviets. The only sure way to solve the problem in Southeast Asia was a settlement guaranteed by the United States and China. The Secretary said that we had such an agreement with regard to Laos; it had not worked. Ambassador Alphand said that Laos had only been a partial settlement which had not worked because of the continued war in Vietnam.

The Secretary said he wanted to mention the two other points in the French position which gave us difficulties. He noted French skepticism about the possibility of creating a viable political structure in South Vietnam. Yet, the French could be of great help in creating such a viable structure by using their influence. Ambassador Alphand asked what France could do. Should it give advice to the Vietnamese politicians? The Secretary said that France should state openly that it is opposed to a Communist takeover of the area and that it was prepared to cooperate with South Vietnam to this end. Ambassador Alphand felt that France had already made it clear that she was opposed to a Communist takeover.

The Secretary said that the other point concerned U.S. military presence in the area, the need for which France appeared to recognize. On this, we could use some moral support. Standing aside and equating U.S. with Communist presence was definitely not helpful. Ambassador Alphand said that he recognized the difficulties. He alluded to France’s own experience in Indochina until 1954. He recognized that France had received material support from the United States. Nevertheless, the war had cost France $8.5 billion and she had to fight the war alone. The Secretary said that it had always been his view that the West had made mistakes with regard to Indochina in the 1953–54 period.

Ambassador Alphand said that it was his personal opinion that a choice would have to be made sooner or later with. regard to the Vietnamese problem. The Secretary reiterated that if Peking and Hanoi would leave Southeast Asia alone, there would be no need for U.S. presence in the area. As long as this was not the case, the U.S. would remain. He said that if the French were to tell this to the Chinese, this would be an accurate statement of U.S. policy. Ambassador Alphand said that it was necessary to talk to the Chinese. The Secretary said that we have indeed talked to the Chinese. Perhaps we have talked more seriously with the Chinese than any other Western nation that has diplomatic relations with Communist China. The absence of such relations between the U.S. and China was no obstacle to serious talks. We have not ignored China but we haven’t liked what we have heard in these talks. We want a decision from the Chinese that they, as well as North Vietnam, will cease their interference in South Vietnam and Laos.

The Secretary said that there were indications that an important meeting is currently going on in Hanoi. He could also tell Ambassador Alphand in confidence that we had closely watched the situation on the southern border of China and that there had been no Chinese troop movements to the South. Ambassador Alphand suggested that perhaps a political solution with regard to Laos was in the offing. The Secretary said that we wanted to return to the 1962 accords.

The Secretary said that he wanted to be brutally frank. It appeared to him that there were people in Paris—he did not know who they were—who seemed to interpret U.S. actions on the world scene as an attempt to replace and to diminish French influence. Nothing could be further from the truth. Ambassador Alphand interjected that he could assure the Secretary that neither he, nor Couve, nor, he thought, General De Gaulle held this view. The Secretary said that, on the contrary, we would be delighted to see an extension of French influence in Southeast Asia, in Africa and in other parts of the world. There have been reports that the French wish to extend their influence in the Congo. Nothing would please us more. Ambassador Alphand said that since the last war the U.S., as the dominant power, had been thrust into a position where it had to exert its influence. He said this had been a good thing and had helped to ensure peace. On the other hand, it had led to a deep involvement of the United States in certain areas, such as Southeast Asia. He referred to our initial support of Diem and alluded to CIA activities in Vietnam.

The Secretary said that seen from Europe, Southeast Asia seemed very far away. We, on the other hand, were an Atlantic as well as a Pacific power and the security of Asia was as important to us as the security of Europe. To us, the defense of South Vietnam has the same significance as the defense of Berlin. Ambassador Alphand disputed this. He felt the situations were not comparable. The stakes in Europe were enormous. The loss of Berlin would shake the foundations of Western security. On the other hand, if we were to lose South Vietnam we would not be losing much.

The Secretary said that if we were to pull out of South Vietnam our guarantees with regard to Berlin would lose their credibility. It was all part of the same struggle, to prevent an extension of Communist influence. Ambassador Alphand said that an agreement on Vietnam with guarantees would not have the effect of lessening Western confidence in U.S. guarantees. The Secretary pointed out that we already have such an agreement on South Vietnam. Ambassador Alphand said that we had not signed the agreement. The Secretary said that we had nevertheless accepted it.

The Secretary said that the reason why we have allies is that we believe in the right of nations to independence. We have 42 allies. Nevertheless, we are not troubled by the concept of non-alignment and neutralism as long as it is genuine.

Ambassador Alphand wondered what could be done in practical terms. He said that with regard to Southeast Asia, we appear to have a difference of opinion and we were going along different paths. The Secretary asked precisely what was the difference of opinion. Ambassador Alphand said France believed there should be a negotiated agreement. The Secretary said that we already have the 1954 and 1962 agreements. Ambassador Alphand suggested that perhaps all that was needed was the 1954 agreement with new guarantees and new controls. The Secretary asked why France did not say so publicly and offer her cooperation to South Vietnam. He said that Saigon did not know what France meant by a “political solution”. Did it mean the inclusion of the Vietcong in the government? Ambassador Alphand admitted that he did not know. He reviewed General De Gaulle’s approach to the Algerian problem: De Gaulle had a policy—a negotiated settlement. The details, the means to get there, varied depending on day-to-day developments.

The Secretary said that it was distressing that France used the term “neutralization” without giving it any concrete contents. Used in this manner, the concept becomes negative and creates the impression that France does not really care about the security of the area. The terms “neutralization” and “political solution” without concrete contents are merely words, not a policy. Ambassador Alphand felt that these words nevertheless expressed a policy, a direction. He felt that a choice would have to be made, and although he did not wish to exaggerate the importance of the coming elections, he felt that the choice would be reached more easily once the elections are over. The Secretary assured Ambassador Alphand that the elections played no role in this. The President had made this quite clear. He had heard the President say “I don’t have to be re-elected President, but I have to be President while I am President”. Moreover, no U.S. President, before or after the elections, would pull out of Southeast Asia as long as the other side interferes. On the other hand, we would pull out tomorrow if the other side would leave Southeast Asia alone. The Secretary said that his brief trip to Vietnam had convinced him that the country, if it were left in peace, would not only be viable but could be an example to this entire part of the world, thanks to a large extent to what the French had done there in the past. Ambassador Alphand agreed. He observed that the French, while in the area, had always found it necessary to have an agreement with the Chinese.

The Secretary said the question was how to get Chinese assent to a solution. He said Soviet assent in Europe had been accomplished through our defensive arrangements. Only when the Soviets became convinced that they would face a major risk in stirring up trouble in Europe did they assent to actual conditions. Obviously, this lesson must be applied in Asia with regard to the Chinese. Ambassador Alphand agreed that Moscow had come to know the risks involved. He was not sure that this applied to China. He did not think the Chinese realized that local actions in Southeast Asia—infiltrations in South Vietnam and Laos—could eventually create the risk of a destruction of China. The Secretary said that the French should make the Chinese aware of the risks. Ambassador Alphand said he thought that this had already been done; on the other hand, the U.S. had not as yet made a statement to this effect.

The Secretary said that the appearance of a division of the West with regard to Southeast Asia had a definite bearing on the problem and made a solution more difficult. He said the French should tell the North Vietnamese that they must leave South Vietnam alone and that France will oppose them if they continued their interference. Ambassador Alphand asked precisely what the Secretary would wish the French to convey to the Chinese. The Secretary said France should tell the Chinese (1) that if the Chinese and North Vietnamese leave Southeast Asia alone, France will use its influence to see to it that these countries will not present any threat to China; and (2) that if the Chinese do not leave Southeast Asia alone, France will oppose them. The Secretary asked Ambassador Alphand to put these two points to the French Foreign Minister. He said that it seemed to him that a genuinely non-aligned Southeast Asia was also in the interest of France. A non-aligned Southeast Asia would in all likelihood turn toward Paris.

[Here follows discussion of Cambodia.]

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Imhof and approved by Rusk. Copies were sent to William and McGeorge Bundy.

228. Letter From the President to the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor) 228. Letter From the President to the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor)1

Washington, July 2, 1964.

Dear Ambassador Taylor: As you take charge of the American effort in South Vietnam, I want you to have this formal expression not only of my confidence, but of my desire that you have and exercise full responsibility for the effort of the United States Government in South Vietnam. In general terms this authority is parallel to that set forth in President Kennedy’s letter of May 29,1961 to all American Ambassadors; specifically, I wish it clearly understood that this overall responsibility includes the whole military effort in South Vietnam and authorizes the degree of command and control that you consider appropriate.

I recognize that in the conduct of the day-to-day business of the Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, you will wish to work out arrangements which do not burden you or impede the exercise of your overall direction.

At your convenience, I should be glad to know of the arrangements which you propose for meeting the terms of this instruction, so that appropriate supporting action can be taken in the Defense Department and elsewhere as necessary.

This letter rescinds all conflicting instructions to U.S. officers in Vietnam.

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–161–69. Confidential. Taylor was appointed Ambassador to Vietnam on July 1, arrived in Saigon on July 7, and presented his credentials on July 14. The White House copy of this letter is published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 219C.

229. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 229. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 8, 1964–7 p.m.

56. CINCPAC for POLAD. I called on General Khanh this morning and we had cordial one hour conversation. He expressed satisfaction with new American personnel, saying that Vietnamese morale rose on news of appointments and VC morale fell. Said this might explain recent wave of VC attacks. I replied that President was prepared to commit all resources needed to assure Vietnamese independence. President wished to make clear that Viet-Nam was number one problem and would enjoy top priority.

Returning to recent VC attacks, Khanh said VC seems to attack sporadically and it was important for us not to be shaken by spectacular VC successes over a short span of time. He noted that French had lost only 13,000 men at Dien Bien Phu and had force of 400,000 left. But French morale had been shattered by this one blow and war was lost. Said we must avoid reactions like this.

Khanh said he could promise me “the frank cooperation of a soldier”. He would be seeking man-to-man advice. If he could not meet some request of ours, he would tell us frankly why he could not do so. I thanked him for this and said I would deal with him in same way. Khanh said he was not a political expert but that he believed that one military principle that really applies to politics is flexibility. He would be flexible and would reconsider any decision if this seemed warranted by new facts, by our desires or by evolving situation.

I then made point that I believed one of our principal common problems was meshing of our efforts. We had to make certain that the efforts of the two national teams, the Vietnamese and the American, geared. I told him of my decision of yesterday to set up a Mission Council with myself as chairman and drew parallel of council concept to functioning of NSC. Identified members of Mission Council and how it was intended that they would operate. I noted in passing my overall responsibility for American military activities, citing this as evidence of attainment of complete unity of effort on the U.S. side. I offered to show him at our next meeting how Mission Council and its several committees would work. We could then study possibilities of a closer working relation between counterparts. Khanh asked for an organization chart so he could set up an analogous council.

Khanh recalled that as he had told Ambassador Johnson, when he commanded I Corps, he believed that Americans should not be merely advisors but should actually participate in making and implementing of plans. We should do this in Saigon as well, between GVN ministries and offices and their American counterparts. Zorthian was already working this way with Information Minister Thai, and results were already impressive. He added that if this cooperation were to be too open or too generally known, “it would be criticized by people too willing to criticize”. I acknowledged this danger and observed that in some areas we would need closer and more frequent contact than in others; in some cases we night need even daily contact.

I agreed to supply him our organization chart, for whatever applicability it might have, and asked how often he thought we should meet. He suggested once every other week at least at outset. I suggested we set a definite regular day towards which we could plan. We agreed that our first meeting should take place on Friday, July 17.2 He prefers meeting at Joint General Staff building as more discreet and efficient.

Khanh then invited me to join him for part of his trip to Danang area July 11 and 12 for two days of Vietnamese Air Force Day celebrations. I will try to spend at least one day with him in the field over the weekend. I told him that I would like to accompany him from time to time on his field trips. Khanh remarked Minh was making field trips now, and I expressed pleasure at learning this. Khanh said he was glad too and that Minh’s trips were definitely useful. Neither of us discussed Minh’s situation any further.

I recalled that last time we spoke (mid-May) religious problem was acute, and remarked that it seemed perhaps less acute now. He agreed that religious situation had improved but said it was still delicate. I asked him which side was the aggressor. Without hesitating he replied the Catholics, and remarked that they were better organized than the Buddhists. I asked what was issue-were they seeking to recover privileges they thought they had lost. He said yes, that in past they had had such special privileges as wood cutting rights, direct delivery of relief goods, etc. This was illegal, and when normal and legal processes were restored Catholics alleged discrimination. I observed that it appeared no religious oppression as such had taken place. He agreed. I asked if the incidents between Buddhists and Catholics might be described as local and vary from place to place. He replied yes, commenting that if two citizens get in a fight and one is Catholic and one Buddhist, it is regarded as a religious incident.

I asked if the top leaders of the religious communities had become more reasonable. When he said yes, I asked about Thich Tri Quang. He replied that Thich Tri Quang reasonable when he was in Saigon but less so when in Hue. He noted there was also the matter of differences in temperament of people and regional differences. Whereas Saigon tended to be calm and non-vindictive, in Hue every problem seemed to take more extreme form.

Next I asked how recruiting was going. He said better but not as well as he would like. I told him General Westmoreland had described to me the new plan to work out from Saigon in force. I thought the plan looked reasonable but remarked that we must anticipate need for greater forces to hold “cleared” area as we advanced. This was particularly true in this area because paramilitary forces existed to relieve ARVN. Further, if we brought ARVN reinforcements to this critical area, we would be stripping other areas of their defense forces. I made clear that I did not raise this point as an objective [objection] to their plan, but rather as a reminder of mounting manpower requirements.

Khanh said that when regular army units left an area, his forces would be replaced with regional forces. He noted that recent changes in pay and other matters had made service in regional forces much more attractive and therefore improved recruitment levels in regional forces. He also noted Vietnamese soldiers prefer to serve near their homes, and this factor also improved recruitment figures of regional forces, usually to detriment of regular army recruitments. He said that as an area was cleared, first the regulars and then the regional forces would withdraw, leaving local forces. He said we must include in our recruitment plans measures to reinforce local and regional forces up to the levels necessary for them to meet their new responsibilities as regulars pull out.

In general comment on all this Khanh noted that the base of the VC action is the local hard-core group, and added that only the inhabitants of the same region could cope with these local VC elements.

I asked Khanh about the desertion rate, whether the figures were correct and if there were not many AWOL being listed as deserters. He said this problem was very complex and stemmed largely from deep-seated desire of Vietnamese to stay near their birthplaces. This desire had plagued population resettlement efforts just as it now influenced desertion rate. Many desertions are for short time; over the holidays desertion rate was particularly high, but most such deserters returned to their units after holidays. The number of deserters who actually go over to the enemy with their weapons is small.

I asked Khanh for more information on his policy towards deserters, and expressed concern over fact that according to statistics we are losing in desertions as many men as we acquire in recruitments. I asked if this impression were correct. He said it was a complicated question; when one service becomes more attractive than another, men desert from latter to join former. This practice made all the more common because forces keep minimal and unsatisfactory personnel records. I remarked that General Sternberg, MACV G–1, had been studying this whole problem and hoped Khanh’s G–1 would work closely with him. He replied they already working together, and added that the problem lay inside ARVN. He said he must put some more effective officer in charge of all personnel affairs. I remarked that the more I studied the situation here, the more I was impressed by the importance of the personnel problem, in all its ramifications.

I next reminded Khanh of President Johnson’s interest in the earliest possible appointment of a more extensive Vietnamese representation abroad, and particularly of effective Ambassadors. He replied much as he had on other occasions. He said Ambassadors go out for several years, and once at their posts they cannot be changed like regimental commanders or province chiefs. There was also the problem of suitable wives. He said he could of course please President Johnson by appointing many Ambassadors tomorrow, but they would not be good appointments and it would be better to wait. Better no Ambassador than a poor one. He added that he had to tie these appointments in with his efforts to solve certain internal problems.

I acknowledged the truth of all this but said that Viet-Nam was losing much by not having enough Ambassadors to represent its interests effectively abroad. He replied that it was better to leave representation at chargé d’affaires level rather than have a bad Ambassador.

Khanh then gave example of totally unsatisfactory proposed nomination made to him by Foreign Minister Quat: Dang Van Sung, “a Dai Viet, of course”, to be Ambassador to Laos. Khanh said Sung began to publish a newspaper that attacked government. Khanh said he called him in and asked why he wrote such irresponsible nonsense, to which Sung allegedly replied “so he could sell newspapers.” Khanh observed that if such a person became Ambassador, he would be able to sell other things.

Another case was Catholic leader of Central Viet-Nam Tran Van Ly. Khanh wanted to send him to Rome as Ambassador, but said that after interviewing him he concluded Ly wanted to be Prime Minister.

On taking leave of Khanh I emphasized once more importance of unity. Khanh replied that this difficult of achievement because Vietnamese suffer from French political heritage that makes them individualistic and disunited. I reminded him of the saying about necessity to hang together or hang separately.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State. Central Files. POL 1 US–VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 A memorandum of the conversation at this meeting was transmitted as an enclosure to airgram A–48 from Saigon, July 20. (Ibid.)

230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 230. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 8, 1964—9:09 p.m.

69. Shenstone2 of Canadian Embassy Washington has given us copy July 5 cable from Seaborn3 stating it now seems likely ICC will meet in Hanoi about July 14. Seaborn will try see Ho and Giap whom he would ask for comments or reply to message conveyed to Pham Van Dong.

Seaborn asked whether any specific further points for him to convey to DRV. We told Canadian Embassy here July 8 that Sullivan4 will be in direct touch with Seaborn in Saigon and will let him know whether we have anything further to convey at this stage.

On behalf Seaborn Canadian Embassy here requested our comments on Pham Van Dong’s position re status and role of National Liberation Front. We told Canadians there is nothing new or surprising about this position as it is generally consistent with DRV public attitude on this question. We drew Canadians’ attention however to fact that speeches and resolution of Third Congress of Lao Dong Party in September 1960 placed great stress on “peaceful national reunification” as major aim of “national united front” to be set up in South Viet-Nam. Thus Pham Van Dong was substantially less than candid when he told Seaborn that “neutrality” was not necessarily first step only.

We also told Canadian DRV should be in no doubt we regard National Liberation Front as puppet and agent of Hanoi, and we hope Canadians will keep this firmly before DRV leaders.

Seaborn stated that he proposes to tell DRV leaders that appointment of Taylor-Johnson team is evidence of seriousness of US purpose but not of bellicosity. He proposes to say there is no change in basic US approach already given to Pham Van Dong. We have confirmed to Canadians that this is correct interpretation and proper line to pursue with Hanoi.

Shenstone at July 8 meeting also told us Ottawa feels on basis statement at recent National Assembly meeting in Hanoi of DRV position on South Viet-Nam struggle that DRV is putting forth maximum position. Ottawa suggested therefore it might not serve our interest to appear too eager to get DRV response to message conveyed to Pham Van Dong. While we see nothing new in DRV position, we told Shenstone we agree with Ottawa’s view about not appearing too eager. We therefore concur with Seaborn that if ICC meeting in Hanoi does not come off in July he should put off new trip to Hanoi until August. (Latest word from Seaborn is that July 16 is earliest ICC commissioners could leave for Hanoi and apparent Polish lack of enthusiasm may delay date further.) We also told Shenstone we believe that if Seaborn’s request to call on Ho and Giap on next visit to Hanoi not readily granted he should not press to see them.5

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Mendenhall, cleared by William Bundy, and initialed and approved by Ball. Repeated to Ottawa.

2 Michael Shenstone, First Secretary of the Canadian Embassy.

3 Not printed. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 VIET S)

4 William H. Sullivan went to Vietnam temporarily to assist Taylor and Johnson on the understanding he would become Ambassador to Laos in a few months. Events in Vietnam kept him there for 5 months. (William H. Sullivan, Obbligato, pp. 196–197) Forrestal replaced Sullivan as the Special Assistant for Vietnam.

5 In telegram 74 from Saigon, July 11, Taylor agreed with this line and reported that Sullivan would discuss the matter in detail with Seaborn in Saigon after July 13. Taylor reported that Sullivan would offer Seaborn the following advice:

“Unless ICC fixes date for early meeting Hanoi, Sullivan will counsel against appearing too eager and will advise August trip rather than July. Will also advise against Seaborn ‘asking’ for comments or reply to message conveyed Pham Van Dong. In our view, ball now in Hanoi’s court and their views should be volunteered rather than solicited. Finally, we will reiterate views re puppet nature Liberation Front.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 VIET S)

In telegram 81 from Saigon, July 13, Taylor reported that Seaborn told Sullivan that the trip to Hanoi was postponed until August. (Ibid.)

231. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President 231. Memorandum From the Director of the United States Information Agency (Rowan) to the President1

Washington, July 11, 1964.

SUBJECT

Rural Opinion in Viet-Nam

USIS conducted a study in April and May, 1964, to determine psychological attitudes in the rural Vietnamese province of Binh Hoa. Despite the fact that Binh Hoa is not typical of all rural Vietnamese provinces, findings proved surprisingly consistent with less detailed but significant data taken previously from other areas, and are probably indicative of rural thinking throughout much of the country.

The following summary of findings from the study may interest you.

1. Villagers prefer the central government over the Viet Cong. Viet Cong influence was significant in only two of the fifteen villages surveyed. Only in the face of threats did villagers tend to support the VC. Left alone, they looked to the central government for any real help.

2. There is confidence in the Khanh government, but it can only be maintained by fulfilling villagers’ desires. Khanh has achieved a considerable measure of respect by meeting certain village demands such as relaxation of taxes and elimination of forced indoctrination sessions. Even among Catholics who felt that Diem gave them preferential treatment, the old regime is no longer mourned.

3. The most common aspiration is for government credit and material aid. Financial and technical help is everywhere sought and needed for construction of public works such as hospitals, schools, and irrigation projects and for private assistance in agricultural developments.

4. Success of the strategic hamlet program is dependent upon several factors. a. Adequate and well-behaved security forces.

b. Prompt payment of resettlement costs.

c. Free elections.

d. Honest, energetic, and socially-responsible government officials and district chiefs.

5. The presence of U.S. advisors is not resented. Generally, people “do not care whether U.S. officers act as advisors or commanders as long as they help in winning the war.” Despite some unfavorable comparisons with the French who “got closer to the people,” U.S. advisors are judged as “better disciplined.”

6. Villagers’ uncertainties about their prospects can be reduced by still further improvement of the Vietnamese Information Service. Common complaints were that publications do not reach the people, movie showings are too infrequent, and Vietnamese information officers do not exert themselves enough. Thus, uncertainties about the government can result from lack of information about so uncomplicated a subject as “People wonder what happened to the savings they have poured into the Agricultural Credit Service fund for the last years.”

The overwhelming need is for reassurances of physical security.

For your more detailed information, a fuller report is attached.2

Carl

1 Source: Johnson Library, White House Central Files, Confidential File, CO 312 Viet Nam. No classification marking.

2 Not printed.

232. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 232. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 14, 1964—midnight.

98. Re Embtel 81.2 Sullivan met July 13 with Seaborn to discuss Seaborn’s views re next encounter with North Vietnamese. According currently anticipated schedule, Seaborn does not expect visit Hanoi until first part of August. At that time, on basis previous conversation with Pham Van Dong, he expects have interview with Ho Chi Minh. However, despite his suggestions to Pham Van Dong, he has very little hope of seeing General Giap.

In general, Seaborn accepts idea that ball is now in Hanoi court and he will not solicit reaction to his previous approach to Pham Van Dong. His latest cable from Ottawa, which reflects conversations in Washington, suggests that he should refer to his previous conversations only indirectly in his next visit.

As for subject matter which he will wish to initiate in his discussion in Hanoi, Seaborn wishes to obtain from us the line we would like to pursue with respect to the National Liberation Front. He wishes to have, by pouch or cable: (A) [garble—latest?] intelligence information we have developed on the Front to demonstrate its DRV control, and which we would be willing to share with him, (B) talking points which we would wish him to use with respect to the Front, and (C) any information which we would like to develop on the Front, and which might emerge from discussions on this subject in Hanoi.

In dinner conversation after private meeting, Seaborn and Sullivan were joined by Canadian Brigadier recently returned from Hanoi, who reported considerable continuing anti-air raid precautions being taken in city and camouflage work being done on POL tank farm just outside city. This info being repeated in more detail by separate messages3 in order not compromise privacy this series of cables.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27–14 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis.

2 See footnote 5. Document 230.

3 Not found.

233. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 233. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 15, 1964—4 p.m.

108. Dept pass to Director AID. For Secretary Rusk and Secretary McNamara.

I have just cleared a cable2 which should reach you shortly which raises the estimate of Viet Cong strength in South Vietnam to 23,000–34,000. This is not a sudden or dramatic increase but rather the acceptance of the existence of units suspected for two or three years for which confirmatory evidence has become available only in the last few months.

This increased estimate of enemy strength and recent upward trend in VC activity in the North should not occasion overconcern. We have been coping with this strength for some time without being accurately aware of its dimensions. As to the heightened tempo of operations in the North, there is considerable reason to believe that VC command thinks we are about to shift larger forces to Saigon area than modest transfer actually planned and that these are holding attacks to pin forces in North. However, taken in combination, both events are a reminder of the growing magnitude of our problems and the need to raise the level of the GVN/US effort.

With this need in mind, we are expediting the formulation of additional requirements to support our plans during the ensuing months. This morning I went over the military personnel requirements which Westmoreland is developing for the execution of the pacification plan for the area around Saigon (dubbed Pica I) and for subsequent operations up to about July, 1965. It appears likely that US military strength should increase to around 21,000 in the next six months to meet projected needs. This matter is being studied closely and will result shortly in a recommendation from General Westmoreland supported by detailed justification. I will comment at that time. USOM requirements are more complex and difficult to define but are taking form and will be forwarded by about August 1.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to JCS and CINCPAC. McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this cable to the President on July 16, under cover of a memorandum that reads as follows:

“This is a cable which I think Bob McNamara mentioned to you yesterday. The critical paragraph is the last one. I see some advantage in a careful build-up, carefully explained from every point of view, but we obviously cannot make decisions until we get more detailed accounts. Bob and I would expect this matter to be ready for discussion and decision sometime next week, but not before.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIV, Memos)

2 Telegram 107 from Saigon, July 15. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

234. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 234. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 15, 1964—9 p.m.

115. CINCPAC for POLAD. This is a Mission message.

A. The countrywide rate of Viet Cong activity while not as high as that experienced in the peak weeks of the February–April period, has increased over the June weekly average. The period 5–13 July has seen several major actions which have produced fairly heavy losses on both sides.

B. Following is furnished in effort to place major military events of the past several days in perspective, point up certain strengths and weaknesses on the part of the RVNAF, and provide some indication of probable course of the war in weeks to come. 1. The spate of press reports regarding PAVN units in battalion size operating in the I Corps area cannot be confirmed. The introduction of regular PAVN forces into the area is regarded as unlikely. Report of initial interrogation of prisoners recently captured indicates that infiltration of drafted native-born North Vietnamese trained in various PAVN divisions has probably increased in the past few months. The extent of this infiltration is not yet clear but there is no evidence that PAVN battalions are moving into this area.

2. Referring to the major specific VC-initiated actions during the past two weeks, the following operational comments supplement the various spot reports, wirenotes, and sitreps which cover these actions. They are intended to provide an insight into current activities and to assist in the assessment of the significance of these activities.

A. Actions against Special Forces (Pled Krong and Narn Dong): (1) Attacks took place at camps which for a considerable period previously had been relatively free from VC harassment. VC controls in area had been of a transitory nature. Friendly patrols normally ranged to 10km or more before any contact was made. Camps had been established to recruit indigenous personnel away from VC.

(2) Because of lack of previous activity, security apparently was somewhat lax. However, Nam Dong was successful in repelling an attack of over BN size.

(3) Local intelligence sources were apparently poor since large VC forces were able to assemble undetected in vicinity.

(4) At least one camp appears to have been infiltrated by VC.

(5) Reaction forces were not effective since arrival was after VC withdrawal.

(6) Apparently VC planning, coordination, and execution were based on detailed knowledge of camps’ activities and reaction capability of available reinforcements.

B. Vinh Cheo outpost (11–12 July): (1) VC apparently used attack on outpost as bait for reaction. A large VC force, estimated at two battalions, was employed in the entire operation which was obviously well-planned.

(2) The VC were disposed in a strong defensive position blocking each column advancing toward the outpost.

(3) Sector reacted quickly but had difficulty in maintaining control in part because reaction forces were dispatched at night.

(4) The reaction forces initially were five Hoa Hao companies. Two of the units were organized in April, the other three in June. None had unit training. They had very little experience. Leadership was weak. The deputy province chief was the strongest leader. However, he was seriously wounded early in the operation.

(5) March security apparently was poor on the moves.

(6) Terrain was difficult. For the most part area consisted of rice paddies under three feet of water. This handicapped reaction forces and was advantageous to VC ambush.

C. Binh Long ambush (13 July): (1) VC again used two separate forces. At this time, it is difficult to determine whether one was used to lure a reaction force into an ambush or whether the initial encounter was accidental.

(2) The convoy ambush appeared to have been well-planned and executed. Some VC were reported to have been disguised as Rangers. lO9mm shells were electrically detonated in the road. The ambush was well-timed and coordinated.

(3) Security and march discipline was lax. Vehicles were bunched and the command element was in the first three vehicles.

(4) Reaction to the ambush was poor. Two Ranger companies in the immediate vicinity did not react. This may have been due to fact that battalion commander was lost in ambush. Coordination was lacking. Two other companies were helilifted to Chon Thanh but were not committed.

(5) Binh Long has significance for the VC as a “corridor” province through which some of their lines of communication are known to run between their national headquarters (COSVN) and the northern provinces and between war zones C and D. While recent VC activity in the province confined itself mainly to interference with traffic on the few highways in that area, ARVN forces have been ambushed there before, and the most recent VC reaction signals their determination to keep ARVN forces out of that area.

C. In summary the following observations are offered as possible explanation of VC activity during last two weeks: 1. Possibly in response to publicity during last few months on hardening US attitude toward war, some reports indicate VC issued instructions during the latter part of June 64 to step up the tempo and intensity of their activities during following three months to include the conduct of a series of attacks on forward RVN military bases. Several reports referred to VC instructions for increased activities during July to commemorate the signing of the Geneva Accords on 20 July 1954. There were other reports associating increased activity with arrival of Ambassador Taylor. The Viet Cong clandestine broadcasting station last week announced an increase in VC activity, while exhorting their followers to intensify their efforts.

2. Another possible explanation for increased VC activity is that the VC are putting on the pressure in I, II and IV Corps to prevent or discourage GVN reinforcement in the provinces around Saigon. They are no doubt aware of plans to intensify pacification in the Binh Duong, Hau Nghia, Long An, Gia Dinh area.

3. The VC seem to make announcements of increased activity only when their reserve strength is ready to accomplish or at least attempt what their propaganda predicts. The VC have sufficient reserves to raise the tempo and intensity of their effort. This is particularly true of VC Military Region 5, comprising the provinces of I Corps and most of the provinces of II Corps, where main force units are known to exist, but are rarely committed. In I Corps tactical zone, recent infiltration of North Vietnamese mentioned above, have added new but relatively inexperienced reinforcements. We have low-level reports of recent infiltration further South via Attopeu province of Laos but these have not been substantiated thus far.

4. Significant recent VC attacks do not depart from patterns established over the past year. The attacks on the CIDG campaign Kontum and Thua Thien were undoubtedly the result of long preparation. CIDG camps because of their very nature are high priority targets for the VC. This was demonstrated by the repeated VC efforts against the Chau Lang camp and the devastating attack on the Kiep Hoa camp in November 63.

5. The attack on Vinh Cheo outpost apparently was a continuation of the same tactics which the VC had attempted to use earlier in Phuoc Thanh province when they inflicted heavy casualties on a 2company Ranger relief force attempting to intervene after a 5-pronged VC action against minor targets.

6. The upsurge of VC activity in the two northern provinces of I Corps during the past several days has not fallen into a discernible pattern but it seems reasonable to credit it in part to a carefully designed VC plan to counter First Division offensive operations into territory that VC consider their base area, negate successful GVN pacification efforts in the coastal regions of the two provinces, and cause the withdrawal of GVN elements working on road projects in the piedmont areas of the two provinces. If these were in fact their goals, they have succeeded to a considerable degree. Some of the increased activity may have been designed to delay or prevent strong ARVN reaction to the attack on the Nam Dong post on 6 July. Finally, stepped up activity in the North probably had a strategic objective, discouragement of GVN intentions to concentrate more troops in the South. In past few days VC activity in I Corps seems to have returned to pattern of weeks prior to 5 July with emphasis continuing to be on the harassment, terroristic and sabotage type of activity. Route 1 is open for traffic. However, Route 9 remains closed west of Ca Lu due to a destroyed bridge.

D. However, in general, high level of activity must be anticipated in response to apparent policy decisions on conducting a special campaign during July. Priority targets are likely to be: district towns, isolated posts, and ARVN units entering VC base areas. However, main thrust of VC campaign is expected to emphasize terrorism, harassment and efforts against routes and lines of communications with particular effort in those areas where pacification operations show evidence of progress.

E. Deptel 1302 just received. We share concerns expressed reftel and agree there are many unknowns in situation. Are making urgent review and will submit Mission views and recommendations in few days.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC, the Department of Defense, and CIA.

2 In this joint State-Defense-CIA message, July 14, the three agencies expressed concern about the military situation in the northern provinces and suggested that the Mission in Saigon consider the feasibility of additional air and ground reconnaissance and intelligence collection to obtain hard evidence on the Viet Cong situation there. (Ibid.)

235. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 235. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, July 15, 1964.

Here are three interesting dispatches from Max Taylor.

The first explains where the bad UPI story out of Saigon came from.2

The second gives the view of the experienced Chinese Nationalist Ambassador on the general situation.3

The third gives perhaps in more detail than you want an account of the effort which has been made to get the Saigon Government to do something serious about help from other countries.4 I concur in the last paragraph which says that they are doing all they can.

There is just no comparison between the reporting we get from the Taylor-Johnson team and what we used to get from Ambassador Lodge. These are good examples.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIII, Memos. No classification marking.

2 In telegram 109 from Saigon, July 15, Taylor reported that General Stilwell held a background briefing with local correspondents in Saigon to eliminate speculation of a North Vietnamese invasion of South Vietnam. Reporters had received this impression from Khanh and other South Vietnamese officials. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) On July 14, UPI wrote a story based on the Stilwell background briefing emphasizing that the North Vietnamese had stepped up their infiltration of regulars into the South. The President was not pleased with this result, according to telegram 131 to Saigon, July 14. (Ibid.)

3 Ambassador Yuen Tse-kien’s view was guardedly optimistic as reported in telegram 112 from Saigon, July 15. (Ibid., POL 17 CHINA–VIET S; also published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 297A)

4 Telegram 99 from Saigon, July 14. (Department of State, Central Files, AID VIET S)

236. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 236. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 17, 1964—6 p.m.

125. CINCPAC for POLAD. Ref: (A) Embtel 108.2 (B) MACJ–31 6180 DTG 161045 Jul 64.3

1. In separate messages COMUSMACV is recommending force increases of about 2,000 personnel. Added to earlier recommendations still pending approval of CINCPAC and/or JCS and shortages not yet filled, the total increase over current strength on board would rise by approximately 4,200 military personnel over the next nine months bringing the total in country to nearly 22,000.

2. I have reviewed these increases, both pending and recommended, in the light of plans to intensify pacification in certain priority areas and to improve operations throughout the country.

3. Without being able or wishing to comment on line items, I give general over-all support to General Westmoreland’s recommendations for the following reasons: a. A substantial improvement in effectiveness of reaction is required at BN level because of an increasing requirement for quicker response in counterambush operations and because the quality and aggressiveness of the VC seem to be rising.

b. In order to improve and accelerate the pacification program a major extension of advisory effort at district level is essential. It is proposed to position advisory teams at all districts in the priority provinces and in the most important districts in other provinces.

c. In addition to the administrative increases which automatically follow the deployment of another 900 advisors to widely dispersed field positions there is a corresponding need for increased airlift and helicopters.

d. Conversion of the Special Forces command to Special Forces group on PCS at full strength minus certain aviation and Q elements, will improve and reinforce operations on the border, in the highlands, against the war zones and support special operations. It should be possible to carry on an effective offensive counterguerrilla program—something we have done only to a limited degree in the past.

4. In the absence of presently unforeseen contingencies, the increases presently being sought added to those in process of approval should meet the US military personnel requirement for pacification operations for approximately the next twelve months. I urge prompt processing and action on these recommendations.4

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–VIET S. Secret; Priority. Repeated to CINCPAC, the White House, Department of Defense, and JCS.

2 Document 233.

3 Dated July 16. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center. Reel 11854)

4 The Department of State, in telegram 205 to Saigon, July 21, replied as follows:

“Highest Authority has approved in principle, subject to further review of details, the requested increase in authorized military strength to approximately 22,000. It has not yet been decided whether or how this augmentation should be announced. Steps should be taken to insure that there is no intentional or accidental release of information on this subject from Saigon until authorized.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

237. Memorandum of a Conversation, Secretary of State Rusk’s Office, Department of State 237. Memorandum of a Conversation, Secretary of State Rusk’s Office, Department of State1

Washington, July 20, 1964, 12:15 p.m.

SUBJECT

Southeast Asia

PARTICIPANTS

The Secretary

Mr. Imhof, WE

Ambassador Alphand, French Embassy

Minister de Leusse, French Embassy

M. Roger Duzer, Counselor, French Embassy

Ambassador Alphand said that he now had a message from Couve de Murville in response to a number of points which the Secretary had raised with Alphand on July 1.2 Ambassador Alphand explained that the delay had been caused by Couve’s extremely busy schedule—he had been in Germany, in Sweden and he had chaired the WEU meeting in Paris. Ambassador Alphand then proceeded to read from penciled notes.

Ambassador Alphand said he could assure the Secretary the French Government was fully aware that the U.S. had no territorial ambitions in Southeast Asia. The Secretary said that not only do we have no territorial ambitions, we also have no ambition to regard Southeast Asia as our special sphere of influence.

Ambassador Alphand said that the French Government knows that U.S. actions in the area are not in any sense directed against France. To be sure, there had on occasions been some activities by certain U.S. services but the French Government knew that U.S. policy was not directed against France. By the same token, the French Government hoped that no one in the United States Government would consider that French policies were directed in any sense against U.S. interests.

Ambassador Alphand said that the fact remained that while we had similar objectives, there were serious differences with regard to Southeast Asia about the ways and means to get there. The French Government believed that the best way to stabilize the area was to make certain that there was no outside intervention, neither from the Chinese nor from the U.S.

Ambassador Alphand said that he recalled the Secretary’s statement on July 1 that we would quickly be back in the area militarily in case the stability of the area were threatened. Ambassador Alphand said that it seemed that this statement indicated that we did regard Southeast Asia as our special sphere of influence. The Secretary said that this interpretation was not correct. We have a commitment to ensure the freedom and the security of the area. We felt the countries had a right to expect outside help in case their security was threatened. Ambassador Alphand asked who would decide whether there was a renewal of aggression. He noted that in the case of the Austrian State Treaty, there was no provision for a unilateral decision that an aggression had occurred. The Secretary said that we considered the current situation in Southeast Asia as an aggression. If Hungary were to put armed bands into Austria, we would have to do something about it. Ambassador Alphand reverted to the question who would define whether an aggression had occurred. The Secretary pointed out that we have jointly registered our interest in the security of Southeast Asia in SEATO.

Ambassador Alphand, again reading from his notes, said that France agreed that the Chinese Communist regime had many bad qualities; on the other hand, the Chinese regime was aware of U.S. power and concerned about U.S. bases on the Asian mainland. The Secretary asked whether China understood why we were there. Ambassador Alphand said he felt certain that China did understand. The U.S. had said so directly. He assumed that we had also made the Chinese aware of our position in our direct discussions with them. He said in this situation the French Ambassador in Peiping could add little. Our statements would count far more heavily with the Chinese than anything the French might say.

Ambassador Alphand then came to what appears to have been the gist of his instructions. He said that there should be an understanding between France and the U.S. not only on objectives in Southeast Asia but also on the means to get there. Without such an understanding, French possibilities to be of help would be limited. As the French saw it, we had various options. We could extend the war. In this case, France could not play a useful role. We could look for a negotiated settlement. In this case, France could be of help. Ambassador Alphand referred in this connection to General De Gaulle’s recent statement to Mr. Ball3 that a vast negotiation, including China, the USSR, the UK, France and the U.S., would in itself help to stabilize the situation in Southeast Asia by slowing down Communist military actions. A French démarche to Peiping would be useful only at a later stage when an understanding had been reached on the course which we would adopt. An earlier démarche would simply jeopardize the usefulness of a later French intervention.

The Secretary asked whether Peiping knew that France disapproved of Chinese and North Vietnamese actions in Southeast Asia. Ambassador Alphand said Peiping was aware that France was opposed to outside intervention in the area and that it wants an agreement with international guarantees. Ambassador Alphand said that Chen Yi had given a bad speech on the occasion of Bastille Day, a speech which had not pleased the French at all. Nevertheless, Ambassador Alphand thought that there was no doubt in Chinese Government circles about French disapproval of outside interference in the area.

The Secretary asked Ambassador Alphand whether the French Government had given any indications as to the kind of agreement they expected to come out of such a conference. Ambassador Alphand said that he had nothing specific from Paris on this point but that the hope was that the Chinese will keep out of the area if the U.S. withdraws from Laos and Vietnam. The Secretary said that if that was what the Chinese desired, they could have it tomorrow if they themselves stopped interfering in the area. Ambassador Alphand said that the Chinese required guarantees. It was desirable that others also participated in extending these guarantees. The Secretary said that we had such an agreement in Laos and it had not worked. Ambassador Alphand said he had repeatedly discussed some of our earlier actions in Laos with the Secretary’s predecessors. The Secretary said he was specifically referring to the situation after the 1962 agreement. We had taken 600 men out of Laos. The other side had not adhered to the agreement. Ambassador Alphand suggested that the situation in Laos had disintegrated because of the war in Vietnam. He said it was necessary to solve the problem of the entire area. An attempt to solve Laos alone would be fruitless. The Secretary said that on the contrary, a solution of the Laotian problem could facilitate a solution in Vietnam, relieve pressures on Sihanouk, and lead to a stabilization of the situation in Southeast Asia. The Secretary noted that the agreement on Laos was self-contained and not dependent on the situation in South Vietnam. Ambassador Alphand said that the Secretary was right juridically; he believed, however, that a solution had to be found for the problem of the entire area. The Secretary said it seemed to him the question was not so much a new agreement but performance on existing agreements.

Ambassador Alphand recalled the Secretary’s remark to him on July 1 that while the Soviets had come to realize that aggression would involve the most serious risks for them, the Chinese apparently had not as yet come to realize this. Ambassador Alphand said once a negotiated settlement had been reached, it ought to be possible to make the Chinese understand that any infraction of the agreement would create the most serious risks for them. The U.S. could bring into play its overwhelming power in Southeast Asia. The threat of a nuclear war would have a most sobering and deterrent effect on the Chinese. The Secretary said that the Asians, including even Chiang Kai-shek, were strongly opposed to the employment of nuclear weapons in Asia. He wondered to what extent the Chinese Communists really felt themselves threatened. For instance, did they really think that they are facing a threat from South Vietnam? Ambassador Alphand said he did not know, but he thought that the Chinese were aware of the power position of the United States.

Ambassador Alphand said that under present circumstances, his government believed that it was better to await a later time for a French démarche in Peiping.

The Secretary asked whether the French Government supported Souvanna Phouma. Ambassador Alphand said that the French Government considered him the Prime Minister of Laos but hoped that he would not allow himself to be integrated among the Right. There should be three factions in Laos. The Secretary said that he did not wish to go into this in detail at this time but that the three factions were not necessarily a permanent ingredient of the accord on Laos.

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversations: Lot 65 D 330. Secret. Drafted by Imhof and approved by Rusk on August 10. Copies were sent to FE, EUR, WE, the White House, and the Embassy in Paris.

2 See Document 227.

3 See Document 202.

238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 238. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 20, 1964—9:33 p.m.

192. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Realize you fully aware importance keeping General Khanh as far as possible on same track as ourselves regarding possible action against North. Khanh’s speech of yesterday plus editorial in Bui Diem’s paper suggests to us that GVN may be attempting stimulate pressure for U.S. involvement in such action.2

You may wish to reiterate to Khanh importance of maintaining parallel position. Talk of this sort tends to distract GVN from first job of getting on with pacification. It also confuses our signals to the North and the rest of the world. If it should become necessary to take such action in response to significant escalation by Hanoi, we would want to be in position of responding to new aggression rather than appear to be carrying out previously planned and publicized offensive.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared by William Bundy, and initialed and approved by Rusk. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 91A.

2 Telegram 201 from Saigon, July 24, summarized Khanh’s speech of July 19 as a call for liberation of North Vietnam. This telegram also included a summary of press coverage of Khanh’s “Day of Shame” rally marking the tenth anniversary of the 1954 Geneva Accords and calling for a “March to the North.” (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 VIET N–VIET S)

239. Memorandum From the Secretary of State 1s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Forrestal) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 239. Memorandum From the Secretary of State 1s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Forrestal) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, July 22, 1964.

I attach a preliminary summary made here of the anticipated deployments of the additional military personnel requested by General Taylor for Vietnam.

The picture is still incomplete, but I think you should note that approximately 1,600 U.S. officers and enlisted men will be assigned to the field, either with battalions or in district headquarters. This will probably mean that American servicemen will accompany more Vietnamese units into combat, increasing their exposure at the battalion level by some 40%.

The presence of approximately five U.S. servicemen in each of the critical 45 districts will also have an appreciable effect on exposure, since their job would presumably be to accompany district military forces into combat with the Viet Cong.

I think the issue we have to think about is whether it is better simply to let casualties increase over the next few months or whether we should anticipate the possibilities of such casualties by announcing in general terms that we are increasing our advisory presence in the field.

My own inclination is still to do the latter, not by talking about specific numbers, but rather by indicating informally to the press that our civilian and military advisory effort is going to be increased as the situation demands and that the result of this will probably be more exposure of U.S. personnel.

Mike

Attachment2

Washington, July 21, 1964.

SUBJECT

Additional Support for RVN

1. The request for additional military support from Ambassador Taylor can be broken down into three main categories. These are: advisors and special forces in the field, logistic and combat support personnel, and items of equipment. A general breakdown of the above categories derived from incomplete information follows:

A. Advisory Personnel in the Field (approximately 1600) Army

Bn/Dist Adv—700 personnel

Spec Forces—592 personnel

Battalion advisors will be increased from 3 per battalion to 5. A district advisory detachment will be assigned to each of 45 districts in the 8 critical provinces. The breakdown will average 5 US personnel per district. The duties of the personnel at district level and the exact number in each specific district has not been determined. The increase in the Special Forces contingent in Viet Nam will include a group headquarters. The Special Forces increase will allow for extension of the program on the border, increased guerrilla type operations and will provide for full A detachments at all Special Forces camps instead of 1/2 A detachments which are now in many Special Forces camps.

Navy

Navy Adv Group—73 personnel

This increase will provide US Navy advisors with [to] greater number of Vietnamese naval craft Marine Corps

Navy Adv Group—8 personnel

This increase will provide additional Marine advisors to Marine battalions in essentially the same number as additional Army advisors provided to Army battalions.

Air Force

ALO/FAC—149 personnel

This increase provides Air liaison officers and forward air controllers.

B. Support Personnel (approximately 2100)

The additional personnel fall into three categories: additions to MACV staff, additions to logistic support activities and additions to combat support activities. The bulk of the personnel will be provided to fly and maintain the aircraft of one Air Force C–123 squadron (16 aircraft), one Army Caribou company (16 aircraft) and 2 Army UH–1B helicopter companies (total 50 aircraft). The majority of these personnel will probably wind up in the Saigon-Tan Son Nhut area.

C. Items of Equipment

Major items of equipment required will be 16 USAF C–123 aircraft, and 106 Army aircraft to include 77 UH–1B and 16 CV–2B (Caribou) aircraft, 336 one-quarter ton trucks, 478 radios and medical equipment for a ten-bed field hospital.

2. In summary, the number of US advisors is nearly doubled at the lower echelon and the number of locations of US advisors at the end of communications and supply lines is nearly doubled. The increase of personnel at the lower level coupled with the increase in helicopter units will undoubtedly create a situation in which a great many more Americans will be exposed to hostile fire than are at present.

MVF

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIV, Memos. Secret

2 Secret.

240. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 240. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, July 22, 1964.

SUBJECT

Information Memorandum: Dialogue on Southeast Asia2

1. I thought you might be interested in a brief report on the discussion of Communist views of U.S. intentions in Southeast Asia which took place July 16 in the Thursday inter-agency Planning Group.

2. A substantial—but by no means unanimous—consensus seemed to be that the North Vietnamese believed we were seriously considering the possibility of eventual retaliation against Hanoi, but were not moved by this belief to abate the present level of violence in South Vietnam, and probably would not be so moved until some—but not necessarily all—of the following: (a) The US made concrete military preparations thus indicating that attack was a near-term possibility.

(b) Those preparations extended to the contingency of ground, as well as air, attack on North Vietnam, since the Communists might be prepared to endure considerable bombing in order to get South Vietnam.

(c) The US gave clear evidence that it was not going to be diverted, at the last moment, by French and other pressures for neutralization, since the Communists may set some store on these pressures as a likely brake on any US military action that may develop.

(d) We indicated what specific actions the Communists would have to cease, if they were to dissuade us from attacking North Vietnam.

3. It was agreed that ChiCom and North Vietnamese perceptions might diverge, but there was no agreement as to the implications of this divergence.

4. This is by no means a complete report of the discussion, but I thought these highlights might be of interest.

We have checked this memo for accuracy with the INR representative who was present at the meeting. The FE representative who was there is now on leave.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam. Secret. A note on the source text indicates that Rusk saw the memorandum. Copies were also sent to Harriman, William Bundy, Hughes, and Llewellyn Thompson.

2 Reference is to an attached CIA memorandum, OCI No. 2073/64, July 13, entitled “Dialogue on Southeast Asia,” which concluded that China and North Vietnam were undoubtedly receiving U.S. messages that the United States considered the situation in Laos and South Vietnam very grave and that it held North Vietnam responsible for the deterioration. The paper also concluded that neither the Chinese nor North Vietnamese believed the United States meant what it said.

241. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 241. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 24, 1964—7:51 p.m.

235. Saigon pass COMUSMACV. Refs: Saigon’s 196, 2032 and related CAS messages.3

Referenced messages have suggested to us following possible explanations for reported attitude Khanh and other members MRC: 1. Khanh may simply be expressing frustration felt by himself and other military, in view of recent military difficulties and consequent feeling war cannot be successfully prosecuted under present concept This mood may be transitory and could be assuaged by reaffirmation of our conviction that pacification program can be successful and must be vigorously pushed, which will be fortified by impending announcement of increase in U.S. military and civilian advisory assistance.

2. Khanh may be reacting against pressures from the neutralist-minded by pushing openly for strong action against the North. His retreat from this tactic may have led some of the military to doubt our continued support of Khanh personally. If you feel that there is indeed slightest doubt about our continued support for Khanh as Prime Minister, you should make every effort to remove these doubts.

3. Recent developments suggest we should watch closely as possible neutralist thinking in Vietnamese circles and specifically watch for any indications of DRV contacts with former junta generals, GVN officials or leading Vietnamese exiles. To avoid generating misinterpretation our interest it might be best alert British to pass us promptly whatever their assets can learn of any such developments.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 VIET N–VIET S. Secret; Flash; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Passed to the White House on receipt in the Department of State. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 91B.

2 These telegrams from Saigon, July 24, described rumors in the capital that Khanh’s position as Prime Minister was becoming “shaky.” (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 6–3 VIET S and POL 15–1, respectively)

3 Apparent reference to CIA telegrams TDCS DB–315/00231–64 to DB–315/00236–64, all July 24. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIV; published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 94F–95D)

242. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 242. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 25, 1964—4 p.m.

213. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtels 180, 184, 185, 186,2 201;3 Deptel 235.4 As our previous reports on the “march to the North” theme (in Vietnamese this phrase actually means “to the North” and does not have same connotation of movement on ground) have indicated Khanh appears to have launched deliberate campaign to associate US with policy of increased military pressure on North Viet-Nam. This decision was taken with full knowledge that GVN campaign would cause embarrassment to US. In our view following interrelated factors are involved in GVN attitude: 1) In Khanh’s mind need for some dramatic move to raise morale and if possible to bring war effort in SVN to more decisive phase has existed for some time. In May Khanh outlined his rationale to Ambassador Lodge (Embtel 2108)5 in which he cited growing war weariness on part of Vietnamese people, slow pace of pacification efforts, continued high casualties sustained in indecisive military actions against Viet Cong, etc. He also raised at that time question as to whether he should make a declaration that state of war exists in SVN in order strengthen his hand in taking necessary measures to more effectively prosecute the war. Khanh also stressed with Secretary Rusk on May 31 that extension of war (for example to Laos or North Viet-Nam) would have effect of producing great national unity, would tend eliminate or postpone internal political quarrels, and would give morale boost to Vietnamese people. Although Khanh appeared recognize serious implications of escalation, it seems clear Khanh has remained personally convinced that something new must be injected in the situation. However, intervening events (such as Honolulu conference, departure of Ambassador Lodge, arrival of new US team in Saigon) have tended to push these thoughts into background. It is also possible that during his frequent meetings at Dalat his Generals have pressed him to take more dramatic action (General Kim frequently espoused similar ideas prior to Khanh’s takeover).

2. While Khanh tends to lump many of above factors under general rubric of “war weariness” we are inclined to believe that war weariness applies more to leaders in Saigon than to population at large. Rather it is lack of demonstrable concrete progress and achievement and little prospect of things getting better in short term which present naggings doubts. This is particularly so when Khanh sees few people solidly behind him for long pull. These problems weigh heavily on Khanh and his young military colleagues who would probably like to sweep them away with bold military gesture against source of the frustration in North.

3. Khanh is concerned over morale and divisions within military, particularly since he is convinced that military is only real solid instrument in SVN capable of exercising power and directing affairs of state at present time. There are numerous recent reports that Khanh is unable to exert full control over Generals. He told me yesterday that he is currently under pressure from two groups of Generals and as man in middle is being pulled in two directions. Further he can foresee a division existing among general officers permeating down through officer ranks with its potential adverse effects on morale. Further, he is undoubtedly aware, even if only in general terms, of various moves afoot to unseat him and replace him with one or another combination of Generals (FVS 10550, 10551, 10552).6 To close these rifts, he may be tempted to try old gambit of turning on a foreign enemy.

4. On civilian side he has been unable to achieve. any real unity of purpose and action among his official family. He is surely conscious of daily sniping at quality of his performance by his Ministers with three Vice Premiers leading pack. While he can take considerable pride in manner with which he has managed numerous problems on civilian front, particularly religious, labor, student activities, he probably realizes that resolution of these problems was based in large measure on forbearance of groups concerned.

5. Politicians whom he considers in any case as contributing little to national effort, are able to exploit any divisions of loyalty within military ranks by playing one group off against another. Press situation permits irresponsible criticism of government with politicians able to make full and often misguided use of press freedom.

6. Recent spate of Viet Cong attacks of battalion and company strength with continued heavy government casualties, difficulty of recruiting sufficient personnel to bring regular forces to authorized strength, undiminished Viet Cong activity and capability must also be disturbing factors. While Khanh is probably convinced that with US support and assistance to GVN Viet Cong cannot take over substantial part of country, prospect for future is still one of painfully slow advances through long years ahead.

7. Developments on international scene have also influenced GVN attitudes. Goldwater’s nomination has led many (Embtel 201) to believe that now was opportune moment to apply pressure on US to expand area of conflict. Sino-Soviet split, split between US and French policy toward SEA and De Gaulle’s most recent anti-US stance and heavy pressure for neutral solution, US Presidential elections probably all contribute to conclusion on part Khanh and his colleagues that now is opportune time to launch campaign.

8. Influenced by these factors Khanh may have any of three courses of action in mind: a. He may talk “march North” merely to whip up such public enthusiasm as is possible. Conceivably, this might aid recruiting and facilitate putting country more nearly on war footing. He could continue to explain his action privately to us as being necessary to public morale b. He can talk “march North” but really have in mind getting us committed to program of reprisal bombing. Such a limited program could be first step to further escalation against Hanoi.

c. He could talk “march North” and literally mean to initiate military actions to reunify country as soon as he felt he has us inextricably involved beyond point of possible detachment.

If Khanh has been reasonably sincere in his statements to me his present objective would appear to be b. above. He knows full well he cannot “march North” on ground with his present resources. He does have air capability to put on fairly good show against NVN if US wild keep ChiCom air out of picture. This is course I believe he wants to follow although thus far he has never indicated exactly when he wants to initiate this new line BN action.

In sum, Khanh, after nearly six months in office, seems to have reached conclusion that frustrating and ineffective instruments of government at his command are not adequate to master Viet Cong by counterinsurgency means alone. He and his colleagues seem to have decided that they can bring about cessation of Viet Cong harassment only by bringing direct pressure to bear on North. If they are unsuccessful in getting US more directly involved, it is difficult to judge at this stage how strong pressures would become within GVN to seek a negotiated solution. However, there are signs that this possibility cannot be excluded [document number not declassified] (General Lam and aide departed Saigon on July 23 with a ticket to Hong Kong, ultimate destination unknown. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]

We are unable to judge how far Khanh and his associates have thought this “march North” through in terms of ultimate consequences, and in terms of solution other than unconditional surrender by Hanoi; but we must assume that they have discussed this in their own councils. Our recommendation on how to approach this knotty problem with Khanh follows by septel.7

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, DEF 9–3 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared with William Bundy and McNaughton. Published in part in Declassified Documents, 1979, 91D.

2 In these telegrams, all July 23, the Embassy reported that Khanh and other South Vietnamese officials were losing confidence in the pacification effort in South Vietnam and sought to solve the problem of the Viet Cong insurgency by attacking North Vietnam. Also reported was information which indicated Khanh hoped to use his “March to the North” campaign to incite the United States to take military action against the North. (Department of State, Central Files, all POL 15–1 VIET S, except 186 from Saigon, which is in DEF 9–3 VIET S)

3 See footnote 2, Document 238.

4 Document 241.

5 Document 136.

6 See footnote 3, Document 241.

7 Document 243.

243. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 243. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 25, 1964—5 p.m.

214. The GVN public campaign for “marching North” (reported Embtel 201)2 may take several courses. In the face of U.S. coolness and absence of evidence of real grass roots support outside certain military quarters, it may die down for a while although it is hardly likely to disappear completely. On the other hand, the proponents of a “quick solution” may be able to keep it alive indefinitely as an active issue, in which case it is likely to foment an increasing amount of dissatisfaction with the U.S. (assuming that we continue to give it no support) to the serious detriment of our working relations with the GVN and hence of the ultimate chances of success of the in-country pacification program. In such a case, Vietnamese leaders in and out of government, unable to find a vent to their frustration in “marching North” may seek other panaceas in various forms of negotiation formulas. General Khanh may find in the situation an excuse or a requirement to resign.

Finally, this “march North” fever can get out of hand in an act of rashness-one maverick pilot taking off for Hanoi with a load of bombs-which could touch off an extension of hostilities at a time and in a form most disadvantageous to U.S. interests.

Faced with these unattractive possibilities, we propose a course of action designed to do several things.

We would try to avoid head-on collision with the GVN which unqualified U.S. opposition to the “march North” campaign would entail. We would do this by expressing a willingness to engage in joint contingency planning for various forms of extended action against NVN. Such planning would not only provide an outlet for the martial head of steam now dangerously compressed but would force the Generals to look at the hard facts of life which lie behind the neon lights of the “march North” slogans. This planning would also gain time badly needed to stabilize this government and could provide a useful basis for military action if adjudged in our interest at some future time. Finally, it would also afford us an opportunity, for the first time, to have a frank discussion with GVN leaders concerning the political objectives which they would envisage as the purposes inherent in military action against the DRV. We do not really know whether they feel that Viet-Nam can indeed be unified by military action, or whether such action is intended only to introduce a pressure which would be equivalent to Viet Cong terror in order to induce DRV to desist from aiding VC and to improve bargaining opportunities for a political negotiation with Hanoi.

It would be important, however, in initiating such a line of action that we make a clear record that we are not assuming any commitment to implement such plans. Therefore, I would recommend that I be authorized to give General Khanh the following written statement: “The United States Government has noted recent public statements by various leaders of the Republic of Viet-Nam proposing military action against the sources of aggression in North Viet-Nam. The reasons which have prompted these statements are clear and the impatience of the people of the Republic of Viet-Nam in the face of continuing subversive warfare from the North is understandable.

“In considering ways and means to bring the Viet Cong insurgency under control, authorities in Washington have given serious study over a considerable period to the question of bringing military pressure to bear on the leaders of North Viet-Nam. It has been their conclusion that this is a complex problem involving judgments and decisions in both the political and military fields which neither the United States nor Viet-Nam could take independently. The current activity of the United States Government consists in the provision of massive assistance to your government in the extension of its [garble] approved pacification programs in South Viet-Nam. The question of extending this assistance by the United States Government to a program of action outside the territorial limits of South Viet-Nam has not been seriously discussed up to now, but it is my belief that the time has come for giving the matter a thorough analysis.

“In the view of the United States Government, the best method of producing such an analysis would be in the form of a joint contingency planning study, undertaken by appropriate representatives of our two governments, without advance commitments by either side as to subsequent actions. If the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam agrees, the Government of the United States has authorized me to appoint representatives who would be able to meet, under conditions of maximum discretion and security, with representatives of the Republic of Viet-Nam to undertake such discussions.”

It is my opinion that such discussions, if initiated with responsible Vietnamese officials, would not only develop some of the fundamental political thinking which is currently motivating the Vietnamese leadership, but would also reveal the need for the completion of a number of preliminary actions which should be taken before serious consideration can be given to expanding the war. Such actions should include the absorption of the new A1H aircraft by November 1, the filling of the ranks of understrength ARVN units, air defense measures for urban centers and the establishment of a greater degree of control over the VC than now exists in order to secure the rear and flanks of fighting forces.

It would be most helpful if approval for the above statement can be received to permit its use at my next meeting with Khanh scheduled for 1600, 27 July (Saigon time).

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 VIET N–VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 8:10 a.m. and passed to the White House. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 512–513.

2 See footnote 2. Document 238.

244. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 244. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 25, 1964—4:18 p.m.

245. As part of the problem of making clear our full support for Khanh, we have been concerned that he may have the feeling that USG in past has been pressuring him to maintain Minh’s position and go easy with Dalat generals. While we have always felt that Minh’s position could be useful in enlisting public support, we believe this aspect may now be secondary to crucial need reinforce Khanh’s position in every possible way. Accordingly, you may in your discretion sound Khanh out whether he wishes us dissociate ourselves further from Minh and whether he needs our support in taking tough line against Dalat or other generals.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority, Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared by Forrestal and Harriman.

245. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 245. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 25, 1964—4:56 p.m.

253. State-Defense message. Ref: Embtels 213, 214,2 215.3

1. Analysis your 213 most helpful and persuasive. We note particularly your judgment that sense of frustration and desire for some action particularly strong among generals but perhaps not widespread in people as a whole.

2. Proposal your 215 for announcement personnel increase fully approved. Please let us know soonest what you propose to say in backgrounder so that we can keep backgrounding here fully in tune. As stated our 235,4 we do not propose announcement here.

3. Re proposal your 214, our objective should be to provide channel for frustrations of Khanh and generals without committing USG to action and with minimum risk of disruptive leaks that might add to picture of US/GVN disagreement, cause wrong signal to Hanoi and Peking, and above all impair our freedom of action and public policy posture. We have impression that Khanh’s meetings in Dalat will have been concerned with the pressures he is under from Khiem on the one hand and with reference to Minh’s position on the other. Thus, you should first draw him out on results Dalat meetings and on his present position and state of mind. If this part of conversation confirms analysis your 213 and 214 that major pressures and frustrations do exist and that it essential to Khanh’s position and our relationship with him to go forward, you are authorized to make following points: a. USG has of course made careful study of problems involved in action against DRV and believes it would be useful pursue this subject in more concrete manner in small and select joint group.

b. Vital that such discussions be conducted so that they do not leak in any way. Military security alone dictates this, but you should also emphasize to Khanh that leaks can only lead to same problems of clarifying statements and apparent disunity that we have already had in last week, and that these will if anything make it more difficult USG pursue additional courses of action if and when these become necessary.

c. Accordingly, Khanh for such discussions should bring in only very few most needed and trusted GVN officers chosen personally by him for their loyalty and security.

d. While we do not believe you should table any written statement or terms of reference as proposed your 214, you should make these points orally and particularly underscore that USG assuming no commitment to carry out such plans.

4. FYI: We concur completely that resulting discussions should highlight need for completing preliminary actions, which may take some time to accomplish. You should be prepared to stress particularly such concrete items as the need for additional A1H aircraft and trained pilots, and Khanh himself may suggest importance air defense measures. However, arguments of under-strength ARVN units and need for greater degree of control over VC may encounter response that these aspects are not going to get any better. Hence importance of stress on military essentials for attack itself. End FYI.

5. JCS considering urgently what additional external measures might be taken, short of attack on DRV itself, that would provide maximum military benefit with minimum risks of escalation or international complications. Request your judgment as to actions you would recommend under this heading. If you think it useful, you could tell Khanh Monday5 that you have asked your government to consider such actions and that these could be discussed in same group. Khanh’s reaction might produce some suggestion this area that would help to meet basic problem of channel for frustrations.

6. We remain deeply concerned that even with these restrictions and caveats Khanh’s position and attitudes of key generals now such that he or they will feel strong temptation publicize existence such planning exercise perhaps in some tendentious form and with implication USG committed at least in some degree. Our line here in such case would be that USG has not changed policy but has repeatedly made it clear that wider action not excluded. Hence natural that US and GVN should be giving careful study this subject, and such contingency discussions have been underway long period.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared by Forrestal, Manning, McGeorge Bundy, and Ball. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 91C.

2 Documents 242 and 243.

3 In telegram 215, July 25, Taylor requested permission to allow Khanh to make a formal announcement that the United States was increasing its troop levels in Vietnam. Taylor would follow the announcement with a background press briefing. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 Document 241.

5 July 27.

246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 246. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, July 25, 1964—5:41 p.m.

254. Joint State-AID message. At highest level meeting today,2 concern was expressed that despite many desirable AID contributions to economic and social progress in rural areas, the pacification effort is not offering the Vietnamese peasant a sharply contrasting alternative between life under the VC and a clearly better deal with the GVN. It was proposed that US undertake with GVN a dramatic and intensive social and economic effort on a single project or area which would highlight as quickly and effectively as possible the opportunity for progress after pacification. This objective also could be furthered through more discriminating provision of benefits of present nationwide AID programs, with denial of benefits to disloyal or VC-dominated villages.

Highest authority has asked for Country Team’s most imaginative thoughts on what might be done toward this objective. US would be prepared to make an all-out effort to produce rapid and visible impact on popular psychology.

Possibilities which initially occur to us for CT consideration include: A. Area projects such as irrigation works and related agricultural production and processing development in the Phan Rang valley. Understand Japanese completing feasibility study of irrigation system using runoff from Da Nhim dam which might irrigate 20,000 hectares. This water presently going to waste, it would seem. Suggest consideration of creation of joint GVN-US body functioning somewhat like JCRR in Taiwan for overall accelerated development of area. Joint body would have assured commitment of US and GVN funds and special authorities to establish or improve cooperatives, assure equitable land distribution, draw on GVN and AID agricultural and industrial development assistance. Suggest this area may be small enough to serve as manageable model and large enough to have important demonstration effect. It is relatively pacified and defensible. Success there could lead to similar area projects elsewhere on chronically dry central coast.

B. Nationwide programs: 1. The intensive village water wells and cisterns program now being launched, might be announced with numerical targets and with emphasis on provision of potable water to cleared and loyal villages and hamlets. Plans for future CI fertilizer distributions restricted to a discriminatory award and punishment approach might be announced.

2. Full scale windmill irrigation program, based upon recent experiments, might be announced, as grant assistance to established or new cooperatives and confined to secured hamlets.

3. While recognizing complexities of the problem, we continue to believe a bolder GVN approach to land reform and rural debt-waiver would strike a telling blow at VC, particularly if restricted to cleared and cooperative villages. If payments to land owners and creditors could be made in form of equity shares in productive enterprise rather than cash, benefits would be multiplied. Imaginative CT action in this field welcome.

Emphasize foregoing are informal ideas to add to CT’s consideration. Further suggestions may be offered later.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Drafted by Forrestal, Poats, and Montgomery and cleared by William Bundy. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 297A.

2 The following persons met with the President at the White House from 11:34 a.m. to 12:29 p.m. on July 25: McGeorge Bundy, McNamara, William Bundy, Forrestal, Wheeler, McNaughton, Colby, and Harriman. The meeting was off the record. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) At this meeting, Wheeler was asked to prepare a list of possible military courses of action designed to support the counterinsurgency program in South Vietnam and relieve the current frustration of South Vietnamese leaders.

247. Research Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to the Secretary of State 247. Research Memorandum From the Director of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (Hughes) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, July 25, 1964.

INR-27

SUBJECT

DeGaulle’s Proposals For Indochina and Likely Reactions Thereto

Although little official response has so far emerged to President Charles deGaulle’s proposal for an international conference to neutralize the Indo-China peninsula, the recent actions of relevant governments support the following speculation concerning their likely reaction.

Abstract

DeGaulle’s July 23rd press conference went beyond his earlier proposals for international neutralization of the Indo-China peninsula chiefly in detail.2 Noteworthy was his proposal that four powers, France, Communist China, the Soviet Union, and the United States, agree “no longer to be committed there.” In addition to his earlier rationale, DeGaulle may have been prompted to this move by a sense of increased risk that hostilities would escalate, on the one hand, and a feeling of greater Communist receptivity to his proposals, on the other hand. Asian Communist reaction is likely to be more favorable than to his January statements, as indicated by statements from representatives of Hanoi and the Viet Cong. Peiping’s attitude remains ambiguous but the regime appears to have taken some steps, especially in the diplomatic sphere, to anticipate this proposal. Soviet reaction is likely to be favorable, if only to keep the proposal alive. Pakistan’s increasing support for Communist China’s position on Southeast Asia may foreshadow explicit support for DeGaulle’s policy, thereby effectively shattering the SEATO front. In Saigon, the official reaction will certainly be negative but the proposal will further promote destabilizing factors and undermine morale.

[Here follows the text of the five-page paper.]

1 Source: Department of State, INR Files: Lot 81 D 343, Vietnam, INR Studies, 1964–1965. Secret.

2 For text of De Gaulle’s statement at the press conference, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 977–978.

248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos 248. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Laos1

Washington, July 26, 1964—6:21 p.m.

89. Vientiane for Ambassador Unger. Saigon for Ambassador Taylor for information only. No other distribution whatsoever.

1. Primarily for reasons of morale in South Viet-Nam and to divert GVN attention from proposal to strike North Viet-Nam, we are considering proposing to Ambassador Taylor that he discuss with Khanh air attacks on VC supply lines in the Laotian Panhandle. For meeting of Secretaries, request by 0600 our time Monday your views on such operations, your estimate of reaction of Souvanna and other Lao leaders, and your advice as to best way to obtain Souvanna’s acquiescence.

2. Our preliminary views as to possible air attacks are as follows: a. The military objective would be to interdict and destroy facilities supporting infiltration into SVN. (It is possible that the political objective might be achieved by fewer targets and/or sorties than indicated below.)

b. Initial targets, which would be programmed for moderate to severe damage, would probably be Muong Phine army barracks (12 sorties), Ban Thay military camp and 4 AAA gun emplacements (18 sorties), Ban Na Nhom military camp (12 sorties), Tchepone army barracks (68 sorties), Muong Nong military area (10 sorties), and Ban Trim barracks and supply area (34 sorties). Also considering Mu Gia border control point just inside North Viet-Nam (14 sorties). At same time, attacks of opportunity would be carried out on lines of communication by armed reconnaissance.

c. Aircraft would be either A1H with only GVN pilots, or A1H plus A1E with American instructors also aboard in case of AIEs. Our present thinking does not include use of Lao T–28s.

d. Armament would be napalm unless politically unacceptable, in which case armament would be less effective conventional bombs, rockets and 20 mm.

e. Estimate that attacks could begin in early August and could, without serious degradation of air support for pacification in SVN, be carried out at rate of 20 sorties a day. Our proposal, however, may be that strikes be conducted on intermittent basis at a slower rate than indicated depending on political requirements.

f. Estimated aircraft losses at less than two per cent in early stages, meaning that some planes will probably be downed in Laos during attacks on initial targets.

g. We may recommend certain readiness measures in Laos and Thailand to cope with possible communist reaction or escalation (e.g., PL moves on Panhandle towns or even toward Mekong).

h. It is assumed that attacks would promptly become known and responsibility would be acknowledged by GVN, that if US instructors are on board, US would acknowledge this fact; that operation would be justified on grounds of infiltration of personnel and supplies through corridor in violation of Geneva Accords; and that we would publicize relevant evidence from photography and POW interrogation. We would hope Souvanna would publicly support such a rationale but at minimum would do or say nothing to undermine it.

3. As you know, joint US–GVN planning is underway not only for air attacks but also for ground operations up to battalion size in Panhandle. We may be querying you shortly for your reactions regarding such ground operations.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by McNaughton, cleared in draft with Wheeler and William Bundy, and initialed and approved by Forrestal. Repeated to Saigon. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, p. 514.

249. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 249. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 27, 1964—10 a.m.

Bundy added the following handwritten end note: “We will discuss this general problem again on Tuesday at lunch.”

232. Deptel 253.2 Alex Johnson and I called on Khanh at Dalat at 1500, 27 July and discussed alone with him a wide range of topics. We were uncertain in what mood we would find him as we had reliable information that the previous day he had been grumbling about the uncertainties of US policy and his unwillingness to adjust himself to a puppet role.

On arriving we asked him about his day and a half of conferences which he was having with his senior Generals. The question elicited no immediate response other than that numerous subjects had been discussed. Some of the subjects came out in the subsequent discussion reported elsewhere in this message.

I opened the matter of a press release by him covering the US military personnel increase. He saw at once the advantage of his putting out such a release and accepted our text with one modification. He preferred to change reference to “advisors at the district level” to “advisors throughout the provinces” saying that the mention of the district suggested an undesirably deep US advisor penetration of the government structure. It was agreed that we would take the statement back to Saigon where we would be met by one of Khanh’s officers who would arrange for the immediate release. He understands the necessity to avoid public statements of ultimate end strengths and agrees to conform to our request for secrecy on this subject.

There was a short discussion of press leaks generated by the quick appearance in the press on July 23 of our joint conference arising from General Ky’s statement on penetrations of North Viet-Nam.3 Mr. Johnson told him that a Saigon US pressman had said that the leak was from the Vietnamese side. We agreed that, whoever the culprit, the incident is a reminder that there are unfriendly elements here and elsewhere anxious to drive a wedge between our two governments in general and between Khanh and Taylor in particular. We all agreed to be watchful in the future. Khanh made a note to investigate leak.

Khanh said press stories on alleged US correspondence with Peking through Ayub had been raised at Cabinet meeting. We replied that this is just type thing that hostile elements will use to create suspicion and distrust between us. Facts were exactly opposite from those in press stories. Facts were that we had asked certain countries having relations with Peking, particularly SEATO countries, to make clear to Peking (and where possible to Hanoi) that our commitment to SVN was firm, they should not make mistake of thinking we [would?] abandon SVN under any circumstances and it would be dangerous for Peking and Hanoi to make any assumption to contrary. Ayub had apparently made same representations to Peking and had a reply.4 This was far different from us entering into negotiations with Peking thru Pakistan. We had not and would not negotiate over SVN behind back GVN. It was essential Khanh be absolutely clear on this. We would expect the same from him. He expressed understanding and said we must appreciate Vietnamese sensitivities on this after their experience with French. He mentioned there were even rumors that because of Johnson’s previous background of negotiation with ChiComs, he had somehow been sent here to negotiate. Johnson replied that his previous experience of negotiating with ChiComs was just reason that he personally had no desire repeat experience.

We then invited Khanh to speak frankly about his views on US policy toward Vietnam-was he as unhappy about it as reported? He answered indirectly by explaining his views about the need for pressure on the North. He again spoke strongly about national warweariness and the need to bring hostilities to a prompt end. Once more it came out clearly that he is thinking about reprisal tit-for-tat bombing rather than a movement North with land forces or massive bombing to effect total destruction of Hanoi and all its works. He wants to do this reprisal bombing to encourage his people and to hasten Ho Chi Minh to conclude that the support of the VC should end. He recognizes that at some time he will need the cooperation of Ho Chi Minh to end the Viet Cong activities in the South.

This discussion opened the way for me to comment along the lines of Deptel 253. I observed that we have never had joint discussions up to now as to the forms of action that might be considered against the Laos Panhandle and NVN and the problems which might arise therefrom. The keen interest he is displaying in the subject suggests that it may be timely now to start a joint study or studies of possible initiatives which might be considered.

He did not jump at the proposal which plainly caught him unprepared but was pleased to receive it and asked to think it over for a few days. I stressed the need for any such planning to be kept within a very small group and he agreed at once. He mentioned himself, Khiem and Thieu (plus possibly a civilian) as the probable participants, at least at the outset. It was left that he would indicate to me when he wants to resume the discussion.

Among miscellaneous matters touched on were the following: a) Our intention to have a MACV J–2 background briefing to acquaint press with latest estimate of increased VC strength.

b) My intention to visit IV Corps on July 29.

c) The recent outbreak of indiscipline in the Special Forces camp at Nha Trang and need to change the commanding officer.

At the end, Khanh again raised question of reorganization of government a la de Gaulle-Pompidou. He had no answer as to who could be civilian Pompidou. We replied that organization was secondary to personalities and most of what he had in mind could be accomplished in present organizational structure by giving more responsibility to vice ministers. Question was his having ministers in whom he had confidence.

We also said changes that seemed to be far-reaching could have demoralizing effect domestically and disturbing effect abroad. He agreed but did not seem to abandon idea. From discussion it appeared some way of disposing of Minh may be principal motivating force as well as Khanh’s desire avoid present burden of detail and responsibility.

Khanh also said they would shortly be ready with a decree declaring a national “state of emergency”. This would give them greater power to deal with a number of problems such as press, travel, etc. We urged there be good explanation and rationale to foreign and domestic press at time of issuance to avoid charges of dictatorship, etc. He agreed and said would consult with us before taking action. During course of discussion he said he had given up project of declaring “state of war” (see Embtel 184)5 as he recognized could not have this without “declaring war against someone”.

When we went to leave, Khanh seemed to be in very good spirits saying that his morale had received a lift from our discussion.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash. Repeated to CINCPAC, the White House, and McNamara. McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of this cable to the President under cover of a memorandum, July 27, which reads as follows:

“We have just received this report of Max Taylor’s interview today with Khanh. Underneath is the outgoing which went to him after our Saturday meeting. The tickers are beginning to carry Khanh’s announcement of U.S. reinforcement, and for the moment Khanh’s positron seems somewhat strengthened. Nevertheless, the first paragraph of Taylor’s message shows that the underlying problem of Khanh’s mood persists.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File. Vol. XIV; regarding the Saturday meeting, see Document 246)

2 Document 245.

3 On July 23, Ky told news reporters that South Vietnamese planes had airdropped combat troops into North Vietnam for sabotage operations. (Telegram 172 from Saigon, July 22; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 The representations made by Mohammed Ayub Khan, President of Pakistan, to the People’s Republic of China in May concerned primarily the withdrawal of Pathet Lao troops from the Plain of Jars.

5 See footnote 2. Document 242.

250. Telegram From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State 250. Telegram From the Embassy in Laos to the Department of State1

Vientiane, July 27, 1964—5 p.m.

170. Deptel 89.2 Saigon for Ambassador Taylor. No other distribution whatsoever. Air attacks on Viet Cong supply lines in Laotian Panhandle, while helping morale South Vietnam and diverting government there from its proposals to strike North Vietnam, would have only marginal effect on problem of infiltration via Laos and would greatly complicate Laotian situation which already threatens get out of hand as result Soviet threat withdraw from co-chairman role.

When various cross-border actions proposed earlier, also including air strikes, I pointed out fundamental attitude of Souvanna, which generally shared by Lao, that use of corridor, even though involving Lao territory, not primarily their problem, and anyway they have their hands full trying to protect heart of their country for defense of which corridor not essential. Our creating new military as well as international political conflict over corridor will be regarded by them as another instance Laos being involuntarily involved in struggle among big powers on matter outside Laos’ own prime interests. There is also Souvanna’s view (no doubt nurtured by French) that GVN is fighting a hopeless war.

Souvanna Phouma and other Lao leaders want help in immediate present to assure they can continue in secure possession of present territory of free Laos. If any new military initiatives are contemplated with attendant risk of escalation they would wish above all that they be directed at retaking Plaine des Jarres. More immediately they want maximum effort be made to cut Route 7 and they also wish be assured of fullest support for Muong Soui if again actively threatened, to say nothing of protection of routes toward Mekong if Muong Soui falls.

Likely reaction to proposals for air attacks in corridor would be: Why complicate our problem and risk creating dangerous military threat in central and southern areas where it does not now exist; why does not US apply its power to source of problem and bomb Hanoi or move effectively in some other way against North Vietnam? North Vietnam is cause of trouble and ought to be target; moreover we are not bound by international agreements there as we are in Laos. Department will recall this line of thinking has been pressed by King and Souvanna Phouma and is undoubtedly view even more strongly held by right-wing leaders.

In this connection, wish point out with respect pare g reftel that there are virtually no uncommitted Lao resources to deal with whatever PL/VM reaction may be. Energies and staff capacity as well as troops and planes are tied down in Operation Triangle and literally only reserve in country is two DNC pare battalions which for political reasons unlikely leave Vientiane. Therefore “preparedness measures in Laos” would have to be taken by US.

Thus if we proceed with projected action Panhandle we must be prepared also to meet any responsible Lao request for help in defending what they regard as heart of their country. If we hesitate under such circumstances Souvanna’s occasional dissatisfaction with what he has regarded as foot dragging by us will be greatly accentuated and arguments on our part that certain actions should be avoided because of international complications or risks of escalation will not carry much weight. Nothing could illustrate point better than question napalm, which being proposed for use in corridor operation at same time I am obliged turn down request from Souvanna to use it in area he considers vital for defense his country.

In view foregoing I believe proposed action would probably bring to an end possibility our preserving even facade of government national union under Souvanna and Geneva Accords, keeping open possible road back to peaceful solution and avoiding resumption full-scale civil war. There certainly has been no sign from Pathet Lao, DRV or ChiComs of any change in their attitude to encourage us to believe they are ready to start living by Geneva Accords and end their interference in Laos. Nevertheless it has been our hope that our recent assumption of stiffer political posture and careful application of stronger military measures would at least bring nibbling to an end. However, as result initiatives in corridor we may find ourselves turned entirely away from guiding principles of last two years under which we have accepted uneasy equilibrium of de facto division of Laos as best we could get for present and better than resumption large-scale fighting. Following strikes in Panhandle we might even find ourselves being pressed hard into a major military effort aimed at pushing North Vietnamese out of Panhandle (when it becomes clear air attacks do not halt infiltration) and eventually entirely out of Laos and reestablishing authority of RLG throughout country.

I realize proposed action envisages employment primarily GVN personnel but from international point of view we must be prepared accept full responsibility. Action will also solidly link questions Laos and South Vietnam which at earlier date we appeared to be intent on keeping separate as possible, at least in context any international discussion.

From here it is difficult to see what all international repercussions of projected Panhandle action might be but I can foresee serious complications with British and Canadians, on whom we depend for cochairman and ICC help. They may well ask us to demonstrate that the installations to be hit have some important connection with infiltration problem and that strikes will appreciably improve situation South Vietnam. On other hand they will be most apprehensive about dangers of escalation as well as major complications in handling international aspects of problem as illustrated by Soviet note just received.

Souvanna’s acquiescence in proposed action [may?] not be enough. If we proceed he will undoubtedly be besieged by press and posture of PriMin of Laos can hardly be acquiescence in other countries’ taking action on his territory. If we are to make effort to bring him along, his position would have to be fortified in advance by buildup of public evidence of use of corridor and its aggravation of problem in SVN. Public indications that corridor problem really much less than represented (for example see July 26 Wireless File story by Robert Brunn, C S Monitor) must also be overcome. Against this background we might try sell Souvanna on line that action against corridor is fundamental to resolving what is basic cause of Laos’ present plight, namely war in South Vietnam. In other words, block corridor so that GVN can again resume full authority over its territory at which point DRV can make no further use of corridor. Unless Souvanna can be persuaded action in Panhandle really serves his cause more than it endangers it, his support will be very hard to secure. Even if support is squeezed out (perhaps only as result of right wing pressure), his remaining on the job becomes problematical.

Specific comments follow: (1) Delete Muong Phine from target list pare 2b because of probable presence there of C–46 survivors.

(2) Foregoing reservations do not apply to Mu Gia control point or other points inside North Vietnam.

(3) Attacks of opportunity on convoys (if related to recce flights) and responsive strikes to ground fire would be less objectionable than proposed action, and this would be even truer of T–28 strikes.

In summary, I believe it would be exceptionally difficult to persuade Souvanna Phouma to approve stepped up military actions in Panhandle without triggering virtually irresistible pressures for similar escalation in this part of Laos, involving increased commitments here of sort we have thus for shied away from. Perhaps we can successfully withstand these pressures, but more likely outcome, in my judgment, would be heightened political instability and a situation in which we might well lose Souvanna and the international recognition his government commands, ending up with albatross around our neck in form of rightist regime lacking in international support and able to survive internal and external pressures only with our outright military support.

Unger

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to Saigon. Passed to the White House, Department of Defense, and CIA on receipt in the Department of State. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 515–517.

2 Document 248.

251. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 251. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, July 27, 1964—6 p.m.

236. Ref: A) Deptel 89 to Vientiane rptd Saigon 261.2 B) Vientiane 170 to Dept rptd Saigon 106.3

1. We are grateful here for positive action under consideration to assist in building GVN morale and thereby divert local attention from proposals to strike NVN. While matter is still in discussion phase I would like to advance the following comments from point of view Saigon.

2. In the first place I do not feel any great urgency to get action started against Panhandle targets by early August. It is likely that Khanh will reopen shortly the question of joint contingency planning and upon becoming engaged therein will remain satisfied at least for a time. In the course of this joint planning, we would give consideration to an attack of Panhandle targets along lines proposed in ref (A) or as discussed in pare 3 below. If indeed we decide to execute such a plan, it is highly preferable from point of view Saigon that it should be a product of our joint planning activities.

3. Noting some of the cogent objections raised by Ambassador Unger, I would suggest considering as a variant to plan in ref (A) the attack on Panhandle targets as an outgrowth of US armed reconnaissance in Laos. In course of flying reconnaissance missions of Plaine des Jarres and of other locations of interest to Souvanna Phouma there would be ample opportunity and excuse to destroy targets such as those contained in ref (A) on basis they represent threats to our recce missions. Timing could be related as desired either to requirements of Laotian situation and/or to those of SVN.

4. In conclusion I recommend that no decision be taken on this matter at this time but that I be authorized to develop a joint plan for the attack of Panhandle targets following initiation of joint planning with Khanh. As matter of priority on the US side, we should now examine the proposed target list to see whether it is the most suitable for intended purpose and consider the relative advantages of concept of operations outlined in ref (A), of that suggested in pare 3 above, or of some other concept. Once the preferred one is determined it would be used in our planning with Khanh.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to Vientiane.

2 Document 248.

3 Document 250.

252. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense 252. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense1

Washington, July 27, 1964.

JCSM–639–64

SUBJECT

Actions Relevant to South Vietnam

1. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered, as requested, those military actions which will: a. Contribute militarily to the success of the counterinsurgency effort in the Republic of Vietnam (RVN);

b. Reduce the frustration and defeatism of the RVN leaders by undertaking punitive measures against the enemy outside the borders of the RVN;

c. Entail minimum risk of escalatory measures by the enemy; and d. Require minimum US participation in a combat role.

2. Of the many courses of actions examined, only three fall within the established parameters. These are air strikes against the infiltration routes through Laos into the RVN, cross-border ground operations against the infiltration effort, and selected air missions using non-US unmarked aircraft against prime military targets in the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV).

3. As to the first, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that air strikes, to include armed reconnaissance missions, against communist installations and traffic in the Panhandle of Laos would reduce, but not stop, the flow of support to the Viet Cong and would also signal sharply to Hanoi and Peking that they must pay a higher price to continue the subversion effort. While such strikes could be mounted with the Vietnamese Air Force alone, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are of the opinion that, to obtain a desirable level of effort and ensure effective US direction of this sensitive operation in both planning and execution, Farmgate should also be employed. For details see Appendix A hereto.2

4. As to the second, reconnaissance and punitive cross-border ground operations into Laos could locate, harass, and, in some cases, destroy communist installations and troop formations. Even moderate success would increase the already sizable problems of the communists in supplying men and material to the Viet Cong and, additionally, would signal Hanoi and Peking. For any worthwhile effort of this kind to be mounted, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that US advisors must accompany RVN units. For details see Appendix B hereto.

5. As to the third, over the past several months, a modest, covert, psychological and punitive campaign has been directed against the DRV. However, as yet no air strikes have been mounted. Air missions by unmarked aircraft to mine selected harbors and rivers and to strike prime military targets in DRV could punish the enemy and signal sharply Hanoi and Peking. Non-US air crews would perform these missions. For details see Appendix C hereto.

6. The actions set forth above are not likely to trigger a communist response escalating the conflict in Southeast Asia beyond present levels; therefore, the Joint Chiefs of Staff do not recommend moving US combat units into or contiguous to the RVN at this time. Moreover, the introduction of US combat forces which would sit idle could well have a psychological impact on both friends and enemies the reverse of that desired.

7. In summary, the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that implementation of the limited actions set forth above could prove militarily and psychologically beneficial to the war effort in the RVN, provided they do not siphon off needed resources and distract the attention of the RVN leaders from the counterinsurgency effort. In making this judgment, the Joint Chiefs of Staff advise that these actions would not significantly affect communist support of Viet Cong operations in South Vietnam and might have counterproductive results in Laos from a political point of view.

8. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that Ambassador Taylor and General Westmoreland be queried as to the feasibility and desirability of undertaking the foregoing measures.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret. Notes on the source text indicate that Vance and McNamara saw this memorandum. A copy in the Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 11, Tab 9, indicates that McGeorge Bundy saw it.

2 None of the appendices is printed.

253. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) to the President 253. Memorandum From the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) to the President1

Washington, July 28, 1964.

SUBJECT

Probable Communist Reactions to Certain US or US-Sponsored Courses of Action in Vietnam and Laos

PROPOSED COURSES OF ACTION2

Category 1. Air raids upon key supply centers along the Viet Cong supply and infiltration corridor in the Laos Panhandle, these raids to be conducted by the VNAF, possibly using napalm and possibly augmented by Farmgate.

Category 2. Ground force cross-border raids on the same targets by GVN units up to battalion in size and perhaps accompanied by US advisors.

Category 3. Limited air strikes against specific military and transportation targets in North Vietnam by unmarked planes flown exclusively by non-US aircrews.

1. In response to the first or second categories of action, local Communist military forces in the areas of actual attack would react vigorously, but we believe that none of the Communist powers involved would respond with major military moves designed to change the nature of the conflict. Rather than risk escalation, which must appear to them unnecessary and potentially disastrous to long-term achievement of their objectives, they would be more likely to rely on a continuing war of attrition and on intensive propaganda and political maneuvering aimed at isolating the US and building up pressure for an international conference to “neutralize” South Vietnam. In any event, the intensity of Communist response to Category 1 and 2 actions would depend to some extent upon the scale and manner in which such actions were executed.

2. Air strikes on North Vietnam itself (Category 3) would evoke sharper Communist reactions than air strikes confined to targets in Laos, but even in this case fear of escalation would probably restrain the Communists from a major military response. Though we think it unlikely, they might attempt isolated air raids on Saigon and other South Vietnamese cities hoping quickly to shatter South Vietnamese morale.

3. There are various local military or semi-military actions, short of major change in the character of the conflict, which should be considered among possible Communist responses: (a) Improvement of local air defenses (probably with additional AA equipment from North Vietnam and China), dispersal of supplies and troop concentrations, and movement discipline designed to hamper effective air attack. Such measures would be likely.

(b) Intensification of Viet Cong ambushes and attacks, accompanied perhaps by the more or less covert introduction into South Vietnam of some additional personnel from North Vietnam. This response also would be likely.

(c) Sabotage attacks on airfields in South Vietnam to damage their communications facilities, POL depots, etc., and if possible to cripple planes on the ground. We believe such attacks likely.

(d) A widespread campaign of terrorism against Americans, including civilians and dependents, in South Vietnam. We think the chances of such a campaign would be less than even.

(e) Communist forces now in Laos could attempt to seize one or more of the Mekong towns. We believe such an attempt would be unlikely.

(f) Fighter aircraft would be introduced into North Vietnam. We think this unlikely if US/GVN air strikes are confined to targets in Laos (Category 1). However, if attacks are initiated against North Vietnam itself (Category 3), chances of the Communists introducing some defensive air capability in North Vietnam would increase appreciably, mounting as the scope and intensity of the attacks increased.

4. The influence of the USSR on the Communist camp in the Indochina situation is limited, and it wants to avoid too direct involvement. Moscow would certainly want to show itself no less strong than the Chinese in opposition to the US-sponsored moves. It would almost certainly consider that an intense international campaign against the US could damage US interests considerably, to Soviet world-wide gain, and would not necessarily jeopardize Soviet détente tactics on issues of US-Soviet relations other than Vietnam. Accordingly, the Soviets would give Hanoi vigorous political and propaganda support, and would probably place themselves in the forefront of those calling for an international conference—and might accompany this by leading A move in the UN to condemn the US.

John A. McCone

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIV, CIA. Top Secret; Sensitive.

2 These descriptions of proposed courses of action are abbreviated summaries of the courses spelled out in the JCS Memorandum devoted to this subject. [Footnote in the source text. The JCS memorandum is Document 252.]

254. Memorandum From the Secretary of State 1s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State 254. Memorandum From the Secretary of State 1s Special Assistant for Vietnam (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, July 31, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

I thought you might like a paragraph or two on the status of our planning effort with the Vietnamese and possible actions outside South Vietnam.

As you remember, Ambassador Taylor told us on Monday that he was not in a great rush to initiate any of the proposed actions in the Laos Panhandle, but that he would wish to begin an orderly process of planning both for such actions and actions against the North with General Khanh and a small group of Khanh’s trusted colleagues.2

We have authorized him to commence such planning, but it is not expected to begin until next week. In the meantime, the Joint Chiefs have responded to the President’s request for actions which would involve the minimum of escalation with the maximum of political effect. In a memorandum (JCSM 639–64)3 the Chiefs have listed a number of possible air actions against infiltration targets in the Panhandle and in North Vietnam. They have also proposed armed reconnaissance across the Laos border in units up to battalion strength, accompanied by U.S. advisors. A copy of this memorandum has been sent to Ambassador Taylor for his personal use in preparing for the planning exercise.

The Chiefs’ memorandum represents, in my opinion, a very significant step forward, since it gives their tentative approval to the very limited kinds of actions which we may want to use in the event Hanoi steps things up, or in the event we need a low key military accompaniment to our diplomatic activities concerning Laos.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. The source text bears Rusk’s initials. A copy was sent to William Bundy.

2 See Document 251.

3 Document 252.

VIII. U.S. Reaction To Events in the Gulf of Tonkin, August 1–10VIII. U.S. Reaction To Events in the Gulf of Tonkin, August 1–10

255. Editorial Note

256. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 2, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto Patrols, August. Confidential; Flash. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 8:46 a.m.

257. Memorandum From the Duty Officer in the White House Situation Room to the President

Washington, August 2, 1964..

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Operation Pierce Arrow. No classification marking. Printed in part in Johnson, Vantage Point, p. 112. The President recalled that this memorandum was sent to him in his bedroom. Since his Daily Diary shows breakfast at 9 a.m., he must have received it before that time.

258. Editorial Note

259. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Washington, August 2, 1964—12:25 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Maddox Incident. Secret; Immediate. Repeated to MACV, Saigon, the White House, CIA, the Department of Defense, and the Department of State, among others.

260. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 2, 1964—1:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Confidential; Flash. Drafted by William McAfee (INR) and cleared with Green, Hughes, and the Department of Defense.

261. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of-Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Washington, August 2, 1964—6:49 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Maddox Incident. Secret; Flash. Repeated to Saigon, MACV, the White House, the Department of State, CIA, and the Department of Defense, among others.

262. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 3, 1964—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto Patrols, August. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to the White House, CIA, and the Department of Defense. Received at 12:15 a.m.

263. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 3, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret, Priority Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC, the White House, ICS, and the Secretary of Defense.

264. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Agency for International Development

Saigon, August 3, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 11:12 a.m.

265. Editorial Note

266. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Vietnam Coordinating Committee (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 3, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group files: Lot 72 D 219, Maddox Incident. Top Secret. The source text bears the handwritten notation: “Secretary Saw.”

267. Editorial Note

268. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Solbert) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, August 3, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret; Sensitive. Received in the Office of the Secretary of Defense at 4:49 p.m. The source text bears the stamp “Sec Def has seen.”

269. Editorial Note

270. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 3, 1964—7:48 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Limited Official Use; Flash. Drafted by Corcoran (S/VN); cleared with Green, Forrestal, Harriman, Trueheart, Blouin, McGeorge Bundy, Ball, and others; and initialed by Rusk. The text of the protest is printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 24, 1964, p. 258.

271. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 3, 1964—8:49 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Forrestal and initialed by Rusk.

272. Editorial Note

273. Editorial Note

274. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, August 4, 1964, 9:55 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Carolyn J. Proctor.

275. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, August 4, 1964, 11:10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Proctor.

276. Editorial Note

277. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand

Washington, August 4, 1964—6:03 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Secret; Flash; Nodis. Drafted by Trueheart, cleared with Ball, and initialed by William Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC.

278. Summary Notes of the 538th Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, August 4, 1964, 6:15–6:40 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 3, Tab 20. Top Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

279. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 4, 1964—6:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto Patrols, Aug. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared by William Bundy.

280. Notes of the Leadership Meeting, White House

Washington, August 4, 1964, 6:45 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, August 4, 1964. No classification marking. Drafted by Walter Jenkins of the President’s Staff. Attached to the source text were two notes dated August 24 and 25 concerning its drafting. One of these reads: “Put that on my desk—I’ll need it every day. LBJ:JRJ 8/27/67.” In addition to the participants, Senator Kuchel and Representatives Vinson and Morgan were present. A 3–1/2–page summary of the meeting is ibid.

281. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions

Washington, August 4, 1964—9:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Drafted by Green and Robert Creel (EUR) and initialed by William Tyler, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs. Sent to Bonn, Brussels, The Hague, Luxembourg, Paris (for the Embassy and USRO), and Rome and repeated to the other NATO capitals and Madrid. Similar messages were sent to 14 other capitals at 11:01 p.m. (Circular telegrams 222 and 223; ibid.) and at 11:02 individual messages were sent to New Delhi and Karachi. (Telegrams 266 and 136; ibid.) At 9:12 and 10:32, the U.S. representatives to NATO and SEATO were instructed to call sessions of their organizations to report on the U.S. position (Topol 198 and telegram 175 to Bangkok; ibid.)

282. Message From President Johnson to Prime Minister Macmillan

Washington, August 4, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pierce Arrow. Transmitted to the Embassy in London in telegram 861, August 4, 9:41 p.m. with the explanation that the message had been sent to the Prime Minister by a separate channel. Telegram 861 is the source text.

283. Message From President Johnson to Prime Minister Khanh

Washington, August 4, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Transmitted to the Embassy in Saigon in telegram 342, 9:47 p.m., for delivery to Khanh with President Johnson’s statement (see Document 286). Telegram 342 is the source text.

284. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Honolulu, August 4, 1964—9:53 a.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11885. Secret; Priority. According to another copy, this telegram was repeated by the JCS to the White House, CIA, NSA, and the Department of State at 8:47 p.m. and was received in the Department of State at 10:26 p.m. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

285. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Representative at the United Nations (Stevenson) in

New York, August 4, 1964, 10:40 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Proctor.

286. Editorial Note

287. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 5, 1964—noon.

Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Received at 11:58 p.m., August 4. Drafted by Taylor. Also sent to the Department of Defense and repeated to CINCPAC, CIA, and the White House.

288. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations

Washington, August 5, 1964—1:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Cleveland.

289. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 5, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret Immediate; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Also sent to the Department of Defense and repeated to CINCPAC, CIA, and the White House. Received at 6:09 a.m.

290. Memorandum for the Record of the White House Staff Meeting

Washington, August 5, 1964, 8 a.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–202–69. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by William Y. Smith.

291. Record of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting

Washington, August 5, 1965, 9:15 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147. Secret. Drafted by Richard T. Davies, Deputy Executive Secretary.

292. Editorial Note

293. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, August 5, 1964, 2:22 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by June M. Robinson of the Operations Staff.

294. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 5, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S/UN. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Cleveland and sent to Rusk through S/S.

295. Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Johnson

Moscow, August 5, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification marking. The Russian text of the signed original, which was handed to Ambassador Kohler at 9 p.m. on August 5 is ibid. Presumably this translation was made in the Embassy in Moscow.

296. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, August 5, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam. Secret. Initialed by Rostow and sent to Rusk through S/S. The source text bears the handwritten notation “Secretary Saw.” Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 92C.

297. Editorial Note

298. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House

Washington, August 6, 1964.

Source: Department of State, President’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Confidential. Drafted by Cleveland and approved in the White House on August 17. U Thant held a similar conversation with Rusk at 1:15 p.m. during a working luncheon at the Department of State. (Ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)

299. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)

Washington, August 6, 1964, 1:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Proctor.

300. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 7, 1964—noon.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Also sent to the Department of Defense and the White House. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Sullivan and signed for Taylor by Johnson. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

301. Editorial Note

302. Letter From President Johnson to Chairman Khrushchev

Washington, August 7, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification marking. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 315B.

303. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Saigon, August 8, 1964—3:15 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11888. Top Secret. Repeated to the Embassy in Saigon and to the JCS.

304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Canada

Washington, August 8, 1964—4:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared in draft with McNamara, Ball, and McGeorge Bundy. Also sent to Saigon. The message and a McNaughton draft of it, dated August 7, are printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 519–522.

305. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 9, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 522–524.

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 10, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Received at 10:07 a.m. and passed to the White House, the Department of Defense, and CIA later that day. A summary of the telegram is printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 530–533.

307. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, Cabinet Room, White House

Washington, August 10, 1964, 12:35 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on Southeast Asia, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy.

308. Editorial Note

255. Editorial Note 255. Editorial Note

At 3:40 a.m. EDT (3:40 p.m. Saigon time), August 2, the destroyer Maddox, on patrol in the Gulf of Tonkin, reported that it was “being approached by high speed craft with apparent intention of torpedo attack. Intend open fire in necessary self defense.” (Message 020740Z to Commander Seventh Fleet; Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto Patrols, August) Twenty-seven minutes later, the Maddox reported that it was being attacked by three North Vietnamese patrol craft and had opened fire. (Message 020807Z to Commander Seventh Fleet; ibid.) In the ensuing engagement, the Maddox and aircraft from the U.S.S. Ticonderoga damaged two of the patrol craft which retreated to the North, and left one dead in the water. Reports on the incident reached Washington shortly after 4 a.m.

256. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 256. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 2, 1964—9 p.m.

281. CINCPAC for POLAD. Ref Maddox incident, most important that we be authorized to give facts to GVN before Hanoi breaks story and falsified version is disseminated. Request official version to be used and, when determined, what action USG expects to take. Please indicate how much of this latter information can be passed to GVN.

As you are aware, operational radio traffic relating to this incident was in clear.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto Patrols, August. Confidential; Flash. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 8:46 a.m.

257. Memorandum From the Duty Officer in the White House Situation Room to the President 257. Memorandum From the Duty Officer in the White House Situation Room to the President1

Washington, August 2, 1964..

Mr. President: 1. Early this morning the USS Maddox was attacked by three DRV PT boats while on patrol approximately 30 miles off the North Vietnamese coast in the Gulf of Tonkin.

2. The Captain of the Maddox returned the fire with 5-inch guns and requested air support from the carrier Ticonderoga on station nearby in connection with reconnaissance flights in that area.

3. Ticonderoga jets arrived shortly and made strafing attacks on the PT boats resulting in one enemy boat dead in the water, two others damaged and turned tail for home.

4. The Maddox reports no personnel or material damages.

5. Messrs. Rusk and McNamara have been informed of the incident and present plans are to release a press statement later today either from Washington or Saigon.2

6. Additional details on the Maddox encounter will be available later today.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Operation Pierce Arrow. No classification marking. Printed in part in Johnson, Vantage Point, p. 112. The President recalled that this memorandum was sent to him in his bedroom. Since his Daily Diary shows breakfast at 9 a.m., he must have received it before that time.

2 For text of the statement, released at 10:15 a.m., see Goulden, Truth, p. 23.

258. Editorial Note 258. Editorial Note

At 11:30 a.m. on August 2, the President met at the White House with Secretary Rusk, Under Secretary Ball, Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance, General Wheeler, and intelligence experts to discuss the Tonkin Gulf incident. Johnson Library, Johnson Daily Diary) The meeting lasted approximately 45 minutes and the President wrote that they studied the latest reports and considered a U.S. response. After concluding that a local North Vietnamese shore commander or a shore station had taken the initiative, the participants decided not to retaliate. They did, however, agree to dispatch a protest note to North Vietnam and to order a continuation of the patrol. (Johnson, Vantage Point, page 113) No other record of this meeting has been found. The meeting is described as taking place “c. 10:30” in Rusk’s appointment book.

259. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 259. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Washington, August 2, 1964—12:25 p.m.

7680. This is a DeSoto Patrol message. Reference: A. CINCPACFLT DTG 021104Z (NOTAL). B. ADMINO CINCPAC DTG 021255Z (NOTAL).2

1. You are authorized to continue the DeSoto patrol in the Gulf of Tonkin area in conformance with routes and times specified in reference A, subject to the following: a. Closest approach to the NVN mainland coastline will be 11 miles, repeat 11 miles.

b. Air patrol CAP will be provided during daylight hours, however, CAP will be maintained to the seaward of the two destroyers so as to preclude any possibility of overflight of NVN.

c. Be extremely watchful for any possible action including possible submarine activity either against the DeSoto patrol or the Ticonderoga task force.

d. Avoid close approaches to NVN coast during period when maritime activities related to OPLAN 34A are underway.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Maddox Incident. Secret; Immediate. Repeated to MACV, Saigon, the White House, CIA, the Department of Defense, and the Department of State, among others.

2 Reference A stated that it was in the best interest of the United States to assert the freedom of the seas and resume Gulf of Tonkin patrols at the earliest. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto Patrols, August; printed in Goulden, Truth, p. 137) Reference B concurred in these proposals. (Washington National Records Center. RG 219, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11885)

260. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 260. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 2, 1964—1:41 p.m.

328. Embtel 281.2 Maddox was engaged in fleet patrol similar to patrols conducted routine basis various parts of world. Ships engaged such activities operate in international waters. For instance ship engaged in patrol along coast Communist China normally remains 15 NM from coast in view Chicom claim 12 mile limit. Observing claimed limits does not indicate recognition of claim. Firing by DRV patrol craft took place in international waters over 20 NM from coast of North Vietnam. Similar destroyer patrol was conducted February–March in Gulf of Tonkin by destroyer Craig. All of foregoing may be passed to GVN.

FYI. Maddox was on DeSoto Patrol and had been authorized approach 8 NM coast of North Vietnam or 4 NM to certain North Vietnamese islands. Destroyer Craig in Feb-March was authorized approach to 4 NM coast of N VN. Maddox will resume patrol observing an 11 mile limit. In case DRV Department has no record of specific distance claimed by them so approach closer than 12 NM authorized. Just prior to incident Maddox may have approached to about 11 NM of coast. Assume you have seen press release issued Honolulu this morning.3 End FYI.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Confidential; Flash. Drafted by William McAfee (INR) and cleared with Green, Hughes, and the Department of Defense.

2 Document 256.

3 See footnote 2. Document 257.

261. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of-Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 261. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of-Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Washington, August 2, 1964—6:49 p.m.

7681. This is a DeSoto Patrol Message. Reference: JCS 7680 DTG 021725Z Aug 642 In event US vessels are attacked in international waters (11 miles offshore or more), you will seek to destroy the attacking forces, however, pursuit into hostile waters or air space is not authorized.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Maddox Incident. Secret; Flash. Repeated to Saigon, MACV, the White House, the Department of State, CIA, and the Department of Defense, among others.

2 Document 259.

262. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 262. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 3, 1964—11 a.m.

282. Deptel 328 and Embtel 281.2 Deptel does not address itself to primary question raised Embtel namely what will be U.S. Govt reaction to this attack? Dept [Emb] will appreciate that info. Unprovoked attack against U.S. destroyer in international waters by three illegal North Vietnamese torpedo boats will be received dramatically in current atmosphere Saigon. It is not adequate to local minds (nor indeed to ours) to state that attack was repelled and that patrol will continue.

This reaction, if it constitutes totality of U.S. Govt intentions, will make it appear that we are prepared to accept regular Swatow harassment in international waters as normal concomitant our normal naval patrolling activities. Such an attitude would immediately be construed in Saigon as indication that U.S. flinches from direct confrontation with North Vietnamese, especially since we apparently did not press home total destruction those vessels which attacked Maddox.

To meet this situation, recommend prompt consideration of following actions: a. Announce that Swatows will henceforth be attacked whenever found in international waters and maintain air and/or naval forces in readiness to do so.

b. Direct regular air surveillance of Swatows overflying DRV air space as required.

c. Mine approaches to Swatow harbors.

d. Create a torpedo capability in GVN Navy for use against appropriate targets, such as Haiphong dredges.

These are quick thoughts without opportunity for consultation with experts. However, we are impressed with need for prompt reaction and timely private communication of intentions to GVN.

Request urgent consideration these matters and advice soonest re statements which we may make privately to GVN.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto Patrols, August. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to the White House, CIA, and the Department of Defense. Received at 12:15 a.m.

2 Documents 260 and 256, respectively.

263. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 263. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 3, 1964—5 p.m.

286. As a part of his swing through four provinces July 31–August 1, Khanh asked me to accompany him on the latter day. In the morning we visited Binh Tuy, a relatively small province of about 60,000 situated on the coast—east of Saigon. There is essentially no pacification problem there but the province illustrates the needs of an economically backward area after elimination of VC.

Khanh received a thorough briefing on the local situation from an intelligent-looking province chief, then visited a nearby fishing village which turned out in force to greet us. Khanh addressed the villagers with apparently good effect, then made a token presentation of gifts to a few chosen elders, taken from a large pile of gift packages laid out in the square, consisting in the main of frying gear, pots and pans.

Khanh and his party then helicoptered from Binh Tuy to Cap St. Jacques where they gave a barbecue for the foreign press at the end of the day. I joined him an hour in advance of the reception to talk business. First, I reported to him matter contained in Embtel 240.2 He took the news calmly and said that if allegation against Hoach were true he would be “eliminated.”

In course of subsequent conversation Khanh asked me (for at least the third time since my arrival) whether US was solidly behind him. I assured him such was the case and intimated some surprise at need for repeating assurance. His reply indicted that he is considering some move against Minh and wanted to determine how USG would react. I took this opportunity to follow guidance contained in Deptel 245,3 saying that we Americans had been happy to see Minh brought into government and had hoped that his presence would contribute to creating the national unity so badly needed. It was not Minh the individual who attracted us but Minh the popular symbol with possible utility in the unstable political situation. If, as Khanh insisted, Minh was not a help but a hindrance to unity, we had no further interest in him. However, I asked Khanh whether in fact he had ever asked Minh to do specific things which the latter had declined to do.

Khanh said indeed he had. He cited failure to respond to invitation to Cabinet meetings. Also, as Head of State Minh has certain duties which go back to time of Bao Dai and include signing of State papers. In this Minh had been tardy particularly in the recent submission of papers to UN bearing on designation of official GVN spokesman. Khanh is plainly fed up and may be expected to take some action against Minh shortly.

I asked Khanh whether he had given further thought to the joint planning exercise discussed in Embtel 219.4 He said he had but then indicated that he had more in mind the declaration of a “state of urgency” (condition d’urgence) than military planning related to NVN. When I mentioned latter he replied that we could talk about it later in Saigon but showed no interest in pursuing subject. In course of entire day, he did not mention “march North” issue or any related matter.

Press reception and barbecue were well attended by foreign correspondents. Purpose was purely social-Khanh made no statement to press.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret, Priority Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC, the White House, ICS, and the Secretary of Defense.

2 Telegram 240, July 28, reported that Minister of State Le Van Hoach had on his own authority been in touch with the Viet Cong concerning a cease-fire. Taylor speculated on the reasons for such an approach and included the possibility that Khanh might be behind it. (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

3 Document 244.

4 Dated July 26, telegram 219 from Saigon requested the best available portfolio of political/military planning papers for a joint contingency planning exercise with the Vietnamese. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US–VIET S)

264. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Agency for International Development 264. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Agency for International Development1

Saigon, August 3, 1964—6 p.m.

Toaid 555. Joint Emb/USOM message. Ref: Deptel 254.2

1. We have under intensive examination the questions cited in reftel. Action is anticipated in certain functional areas soonest with others subject to initial review and/or planning.

2. We believe urban areas should share with rural communities in allocation of efforts to bolster confidence in GVN and its program. To that end Saigon-Cholon becomes critical target with its large share of nation’s population and total economic activity. At same time current unemployment represents fertile area for VC agitation and action.

3. USOM is therefore initiating action looking towards formulation of comprehensive development program for Saigon-Cholon which could be carried out on time-phased basis over period of years. Initial effort would probably involve slum clearance and extensive housing program. Target date of August 20 set for development of ideas as to how program could be carried forward.

4. USOM also plans move ahead immediately on work necessary to put fifteen hospital suites in operating condition soonest. OICC will supervise project with MOH doing work. Project financing being worked out simultaneously. Concurrent action by GVN in reorganizing MOH and establishing budget required. Close coordination now exists between USOM, Public Health and MOH in all aspects of project. Hope actual work on suites plus water and power supply can be undertaken within 30–45 days, with first suite ready to accommodate next arriving surgical team late fall. Every effort will be made to accomplish this task at earlier time if possible.

5. Re sites for concentrated effort in Kral area or areas, USOM now determining most feasible location for such activity. Findings will be reviewed for strategic or other considerations. When this completed will develop plans with GVN for implementation. Expect plans crystallized in 30–45 days.

6. Greater exercise of selectivity in determining locale of effort to distinguish between GVN-controlled and other areas foremost in our thinking. This makes urban effort doubly attractive. At same time, well drilling and other more far-flung activities being reviewed to examine possibility and feasibility of concentration along lines you outline.

7. We share feeling that formulation and scrupulous conduct of politically attractive and economically feasible land policy has great value to overall effort. This problem being studied and discussions with GVN will be undertaken soon.

8. Ever-present problem in all above matters is need to bring GVN along with our thinking. GVN must in all cases be implementing body with assistance from us. To this problem, major US effort being directed.

9. Outside framework of above matters, we are also considering some one-shot operations involving supply problems that would underscore in appealing way US support for Vietnamese people and their problems. More on this later if preliminary review indicates favorable prospects such action.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, AID (US) VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limit Distribution. Received at 11:12 a.m.

2 Document 246.

265. Editorial Note 265. Editorial Note

On August 3 at 11:30 a.m., President Johnson called an impromptu press conference at the White House and read the following statement:

“I have instructed the Navy: “1. to continue the patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin off the coast of North Viet-Nam,

“2. to double the force by adding an additional destroyer to the one already on patrol

“3. to provide a combat air patrol over the destroyers, and

“4. to issue orders to the commanders of the combat aircraft and the two destroyers, (a) to attack any force which attacks them in international waters, and (b) to attack with the objective not only of driving off the force but of destroying it.” (Department of State Bulletin, August 24, 1964, page 259)

266. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Vietnam Coordinating Committee (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State 266. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Vietnam Coordinating Committee (Forrestal) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, August 3, 1964.

SUBJECT

Possible Actions Following Maddox Incident

We met this morning with Pete Solbert (McNaughton is away on vacation) and his civilian and military staff people.2 The following information may be of use to you in connection with any meeting the President may have this afternoon.

I. Present Rules of Marine Reconnaissance

At the present moment destroyer patrols are authorized to close within 15 miles of the Chicom coastline, 11 miles of the DRV coastline, and 4 miles from DRV offshore islands. We have only made four destroyer patrols since December 1962, and the distances off the coast have varied depending upon the purpose of the reconnaissance, i.e. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified], Junk Surveillance, etc. Another patrol is scheduled for the period August 3–7.

You probably know that the action against the Maddox took place within the same 60-hour period as an OPLAN 34A harassing action by SVN forces against two islands off the DRV coast, Hon Me and Hon Nieu. It seems likely that the North Vietnamese and perhaps the Chicoms have assumed that the destroyer was part of this operation, although it was attacked some 30 miles away from the nearest island. It is also possible that Hanoi deliberately ordered the attack in retaliation for the harassment of the islands. This suggests to me that we should in the future assure coordination between OPLAN 34A activities, which are controlled in the Pentagon by SACSA, and the destroyer patrols, which are controlled by J–3. Other OPLAN 34A actions are scheduled for August 3–5.

II. Rules of Engagement

At the moment, rules of engagement for both marine and air units are to respond to any attack and pursue the attacking forces with the objective of destroying them up to a point 11 miles from the DRV coastline. Our units are permitted to fire beyond this point and in the case of destroyers, this means they could reach the shoreline with their guns.

III. Additional Thoughts

The 11-mile limitation referred to above reflects the fact that NVN probably claims that her territorial waters extend 12 miles off her coast. We do not admit this claim, and the theory is to show this by penetrating it to the extent of one mile. I agree that there is some logic to this position as far as regular patrols are concerned; but I wonder if we should not authorize our people to engage in hot pursuit of NVN attacking forces, both on the sea and in the air, to a distance of three miles from the DRV coast. Another question which has not been thoroughly discussed is what happens if in the course of hot pursuit of an attacking enemy ship or aircraft, our forces are fired upon by landbased aircraft or coastal artillery. Do we engage in suppressive or retaliatory activity against the DRV mainland? I believe that we probably should, but we do not have to make this decision now.

I raised the question this morning whether any sort of aerial reconnaissance over the DRV would have any military value in connection with the protection of our coastal patrols. The answer appears to be “no”, because the risk of a shootdown is considerably greater than the reconnaissance results we could expect to achieve. But this is a point you might wish to raise.

I think we might at least wish to discuss other actions against the DRV associated with their patrol boat activity. I have in mind the aerial mining of the harbor or harbors from which these boats emerge. I understand that this probably could be done effectively by the VNAF, who have been trained in this technique. Another possibility, of course, is an unidentified airstrike against one or more of these harbors. A recent JCS paper includes several such harbors as a possible VNAF target.3

Finally, you have our draft cable to Saigon asking Ambassador Taylor to hand our protest to the ICC for transmission to Hanoi.4 The issue here is whether to use the ICC for this purpose, since to do so might only stimulate Hanoi to react by demanding an investigation of our destroyer activities in the Gulf of Tonkin.

We have considered going through the British, Canadians, Indians or French-all of whom have representation of some sort in Hanoi. We have concluded in the interests of speed that the ICC is the best means for the formal transmission of our protest. We are not asking the ICC to investigate, merely to transmit.

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group files: Lot 72 D 219, Maddox Incident. Top Secret. The source text bears the handwritten notation: “Secretary Saw.”

2 No record of this meeting has been found.

3 Presumably the 91 Target List submitted to the Secretary of Defense as an appendix to JCSM–460–64, May 30. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files)

4 A copy of this draft, which is substantially the same as Document 270, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Maddox Incident.

267. Editorial Note 267. Editorial Note

On August 3, Secretary McNamara called Secretary Rusk at 11:05 a.m. to say that the President thought it would be wise for them to brief Congressional leaders concerning the Maddox incident. McNamara had already made arrangements for the Secretaries to brief the Senate Armed Services and Foreign Relations Committees at 3 p.m. and the Speaker of the House and selected Congressmen at 4. (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations) No records of the briefings have been found.

268. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Solbert) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 268. Memorandum From the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs (Solbert) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, August 3, 1964.

SUBJECT

Meeting this Afternoon at the White House concerning aftermath of Maddox Incident

1. Proposed Meeting. I understand from Mike Forrestal that a meeting this afternoon at the White House may involve review of Ambassador Taylor’s cables on the Maddox incident (Tab A),2 including our present ship [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] reconnaissance instructions, rules of engagement and possible additional actions in response to the Maddox engagement.

2. President’s News Release. Attached (Tab B)3 is a news ticker on the President’s statement made this morning.

3. Present Rules for [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] Reconnaissance. We understand that these rules vary for each mission. The Maddox was operating under the limitations that it not go nearer than 15 nautical miles to ChiCom territory (not near islands), 8 miles from DRV mainland and 4 miles from DRV offshore islands. Present orders (issued yesterday—Tab C)4 require the Maddox on the balance of its mission to keep 20 miles from the ChiCom mainland, 11 miles from DRV mainland and 4 miles from DRV offshore islands. A question may be raised as to the frequency with which these [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] missions should be run in the future: chart of mission at Tab D.5

4. Rules of Engagement. The current rules of engagement provide that ships on patrol will fire back if attacked and will destroy the attacking craft. In attempting to destroy an attacking craft, our ships may not go closer than 11 miles from the DRV mainland. It may be desirable to reduce this limit, though the 5” guns of most destroyers can reach up to and perhaps beyond the coastline from the 11-mile limit (Com7Flt orders permit firing “over-the-line”). Our aircraft should not go much beyond this limit if they are to avoid DRV overflights.

5. Further Actions. The meeting may also consider other actions in response to the Maddox incident. Some suggestions are (a) aerial mining of DRV naval bases or harbors (now under JCS review for 34A); and (b) other 34A missions directed against these bases (probably not feasible with current 34A craft). Ambassador Taylor has also suggested aerial surveillance of Swatows, including DRV overflights as required, destruction of Swatows on the high seas, and creation of GVN torpedo capability. Surveillance flights over the DRV, over and above present flights, would not appear to produce substantial military information and involve risk of escalation, as does the destruction of Swatows at sea. The creation of GVN torpedo carrying capability is being investigated but appears slight.

Peter Solbert

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret; Sensitive. Received in the Office of the Secretary of Defense at 4:49 p.m. The source text bears the stamp “Sec Def has seen.”

2 Tab A contained copies of Documents 256, 260, and 262.

3 Tab B consisted of the text of the statement in Document 265.

4 Tab C contained copies of Documents 259 and 261 and a copy of message 030553Z from the Commander of the Seventh Fleet to the Ticonderoga stating that, if another attack took place, it was mandatory to make a maximum effort to achieve the complete destruction of the attacking units.

5 Not printed.

269. Editorial Note 269. Editorial Note

At 6:35 p.m. on August 3, the President met in the Cabinet Room of the White House with Rusk, McNamara, Wheeler, and McGeorge Bundy to discuss Vietnam. (Johnson Library, Johnson Daily Diary) No record of the meeting, which lasted until 7:15 p.m., has been found. A telephone conversation between Bundy and Rusk at 2:45 p.m.. however, previewed the meeting: “B called to see if Sec had message re the 6:15. Sec did. Sec said he presumed it was on the Gulf of Tonkin and B said yes. B supposed we would review the rules of engagement. B said we need a draft reply to Max; since we were not asking any staff, could Sec bring whatever he wanted himself. B said he thought this would all pass over. Sec said Khanh is kicking up, saying we should retaliate.” (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

The meeting was delayed until 6:35 p.m. because of a reception for American foreign language newspaper editors.

270. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 270. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 3, 1964—7:48 p.m.

335. Please hand the following to the ICC with the request that this protest be passed to the Hanoi regime: “The United States Government takes an extremely serious view of the unprovoked attack made by Communist North Vietnamese torpedo boats on an American naval vessel, the USS Maddox, operating on the high seas in the Gulf of Tonkin on August 2.

United States ships have traditionally operated freely on the high seas, in accordance with the rights guaranteed by international law to vessels of all nations. They will continue to do so and will take whatever measures are appropriate for their defense.

The United States Government expects that the authorities of the regime in North Viet-Nam will be under no misapprehension as to the grave consequences which would inevitably result from any further unprovoked offensive military action against United States forces.”

Text will be released in Washington at noon press briefing August 4.2

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Limited Official Use; Flash. Drafted by Corcoran (S/VN); cleared with Green, Forrestal, Harriman, Trueheart, Blouin, McGeorge Bundy, Ball, and others; and initialed by Rusk. The text of the protest is printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 24, 1964, p. 258.

2 Department spokesman Robert McCloskey read the statement to news correspondents on August 4.

271. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 271. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 3, 1964—8:49 p.m.

336. From the Secretary to the Ambassador. Ref Embtel 282.2 We have been very sensitive here to the considerations you raise reftel. We would hope that part of the problem has been met by President’s public statement today,3 which you have already received. We have asked JCS to insure that you receive copies of the implementing orders to the appropriate commanders through military channels.

Suggestions made in b, c and d reftel are currently being considered in context OPLAN 34A. Significant additions have been made to list of targets for marine operations and these will be transmitted to you shortly.

We believe that present OPLAN 34A activities are beginning to rattle Hanoi, and Maddox incident is directly related to their effort to resist these activities. We have no intention yielding to pressure.

In your discretion you may pass these thoughts along to Gen. Khanh. You may also reiterate to him, but only if you believe it appropriate, our concern that actions against the North be limited for the present to the OPLAN 34A type. We do not believe that SVN is yet in a position to mount larger actions so long as the security situation in the near vicinity of Saigon remains precarious. We are impressed with the fact that a battalion-sized attack could have occurred within 4 miles of Saigon without any advance warning.

We would welcome your further comments on Saigon reaction to today’s announcement, as well as your continuing assessment of the political temperature there.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Forrestal and initialed by Rusk.

2 Document 262.

3 See Document 265.

272. Editorial Note 272. Editorial Note

At 7:40 a.m. EDT (7:40 p.m., Saigon time), August 4, the destroyer Maddox, on patrol in the Gulf of Tonkin, reported that an attack from unidentified vessels appeared imminent. The National Military Communications Center in the Department of Defense received the report at 9:30 a.m. in message 041240Z. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto Patrols August) The following entries are taken from a Top Secret chronology of the events of August 4–5 prepared on August 28 and submitted by McGeorge Bundy to President Johnson on September 4: “8:13 AM: First word of a possible attack on the Maddox is received at the Pentagon by the DIA Indications Center over the phone [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]. While on the phone, a copy of the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] field unit message arrives and copies are delivered sometime about 9:00 a.m. to the Secretary of Defense McNamara, and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Wheeler. The message states that there are ‘imminent plans of DRV naval action possibly against DeSoto mission’ gathered from [less than 1 line of source text not declassified].

“8:36 AM (8:36 PM, August 4, Saigon time): The Maddox establishes its first radar contacts with two unidentified surface vessels and three unidentified aircraft. U.S. fighter aircraft are then launched from the USS Ticonderoga to provide the Maddox and the Turner Joy with protection against possible attacks from the unidentified vessels and aircraft, in accordance with the President’s previously issued directives. At this time, the Ticonderoga is located approximately 100 nautical miles East North East of Da Nang. (NMCC receives this report at about 10:30 AM.)

“9:08 AM (9:08 PM, August 4, Saigon time): The Maddox reports that the unidentified aircraft have disappeared from its radar screen but that the surface vessels are still remaining at a distance. U.S. aircraft from the Ticonderoga arrive and commence defensive patrol over the Maddox and the C. Turner Joy. (NMCC receives this report at 11:04 AM.)

“9:12 AM: McNamara calls the President and tells him about the [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]/DIA intelligence warning he has just received that the Maddox is on the alert again, with the presence of hostile ships reported.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Gulf of Tonkin Misc. 1964)

The message received in the National Military Communications Center at 10:30 a.m. is 041336Z. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) The message received at 11:04 a.m. is 041408Z. (Ibid., Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 719, DeSoto Patrols August) The 9:12 a.m. telephone call from McNamara to the President is described in Johnson, Vantage Point, page 114.

273. Editorial Note 273. Editorial Note

At 9:25 a.m., August 4, Secretary of Defense McNamara, Deputy Secretary of Defense Vance, and Lieutenant General David A. Burchinal, Director of the Joint Staff of the JCS, met at the Pentagon. The following account of the meeting is taken from the August 28 Top Secret chronology of the events of August 4–5 submitted to the President by McGeorge Bundy on September 4: “McNamara, Deputy Secretary Vance, General Burchinal, Colonel Jones, and Admiral Mustin of the Joint Staff meet at the Pentagon beginning at 9:25 AM as reports of the attack on the destroyers come in. As the situation grows more intense, possible levels and time of retaliation are discussed, and target folders are examined. High on the list are the PT boats and bases and supporting POL installations, but other targets such as airfields, industrial complexes and bridges are also scrutinized. Captain Miller of the Navy, a mine expert, is also asked to join the meeting and the possibility of mining one or more of the North Vietnamese important Ports is discussed. Here it is pointed out that the mines would have to be brought to the carriers from Subic Bay, the Philippines. McNamara orders that mines be brought to the carriers as soon as possible. Burchinal informs McNamara that a retaliatory attack can take place at first light. McNamara, during this time, calls the President, informs him that a retaliatory attack is being planned, and tells the President that he will call Secretary Rusk and Presidential Assistant Bundy to join him in preparing a number of options to be presented to the President as soon as possible.*

“During these discussions, McNamara develops four options for a sharp limited blow and one option for continuous pressure against the North Vietnamese. The four options for the sharp limited blow are: “1. Air strikes against PT boats and their bases.

“2. Air strikes against petroleum installations.

“3. Air strikes on bridges.

“4. Air strikes on prestige targets, such as a steel plant.

“The option for continuing pressure against the North Vietnamese is to mine important ports along their coastline.

“McNamara, about 11:00 AM, summons Rusk, Bundy, and the JCS and they arrive shortly thereafter.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Gulf of Tonkin Misc. 1964)

The asterisk footnote reads: “McNamara made three calls to the President during this period at 9:43, 10:53, and 11:06 AM.” For an account of the 9:43 a.m. call, see U.S. Senate, Committee on Foreign Relations, The U.S. Government and the Vietnam War, Executive and Legislative Roles and Relationships, Part 11, 1961–1964 (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1974), page 289. Regarding the 11 a.m. call, see Document 275.

274. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 274. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, August 4, 1964, 9:55 a.m.

TELEPHONE CALL TO SECRETARY McNAMARA

Sec wanted to be sure there would be as much force as needed. M said Wheeler had called the commandant of CINCPAC and they will put the whole 7th Fleet out there if necessary. M said the President agreed with out position; he was very much concerned about what additional retaliatory steps we should take. Sec said one thing is to go after the boats. M said he would be inclined to do more than that, pick out a target of our own and go after that. M said he would have something for discussion at lunch.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Carolyn J. Proctor.

275. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 275. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, August 4, 1964, 11:10 a.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM SECRETARY McNAMARA

M said there was a cable [at] 9:362 our time reporting 3 unidentified boats and 3 unidentified aircraft approaching the destroyers; they had just had a phone call from Sharp that the destroyer reported under torpedo attack. M had told the President we were working out retaliatory measures. M asked if Sec could come over as they had all the charts etc. Sec said he would be there in about 10 minutes.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Proctor.

2 Presumably message 041336Z. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) See Document 272.

276. Editorial Note 276. Editorial Note

At 11:40 a.m., Secretary of Defense McNamara, Secretary of State Rusk, McGeorge Bundy, Acting Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs Marshall Green (William Bundy was on vacation in Massachusetts, where Rusk called him to return to Washington), and the Joint Chiefs of Staff met at the Pentagon. The following entries are taken from the August 28 chronology: “11 :40 AM: Bundy arrives at JCS meeting. McNamara briefs Bundy. McNamara describes the five options listed on page 5 above. McNamara informs the group that he has issued orders to have mines moved from Subic Bay into Da Nang. There is a discussion of retaliatory measures. McNamara and Bundy discuss the advantages and disadvantages of a sharp limited blow such as air strikes and/or the continuing pressure of mining the North Vietnamese coast. McNamara tells LeMay that the JCS should work up recommendations for immediate action, then recommended actions for 24, 48 and 60 hours ahead, with special emphasis on reinforcements, such as the movement of B–57s into South Vietnam and fighter-interceptors into the Philippines.

“12:04 PM: McNamara, Rusk, Bundy, Green (State Dept.) and Vance move to McNamara’s office, while the JCS continue meeting in McNamara’s dining room. At this meeting the options are essentially refined to three: “1. Sharp limited strikes against such target as PT boats, PT bases, oil depots, etc.

“2. Continuing pressure, i.e., mining the Vietnam coast.

“3. A combination of both.

“12:20 PM: McNamara, Rusk, Bundy and Green depart for White House. Vance goes into McNamara’s dining room to ask JCS if it would make any difference whether the retaliatory strikes were conducted at first light. JCS tell Vance that the time of attack would make no difference from a military standpoint but that fewer people would be at the PT boat bases and supporting installations at first light.

“12:25 PM: Vance departs for the White House. The JCS continue meeting until 1:49 PM. During their meeting, at JCS direction, Burchinal calls McNamara at White House to recommend the sharp limited response option.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Gulf of Tonkin Misc. 1964)

Regarding the five options described by Secretary McNamara, see Document 273.

At 12:40 p.m., according to the chronology, McNamara, Rusk, Bundy, and Green arrived at the White House where they joined the National Security Council which was discussing the Cyprus situation. McNamara briefed the NSC and the President on the available details of the attack on the Maddox and the C. Turner Joy. Bromley Smith’s notes of the 537th meeting of the National Security Council read in part as follows: “Secretary McNamara: North Vietnamese PT boats have attacked the DeSoto Patrol consisting of two U.S. destroyers, the Maddox and the C. Turner Joy, approximately 65 miles off North Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin. Presently we believe 9 or 10 torpedoes were fired at the Patrol. Two of the PT boats were reportedly sunk and three to six were fired on. So far, we have no casualties. Nearby U.S. aircraft carriers are providing continuous air cover.

“Secretary Rusk: Secretary McNamara and I and the Chiefs of Staff are preparing recommendations but these are not yet ready.

“Mac Bundy: In addition to these recommendations we should have an estimate of the reaction to various courses of action we might take.”

Later in the meeting, the discussion again turned to the incidents in the Gulf of Tonkin: “The President: Turning again to the attack in the Gulf of Tonkin, he asked that nothing be made public for the time being.

“Secretary Dillon: There is a limit on the number of times we can be attacked by the North Vietnamese without hitting their naval bases.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 3, Tab 19, 8/4/64)

Following the NSC meeting, Rusk, McNamara, McCone, Bundy, and Vance joined the President for lunch from 1:04 to 2:50 p.m. The August 28 chronology reads: “The President agrees that a firm, swift retaliatory strike must be carried out. Here, a general consensus is formed on the approach finally taken in the JCS message to CINCPAC, developed later that afternoon, ordering the strikes into execution against the PT boats located at bases Port Wallut, Hon Gay, Phuc Loi and Quang Khe and Loc Chao estuary and the oil depot at Vinh. (See the 5:19 PM entry below.) The mining option, as well as an attack on Haiphong, is rejected. The President asks how long it would take to execute the strike. McNamara estimates from the advice he has received that a strike could be launched at about 7:00 PM (7:00 AM, Saigon time). The President suggests that McNamara call the JCS to confirm the time, but McNamara says he wants to work it out carefully with the JCS on his return to the Pentagon.”

At 3 p.m. at the Pentagon, the Joint Chiefs of Staff began meeting; they were joined by McNamara and Vance who informed the Chiefs that “the President wants the strikes to take place at 7:00 PM Washington time, if possible, and at the following targets: PT boats and bases at Quang Khe, Phoc Loi, Port Wallut, Hon Gay and Loc Chao, and the oil complex at Vinh. The JCS agree with this proposal.” (August 28 chronology)

The drafting of the strike execute message continued throughout the afternoon of August 4 amid some confusion about the actual course of events in the Gulf of Tonkin. At 1:27 p.m., the Maddox reported that “a review of the action makes many reported contacts and torpedoes fired ‘appear doubtful’. ‘Freak weather effects’ on radar, and ‘over-eager’ sonarmen may have accounted for many reports. ‘No visual sightings’ have been reported by the Maddox, and the Commander suggests that a ‘complete evaluation’ be undertaken before any further action. (NMCC receives this report about 1–1/2 to 2 hours later.)” (August 28 chronology, the report was in message 041727Z; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) “4:47 PM: McNamara, Vance and the JCS meet to marshal the evidence to overcome lack of a clear and convincing showing that an attack on the destroyers had in fact occurred. They conclude that an attack had taken place. In this regard five factors are considered: “1. The Turner Joy was illuminated when fired on by automatic weapons.

“2. One of the destroyers observed cockpit lights.

“3. A PGM 142 shot at two U.S. aircraft.

“4. A North Vietnamese announcement that two of its boats were ‘sacrificed.’ [less than 1 line of source text not declassified]

“5. Sharp’s determination that there was indeed an attack.

“Burchinal, at Wheeler’s request, tells McNamara that the 7:00 PM strike time will not be met because the carriers are operating on a time which makes 8:00 PM Washington time 7:00 AM carrier time.

“5:19 PM: JCS strike execute message is retransmitted Flash precedence as JCS 7720 to CINCPAC. It states that by 7:00 PM EDT (0700 local time) a one-time maximum effort attack against Port Wallut (later cancelled because of weather), Hon Gay, Phuc Loi, Quang Khe, Loc Chao and Vinh, and an armed reconnaissance against PT boats beyond the three mile limit should be conducted. The message cautions that if the weather precludes meeting the above time of attack, the commander is to ‘proceed soonest’ and to notify the JCS as soon as possible. (CINCPAC receives this message at 5:52 PM (11:52 AM, August 4, CINCPAC time).)” (August 28 chronology)

JCS 7720 to CINCPAC is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Gulf of Tonkin, [less than 1 line of text not declassified].

277. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand 277. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Thailand1

Washington, August 4, 1964—6:03 p.m.

171. In view further attacks today on US Destroyer Maddox President has decided air strike should be carried out at once against torpedo boat bases and a fuel installation in North Viet-Nam. You should be prepared on receipt further message repeat on receipt further message, to notify Thanom and call emergency SEATO meeting to announce action and reasons therefor.

Slug reply Nodis-Pierce Arrow.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Secret; Flash; Nodis. Drafted by Trueheart, cleared with Ball, and initialed by William Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC.

278. Summary Notes of the 538th Meeting of the National Security Council 278. Summary Notes of the 538th Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, August 4, 1964, 6:15–6:40 p.m.

Gulf of Tonkin Attack

Secretary McNamara: The North Vietnamese PT boats have continued their attacks on the two U.S. destroyers in international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin. No enemy aircraft was involved. Our efforts to learn the exact situation and protect the Patrol have been complicated by a very low ceiling. One of the two destroyers was fired on by automatic weapons and was lit up by search lights.

Secretary Rusk: An immediate and direct reaction by us is necessary. The unprovoked attack on the high seas is an act of war for all practical purposes. We have been trying to get a signal to Hanoi and Peking. Our response to this attack may be that signal. We are informing NATO, SEATO, and the UN. As an indication of Hanoi’s intentions, this second attack was a more serious decision for the North Vietnamese than the decision to make the first attack.

Secretary McNamara: We have agreed to air strikes on two bases in the north of North Vietnam and two base complexes in the south of North Vietnam. A fifth target has been deleted because it is close to Communist China. In addition, any North Vietnamese PT boats and Swatows found off Vietnam outside the three-mile limit will be attacked as part of an armed reconnaissance program. (The execute order as actually set is attached-JCS 7720.)2

CIA Director McCone: The proposed U.S. reprisals will result in a sharp North Vietnamese military reaction, but such actions would not represent a deliberate decision to provoke or accept a major escalation of the Vietnamese war. (The text of Mr. McCone’s estimate of probable North Vietnamese and Chinese Communist reactions to our reprisal is attached.)3

The President: Do they want a war by attacking our ships in the middle of the Gulf of Tonkin?

Director McCone: No. The North Vietnamese are reacting defensively to our attacks on their off-shore islands. They are responding out of pride and on the basis of defense considerations. The attack is a signal to us that the North Vietnamese have the will and determination to continue the war. They are raising the ante.

The President: Are we going to react to their shooting at our ships over 40 miles from their shores? If yes, we should do more than merely return the fire of the attacking ships. If this is so, then the question involves no more than the number of North Vietnamese targets to be attacked.

Secretary McNamara: Our intelligence officers report that a Chinese Communist air regiment is moving to North Vietnam.

USIA Director Rowan: Do we know for a fact that the North Vietnamese provocation took place? Can we nail down exactly what happened? We must be prepared to be accused of fabricating the incident.

Secretary McNamara: We will know definitely in the morning. As of now, only highly classified information nails down the incident. This information we cannot use and must rely on other reports we will be receiving.

Secretary Rusk: We should ask the Congressional leaders whether we should seek a Congressional resolution. (The draft resolution read by Secretary Rusk is attached.) This short and clear draft is similar to the Mid-East resolution.

Secretary McNamara: In addition to the air strikes, we plan to send major U.S. reinforcements into the area. These include ships, men and planes. (A detailed listing of these forces is attached.)4

A draft statement for the President was revised.5 It is to be made public by the President as soon as the U.S. attack planes are over target.

Bromley Smith

Attachment

DRAFT JOINT RESOLUTION ON SOUTHEAST ASIA6

Whereas warships of the Communist regime in North Viet-Nam have committed a series of unprovoked armed attacks in international waters against naval units of the United States;

Whereas these attacks are a part of a continuous, deliberate and systematic campaign of aggression and subversion carried on against free nations, and particularly against the peoples of Southeast Asia, by the Communist regime in North Viet-Nam;

Whereas such Communist aggression and subversion constitutes a serious threat to international peace and security and is inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations;

Whereas the Communist regime in North Viet-Nam has flouted its obligations under the Geneva Accords of 1954 and has engaged in aggression against the independence and territorial integrity of the Republic of Viet-Nam by carrying out a systematic plan for the subversion of the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam, by furnishing direction, training, personnel and arms for the conduct of guerrilla warfare within the Republic of Viet-Nam and by the ruthless use of terror against the peaceful population of that country;

Whereas in violation of its undertakings in the Geneva Agreements of 1962 the Communist regime in North Viet-Nam has engaged in aggression against the independence and territorial integrity of Laos by maintaining forces on Laotian territory, by the use of that territory for the infiltration of arms and equipment into the Republic of Viet-Nam, and by providing direction, men and equipment for persistent armed attacks against the Government of National Union of the Kingdom of Laos;

Whereas at the request of the Government of the Republic of Viet-Nam, the United States is assisting the people of that country to maintain their independence and political integrity with no territorial, military or political ambitions of its own, but solely to assure that the peoples of Southeast Asia will be left in peace by their neighbors to work out their destinies in their own way,

Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress Assembled:

That the United States will not tolerate unprovoked and illegal armed attacks on its forces, that it will take such measures as may be necessary to prevent such attacks and otherwise to protect its forces and that the maintenance of international peace and security in Southeast Asia, including the preservation of the political independence and territorial integrity of the nations of Southeast Asia, is required by the national interest of the United States;

Sec. 2. To this end, the Congress supports the determination of the President, as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces of the United States: (a) to respond instantly with the use of appropriate force to repel any unprovoked attack against the armed forces of the United States and to take such other steps as may be necessary to protect these forces and

(b) upon request from any nation in Southeast Asia, to take, consistently with the Charter of the United Nations, all measures including the use of armed force to assist that nation in the defense of its political independence and territorial integrity against aggression or subversion.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 3, Tab 20. Top Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

2 See Document 276.

3 Not found.

4 Not printed.

5 See Document 286.

6 Top Secret. There is no indication on the source text of the drafter.

279. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 279. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 4, 1964—6:35 p.m.

341. For the Ambassador. In view of two Maddox incidents and certain responses which are now being developed here, you should see Khanh as soon as possible to be sure he has accurate account of NVN actions against our two destroyers. You should tell him that President will shortly be announcing U.S. responsive measures against NVN including actions against NVN naval craft wherever they may be found on the high seas, U.S. air strikes against four torpedo boat bases on NVN coast, air cover for these operations which will engage any unfriendly aircraft. These actions are expected to take place approximately 1830 Washington time.

You should enjoin Khanh to keep this information strictly secret. We expect to have a Presidential message out to you in the next few hours. We will also insure that you are informed through military channels of results of U.S. action which you may also pass on to Khanh in your discretion.

Our position is that this deliberate and unprovoked attack on U.S. vessels in international waters cannot go unanswered. On the other hand, we have limited our response to the offending boats and supporting facilities in order to avoid forcing escalation.

We want to keep Khanh as fully informed as possible, consistent with operational security. In meantime you should forcefully advise Khanh to take no independent action external to SVN and avoid public statements during this critical period. You may wish, however, to suggest to him precautionary and alerting measures against possible NVN retaliation. We leave these to your judgment.

When these actions have become public, they may help you in your efforts convince military and politicians that drastic changes in GVN leadership must not be considered at this time.

Slug all future messages this subject “Pierce Arrow.”

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto Patrols, Aug. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared by William Bundy.

280. Notes of the Leadership Meeting, White House 280. Notes of the Leadership Meeting, White House1

Washington, August 4, 1964, 6:45 p.m.

President: I want to counsel with you. It is dangerous to have the leaders come here. The reporters see they are coming and they go back and report all over the Hill. Some of our boys are floating around in the water. The facts we would like to present to you are to be held in the closest confidence and are to be kept in this room until announced.

Halleck: I did not tell a damn person.

President: I know no one did, but it is on both tickers anyway. We have to be very careful. Please don’t discuss what goes on in this room. I have asked Secretary McNamara to brief you and it would be unjustifiable to refer to it at all.

McNamara: The first indication we had of another attack on the destroyers, the Maddox and Turner Joy, was received at 7:30 A.M. today.

President: I asked the Secretary of State to give us a report on the political situation.

Rusk: For months and months we have been trying to get to them a signal, etc. This was a serious decision to attack our vessels on the high seas. It was planned to take place forty to sixty miles away from port on the high seas. We should not look on anything as accidental and they look for us to come back in a relevant fashion. At the source of the trouble we would run the great risk that they would misinterpret what the positions are in South East Asia. We must make it quite clear that we are resolved not to overlook the threat that is posed to our forces. We would propose to call for the Security Council and also report to our Allies.

President: The Security Council of the United Nations.

Rusk: We would make it clear as we can that we are not going to run out of South East Asia, but that we have no national ambitions nor either in a war to the north. They made the choice themselves. They will have some doubts there if it comes to choice, but if we go back in a limited fashion, there would still be a showing that we want to limit the escalation. We have not had time to consult our Allies.

President: I would like to ask Mr. McCone to give us his estimate of enemy action—what their responses would be.

Russell: Mr. McCone, I notice you did not mention the submarine. Does anybody know what kind of anti-submarine warfare there is in that area?

McCone: We discussed that today. Our forces there have ample forces to take care of it. We expect to move close to the China Seas.

McNamara: They can be there before any submarines can. The carriers can take of themselves.

President: We do not seriously anticipate that.

Russell: It would more likely be through the air.

Rusk: They can disguise their air power by pretending they are Viet Namese.

Russell: The submarine can come nearer disguising itself.

Hickenlooper. Do I understand the reasoning behind your analysis on one phase is that if we do not do something here then the Communist forces will be in a position to deal from strength in any proposed settlement? If we do react, it may put us in a position to deal from strength.

Russell: That is part of the problem. It is possible we would be giving up the right to sail through the Gulf. If we did that, psychologically our prestige possibly would be seriously affected in Hanoi and other places. They might come to the wrong conclusion about what we are willing to do, which would be much more serious.

Hickenlooper: They attacked and we will deal from here on out and we are trying to counteract.

Rusk: We are trying to get across two points: (1) leave your neighbors alone and (2) If you don’t, we will have to get busy.

Hickenlooper: May I ask if there is a comparison between Cuba and this? Cuba was a bold and dangerous operation as far as Washington is concerned. No one knows what would have happened had we not reacted. Is it possible this follows the same route? If we don’t react, what kind of position does it put us in with the North Viet Namese?

Rusk: What the Russians learned in Cuba could have an influence on the entire world.

Speaker: There is no question but what it is an act of war-an attack on American vessels. Deliberate from our angle. In the lives of Nations you must take calculated risks. If we don’t take some action, what would flow from it? Inaction may be more important than action.

Bolton: Ammunition available to the ship was not powerful enough to do the job.

McNamara: We have the most modern ammunition available anywhere.

Saltonstall: The Secretary said they are going to protest to the Security Council tomorrow.

Rusk: I will get the notes for you on this issue.

Saltonstall: If you ask for action and did not get. it, wouldn’t you be in a weak position?

Rusk: Our preliminary thought is that we are in a stronger position to make it if we do not ask the Security Council.

Aiken: Get Mr. McCone to give us a report on the Chinese.

McNamara: I do not think they will join in any physical reaction and I do not think that there will be any other reaction.

Halleck: Could they think that they could withdraw from the Bay to ease tension?

President: Maybe you would want to consider that General Taylor follow the instrument. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have gone over it all. General Wheeler is here. I would like for him to report on the recommendations of General Taylor in Viet Nam. (General Wheeler then explained the recommendations.)

Rusk: We do expect to be in contact with the co-chairmen of the 1954 settlement. We want to get the main hand in disengagement and try to keep it under control.

Russell: Are you sure you have enough stuff to do this job? We don’t want to do it half way.

McNamara: We have two carriers and definitely enough power to do the job. We do propose to use bombers.

Russell: You will have to make more than one strike. How many sorties do we have planned?

McNamara: We have issued orders for only a single night’s action. These orders are already in being.

Russell: Is it daytime over there?

McNamara: Our attacks will be in daylight hours.

Russell: I hope you will keep going until they get the last one of them. We had a Formosan type resolution in the Middle East. It was taken before the positive action—or subsequent to the positive action.

President: I think they were taken before this debate was critical of Korea. Felt they would come and see the seriousness of the situation. If I recall, ____2 speech would have said he had supported it.

Halleck: That is tantamount to a declaration of war.

Speaker: I think the fleet was pretty well in preparation. All plans were made.

Hickenlooper: It seems to me there should be no desire to have a confrontation. There should be no doubt as to whether the President should have the right to order the Armed Forces into action. Should not have to quarrel for weeks as to whether he had the authority or not. It is my own personal feeling that it is up to the President to prepare the kind and type of resolution he believes would be proper. It is up to Congress to say whether they will pass it or not. I have no doubt in my mind that concrete action would be taken.

President: I had that feeling but felt I wanted the advice of each of you and wanted to consult with you. We felt we should move with the action recommended by the Joint Chiefs, but I wanted to get the Congressional concurrence. I think it would be very damaging to ask for it and not get it.

(Rusk then discussed Laos and Cambodia)

Russell: Does that include Burma?

Rusk: We considered specifying certain countries but felt we could not do this without getting into problems.

Saltonstall: The only comment I have is this: How far does it go and where does it go from there.

President: We thought there were two decisions to make after we were attacked yesterday and today and nine torpedoes were shot at our destroyers 40 miles on the high seas. We had to answer that attack. There are four bases. There have been many discussions and recommendations by people in the country that we go into the northern area and not allow them to murder us from bases of safety. These boats came from these bases and have been shooting at American ships. I think I know what the reaction would be if we tucked our tails. I thought I should get the Security Council and get the Leadership and after the orders are executed I would plan to make a statement something like this. (The President then read the proposed statement.)3

Saltonstall: Three times in that little statement you use the word “limited.” Why not use the word “determined” and let the limitations speak for themselves. If you will use the “limited” maybe we won’t go any further. Turned for the time being.

President: That is why we use it. We want them to know we are not going to take it lying down, but we are not going to destroy their cities. We hope we can prepare them for the course we will follow.

Saltonstall: I agree with what you are doing. If you put it in, someone will pick it up.

Bolton: I would do it. Keep them a little bit in the dark on what we are doing.

Rusk: I think there is some advantage in not leaving it in but that we are using this as a pretext for a larger war. With the time factors involved I have not had a chance to discuss this with all the governments that will have to be consulted. We can cut down the emphasis.

Hickenlooper: I agree that the word limited should not be used three times. I wonder if the connotation is that we are limited at this time.

President: We say our response for the moment will be limited. I suppose if you look at the paragraph phrase it could include Burma, but we don’t consider Burma would be involved.

Humphrey: Better get a little task force to put the fine points to it.

Saltonstall: Just ask the Secretary to show me that paragraph again. Doesn’t ask any other Nations to join us at all. We would have to go alone. Other Nations could say-go to it.

Rusk: We can’t tie ourselves to what they could do.

Halleck: We thought you ought to consider the words and phrases.

President: We will probably make some changes in it. Maybe we will say “desirable” action. I don’t ask you to draft the message or any bill we want. We have taken the resolutions you have had in the past. I don’t think any resolution is necessary, but I think it is a lot better to have it in the light of what we did in Korea.

Speaker: I think Congress has a responsibility and should show a united front to the world.

Halleck: The President knows there is no partisanship among us. Are we getting fouled up here on something we could put off? There was never any hesitation when we had the deal about Cuba. I was the first to speak up and say-Mr. President, count me in.

President: I would hope we could pretty well work out a resolution which is good with a minimum of doctoring. I wanted to see if you felt it was the wise thing to do.

Hickenlooper: I think the resolution is appropriate and proper, but I doubt you should mention the resolution in your remarks this evening.

President: I did not plan to mention it tonight.

Fulbright: Are they expected to urge these provocations?

Rusk: Maybe you have seen some of the broadcasts. They are highly inaccurate. They have not talked about what did happen but what did not happen. Actions of that sort are a low level minimum we have to take seriously.

Fulbright: What bases do you plan to destroy—Haiphong?

McNamara: No, we will not destroy any in the Haiphong area.

Aiken: You spoke of airplanes. Do you conclude they are airplanes? Viet Nam has no combat aircraft. Communist China will move combat aircraft in shortly.

Russell: There are some Chinese here [there?]—perhaps in the nearby area.

McCone: There are four bases in North Viet Nam.

Russell: Aren’t there some in ____4 Island?

McNamara: Two of them.

Mansfield: When the call came I looked at the ticker and I suppose you want us to be frank. I don’t know how much good it will do. I would point out as far as the Island of Kinon is concerned, it is fortified. There is a sharp question between this and Cuba, Russia, and the United States. In this instance, Russia is remote. China is not involved directly. May be getting all involved with a minor third rate state. Then what is to come in response, if not Korea for China? The Communists won’t be faced down. A lot of lives to mow them down.

President: Do you give me a formula?

Mansfield: Two, make them isolated acts of terror. Three, the United Nations, four, call on 54 countries to consider it a matter of urgency.

Rusk: Principal problem, however, is that China has not committed itself. It would be wonderful if she could get them to pull away. Cuba is quite different in a number of respects. If we concentrate in a limited fashion on the source of the attack, it gives the other side a chance to pull away.

Mansfield: In North Viet Nam there are jet airfields. In addition, have you considered actions that might happen in Formosa.

Russell: What purpose do we have for drawing China into this? I am sure you will give some thought to it. If we have to fight them, we will whip them. But I would like to know [if?] you have come to some assumption.

Rusk: Some Chinese were planning to come in in any event. The general reaction to mounting pressures and to impress the seriousness of their whole attitude.

Fulbright: The point the Secretary has made is that the provocation is important. It could go on for several days. I think you ought to leave it in for the moment.

Dirksen: If I had it to do I would put our references to the word “limited” in deep freeze. It connotes we would be like sitting ducks. We should make it clear we would meet every enemy threat. I have one other observation—at 3 P.M., three of the most responsible reporters say we got word out of the Pentagon. They could tell me six particular shots were involved. They knew much more about it than I did. Maybe there is some whispering going on.

McNamara: I heard the same story and have some idea of where it came from. I am sure you understand what we told you last night5 has to be kept [secret?] because the North Viet Namese could use the boats and their defenses could be alerted.

Halleck: If we are going to have it, it has to be overwhelming. (He indicated a desire to hear from the Speaker and the Majority Leader.)

President: I have told you what I want from you.

Fulbright: I will support it.

Mansfield: It will go before the Foreign Affairs Committee.

Saltonstall: I hope you make the United Nations a little more effective.

Russell: I share that hope.

Halleck: I think it will pass overwhelmingly as far as I am concerned. I have made my position here clear in all cases.

Aiken: By the time you send it up there won’t be anything for us to do but support you.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, August 4, 1964. No classification marking. Drafted by Walter Jenkins of the President’s Staff. Attached to the source text were two notes dated August 24 and 25 concerning its drafting. One of these reads: “Put that on my desk—I’ll need it every day. LBJ:JRJ 8/27/67.” In addition to the participants, Senator Kuchel and Representatives Vinson and Morgan were present. A 3–1/2–page summary of the meeting is ibid.

2 As on the source text.

3 Not found. For text of the statement as delivered at 11:36 p.m., see Document 286.

4 As on the source text.

5 Regarding the briefings by Rusk and McNamara on August 3, see Document 269.

281. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions 281. Circular Telegram From the Department of State to Certain Diplomatic Missions1

Washington, August 4, 1964—9:41 p.m.

218. For the Ambassador or Charge. The following personal message from the President to the Head of Government in your country should be delivered as soon as possible to the FonMin or senior available official: Begin Verbatim Text:

I am asking my Ambassador to convey to you a statement I am making in Washington tonight2 with regard to deliberate attacks which have been made by Communist North Viet-Namese torpedo boats on American vessels operating on the high seas.

As I am sure that you will agree, these attacks could not go unanswered. The response we are making is, however, limited and fitting. I hope that it will make clear to the North Viet-Namese regime the dangerous character of the course they are following in Southeast Asia. End Verbatim Text.

Text of Presidential message as well as Pentagon announcement3 being sent to you Septel and via USIS wireless file, respectively, and should accompany this personal message. Slug future messages this subject “Pierce Arrow”.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Drafted by Green and Robert Creel (EUR) and initialed by William Tyler, Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs. Sent to Bonn, Brussels, The Hague, Luxembourg, Paris (for the Embassy and USRO), and Rome and repeated to the other NATO capitals and Madrid. Similar messages were sent to 14 other capitals at 11:01 p.m. (Circular telegrams 222 and 223; ibid.) and at 11:02 individual messages were sent to New Delhi and Karachi. (Telegrams 266 and 136; ibid.) At 9:12 and 10:32, the U.S. representatives to NATO and SEATO were instructed to call sessions of their organizations to report on the U.S. position (Topol 198 and telegram 175 to Bangkok; ibid.)

2 See Document 286.

3 Presumably reference is to News Release 570–64, a brief announcement describing the attack on August 4. (Washington National Records Center. RG 330, Pentagon Papers Files: FRC 75–0062, News Releases)

282. Message From President Johnson to Prime Minister Macmillan 282. Message From President Johnson to Prime Minister Macmillan1

Washington, August 4, 1964.

I tried to reach you earlier by phone to inform you of a serious development concerning North Vietnam. Two of our destroyers, the Maddox (which had already been subjected to attack on August 2) and the C. Turner Joy were today attacked on the high seas some 65 miles from the North Vietnamese coast by a number of PT boats which launched a number of torpedoes. Fortunately neither of our ships suffered any damage. They engaged the attack craft vigorously and, according to still unconfirmed reports, three were sunk. In view of this further unprovoked attack against U.S. war ships on the high seas by the North Vietnamese Naval Forces, I gave orders that air strikes should be immediately carried out on the four PT bases and the accompanying POL installations. Two of these bases are located in the Southern part of the coastline and the two others in the Northern area.

I have called the leadership of the Congress to meet with me at 6:45 this evening, our time. We will make a report to a special meeting of the North Atlantic Council at 3 p.m. European time tomorrow, Wednesday. I am also considering whether to send a personal message to Chairman Khrushchev in order to inform him of this further attack and of the reasons why I am determined to take all measures necessary to prevent such attacks and to protect our forces. At the same time, I would assure him that our objective remains the maintenance of international peace and security in Southeast Asia.

I will of course continue to keep you informed of developments as promptly as possible and attach the greatest importance to our keeping in closest touch with each other.

Sincerely,

Lyndon B. Johnson2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis; Pierce Arrow. Transmitted to the Embassy in London in telegram 861, August 4, 9:41 p.m. with the explanation that the message had been sent to the Prime Minister by a separate channel. Telegram 861 is the source text.

2 Telegram 861 bears this typed signature.

283. Message From President Johnson to Prime Minister Khanh 283. Message From President Johnson to Prime Minister Khanh1

Washington, August 4, 1964.

I am asking Ambassador Taylor to convey to you personally a statement I am making in Washington tonight concerning the deliberate attacks which have been made by Communist North Vietnamese torpedo boats on American vessels operating on the high seas. The measures I have ordered are intended to make it unmistakably clear to the Communist leaders in Hanoi that the United States defends its rights and that our commitment to assist your country in preserving her freedom and independence cannot be shaken.

The Hanoi regime has embarked upon an adventure which can have the gravest consequences for world peace, and I believe that you and I have responsibilities which extend beyond our own borders. For this reason our response to North Vietnamese provocation has been, for the present, limited in the hope that the Hanoi regime will recognize the dangers which flow from increasing violence in Southeast Asia.

It is of the utmost importance therefore that our two countries continue to plan and act in the closest consultation during the very critical days ahead. Ambassador Taylor will always be prepared to communicate your thoughts to me, and I will keep in close touch with you through him.2

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Transmitted to the Embassy in Saigon in telegram 342, 9:47 p.m., for delivery to Khanh with President Johnson’s statement (see Document 286). Telegram 342 is the source text.

2 Telegram 342 does not bear President Johnson’s signature.

284. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 284. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Honolulu, August 4, 1964—9:53 a.m.

032353Z. DeSoto Patrol rules of engagement. A. JCS 7680 DTG 021725Z. B. JCS 7681 DTG 022349Z. C. OPNAVINST 03300.8. D. JCS 2084/80. E. SM–1431–62.2

1. A United States ship has been attacked on the high seas off North Vietnam. The Maddox quite properly repulsed the attackers and one of the attacking boats was destroyed. Now, our friends and enemies alike will await what additional moves the United States will take.

2. Refs A and B appear to be a retreat at a time when aggressive measures are necessary. Ref A now prohibits an approach by DeSoto Patrol closer than eleven miles to the North Vietnam mainland coastline. Ref B prohibits hot pursuit into hostile waters and refers to international waters parenthetically as eleven miles offshore. Does this mean that hot pursuit must stop eleven miles offshore? If so, we are drastically reducing the time and space available to our ships and aircraft for destroying the attackers.

3. Although the terms hostile waters and hostile airspace are used in the rules of engagement contained in refs C through E, no clear definition of the terms is set forth and it must be assumed that they are synonymous with territorial waters and territorial airspace of the offending country.

4. In the event of unprovoked attack, our forces should be authorized to take aggressive action to destroy the attackers. This action has traditionally included hot pursuit into the territorial waters and airspace of the hostile country. If we are to be prohibited from pursuing into territorial waters and airspace, we should be allowed to pursue to the three-mile limit where territorial waters commence, in accordance with standard U.S. policy.

5. Recommend that: a. The terms territorial waters and airspace be used in lieu of hostile waters and airspace.

b. DeSoto Patrol be permitted to approach within eight miles of NVN coastline, thus keeping five miles clear of territorial waters.

c. Hot pursuit into territorial waters and airspace of the hostile country be authorized.

d. If hot pursuit into territorial waters is not authorized, then authorize pursuit to the three-mile limit.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11885. Secret; Priority. According to another copy, this telegram was repeated by the JCS to the White House, CIA, NSA, and the Department of State at 8:47 p.m. and was received in the Department of State at 10:26 p.m. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

2 JCS telegrams 7680 and 7681 are printed as Documents 259 and 261; the other three documents have not been found.

285. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Representative at the United Nations (Stevenson) in 285. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State in Washington and the Representative at the United Nations (Stevenson) in1

New York, August 4, 1964, 10:40 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM AMB. STEVENSON, USUN

S said the earliest possible would be noon; Yost is notifying U Thant. Sec said President will make his statement at 11:15; there were some changes in the text. Sec said the key thing and we must make it very clear up there tomorrow is that this is limited action appropriate to the nature of the intolerable kind of attack; we do not want a big war, in no sense is this destroyer a pretext to make a big thing out of a little one. S asked if this were self-defense under Article 512 Sec said he thought so; we cannot have our vessels operating in danger of being torpedoed; we are not going into any general assault, just after these boats. They discussed whether U Thant visit should be postponed;3 they did not think so but it was possible. Sec said he did not think a resolution would be introduced tomorrow; this was basically a reporting situation. S asked in the event they ask for North Viet Nam to be seated, should we ask for South Viet Nam. Sec said yes, but he doubted they would. S asked if we had any info about the boats. Sec said they were built in Chinese yards, but have been in North Viet Nam for some time and for all practical purposes are North Vietnamese. Sec said we should concentrate on the fact that they are North Vietnamese, so that we do not force the Chinese into it.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Proctor.

2 Article 51 of the U.N. Charter provides that nothing in the Charter impairs the right of self-defense, if an armed attack occurs against a member, until the Security Council has taken measures to maintain international peace and security.

3 U Thant was scheduled to visit Washington on August 6.

286. Editorial Note 286. Editorial Note

At 11:20 p.m., Admiral Sharp telephoned Secretary McNamara to confirm that that the Ticonderoga “got her planes off at 0243” or 10:43 p.m., Washington time, and 10:43 a.m., Saigon time. Sharp indicated that it would take the aircraft almost 2 hours to reach their targets. After discussing the matter with General Wheeler, McNamara called President Johnson to inform him. (August 28 chronology; Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Gulf of Tonkin Misc. 1964)

At 11:36 p.m. on August 4, President Johnson addressed the nation from the White House over radio and television. He summarized the events since the attack on the Maddox on August 2 and informed the nation that “air action is now in execution against gunboats and certain supporting facilities in North Viet-Nam which have been used in these hostile operations.” The President told the nation: “In the larger sense this new act of aggression, aimed directly at our own forces, again brings home to all of us in the United States the importance of the struggle for peace and security in Southeast Asia. Aggression by terror against the peaceful villagers of South Viet-Nam has now been joined by open aggression on the high seas against the United States of America.

“The determination of all Americans to carry out our full commitment to the people and to the government of South Vietnam will be redoubled by this outrage. Yet our response, for the present, will be limited and fitting. We Americans know, although others appear to forget, the risks of spreading conflict. We still seek no wider war.”

He concluded his statement with an acknowledgement of his “solemn” responsibility in ordering the military action, but he considered that “firmness in the right is indispensable today for peace; that firmness will always be measured.” The President’s statement is printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book II, pages 927–928, and Department of State Bulletin, August 24, 1964, page 259.

287. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 287. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 5, 1964—noon.

303. Deptel 341.2 In company with Alex Johnson and Westmoreland I saw Khanh at 0930 Saigon time and gave him information and advice contained in reftel. Khanh was delighted with news and asked permission to tell Cabinet which was meeting at 1000. As execution of attacks had not been confirmed, I authorized communication of information less indication of targets.

At same time, I urged Khanh and he agreed to stress to Cabinet seriousness of situation and need to close ranks and achieve greater unity.

There followed considerable discussion of precautionary measures to take in SVN in view of possible hostile reaction. Khanh was inclined to put out something to public warning people (of Saigon in particular) of danger of air attack. We persuaded him not to do so, pointing out danger of panic and got his agreement to say nothing publicly now. Later, following President’s statement not yet received here, he will want to make some statement explaining situation and urging national unity.

It was agreed that an alert should go out through military channels warning of possible VC reaction and air action against targets in I and II Corps, particularly the air field at DaNang and the 34A marine base. Westmoreland is meeting with DefMin Khiem to work out detailed alert plan.3

General Khanh stated that his air force would like to participate in this action against NVN. I told him that I understood his desire to join forces but that now was not the time. He should keep his military guard up and await outcome of events in progress.

Khanh mentioned that in case of air attacks on Saigon he was prepared to move to emergency CPs which he had prepared at Cap St. Jacques, Dalat and Nha Trang. In view of fact that something might happen to him, he suggested giving me a paper asking US intervention and take over of command if he disappeared. I acknowledged this might be a desirable thing but let matter drop. (I would appreciate advice on attitude to take on this point.) Khanh also indicated that he still regards Khiem as his successor.

Westmoreland informed Khanh that he was seeing General Minh shortly for purpose of introducing General Throckmorton and got Khanh’s agreement to tell Minh the same things which Khanh was about to tell Cabinet regarding events in Tonkin Gulf.

I informed Khanh on leaving that US would increase the number of F–102s presently in SVN and he expressed thanks while reminding us that US has the only means for air defense of his country.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Received at 11:58 p.m., August 4. Drafted by Taylor. Also sent to the Department of Defense and repeated to CINCPAC, CIA, and the White House.

2 Document 279.

3 Westmoreland transmitted a report on his meeting with Khiem at 11:30 a.m. in MAC JOO 7425 from Saigon, August 5. Johnson Library, National Security File. Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIV, Memos)

288. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations 288. Telegram From the Department of State to the Mission at the United Nations1

Washington, August 5, 1964—1:30 a.m.

282. For Ambassador Stevenson. Subject: Security Council meeting on torpedo boat incidents. Following is general guidance and suggestions for SC meeting Wednesday morning. Additional memo on legal aspects in septel.2

1. We are coming to the SC to report a threat to the peace, and to report the action we have felt necessary to take as a responsible member of the world community. Although an attack on a U.S. destroyer in international waters is clearly an armed attack on our nation within the meaning of Article 51, our case for UN concern rests more broadly on Charter doctrine that all governments have responsibility to refrain from aggression and armed attack. We are not angry, but sorrowful. It is not (as one TV commentator tonight called it) “a drastic retaliatory action”, but rather a single action designed to make unmistakably clear that U.S cannot be diverted by military action from its obligation to help its friends establish and protect their independence.

2. We hope you can encourage other friendly members of SC to make appropriate statements of support. It seems to us that there are five clear votes (US, UK, GRC, Brazil and Bolivia) against any unsatisfactory proposition, but that seven votes are probably lacking for condemnatory res. French, who as usual are swing vote, may take occasion to plug for Geneva Conference; desire to heat up atmosphere in order to get a Geneva Conference may indeed be one of Hanoi and Peking motivations in this affair.

3. In the event North Vietnamese ask to be heard, suggest you not oppose but try to arrange so that they are heard under Rule 39 (under which SC “may invite…3 persons, whom it considers competent for the purpose, to supply it with information or to give other assistance in examining matters within its competence”). In these circumstances, believe Government of South Viet-Nam should also be invited to appear, not under Rule 39 but as government of non-member state concerned.

4. As in Cambodian border case, every occasion should be taken to emphasize (a) general context of Geneva Agreements violated by communists and (b) our desire for enforceable peace and assured independence as only motive our military assistance to SVN and our military activity in the area.

5. We do not see any need for seeking formal action of SC and would be satisfied to have SC conclude with no resolution. However, following is suggested draft resolution for possible tactical use in event hostile resolution proposed by Soviets or some other SC member. It is too early to make any definitive judgment as to whether, in absence of hostile resolution, it would be politically desirable to put forward such a resolution, since this would depend in part on amount of support we could get from other Council members as well as what counter-measures, if any, other side may take in response to our retaliation.

We recognize that resolution put forward by others would undoubtedly include evenhanded appeal to both sides to refrain from any action which might exacerbate situation. For this reason, we have included in suggested resolution paragraph along these lines which would be acceptable to us and avoids fixing blame on United States.

Text of resolution follows: “The Security Council

Noting that the North Vietnamese have launched unprovoked attacks on American naval vessels in international waters,

Having considered the complaint of the United States,

Noting further the measures taken by the United States,

Concerned that the continuation of the present situation could lead to a serious threat to peace in the area,

Condemns the attacks by the North Vietnamese on U.S. ships;

Calls on the Hanoi regime to respect the freedom of use of the high seas in accordance with the rights guaranteed by international law to vessels of all nations, and to cease and desist from any further hostile and provocative acts;

Calls on all concerned to refrain from any actions which might further exacerbate the situation.”

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential. Drafted by Cleveland.

2 Not found.

3 Ellipsis in the source text.

289. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 289. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 5, 1964—5 p.m.

310. Delivered President’s letter and public statement2 to Khanh at 1600 local 5 August. He was pleased to receive letter and expressed complete agreement with it. He understands that it is confidential and not to be released. I took opportunity to stress importance of getting on with our joint military planning which is being initiated today by General Westmoreland and DefMin Khiem.

I gave him in general terms our US plans for reinforcing SEA area of which the introduction into SVN of 2 squadrons of B–57’s and 1 squadron of F–102’s was a part. He responded that his country was open to US forces at any time and no permission for introduction need be sought, particularly if time presses.

I cited danger at time like this to neglect the counter VC campaign and urged him to keep pressure behind the operations in progress. He stated that he had already issued instructions to this effect.

He has decided to make Cap St. Jacques his alternate command post. Westmoreland is looking the facilities over today, particularly the signal communications.

We decided to postpone the GVN National Security Council-US Mission Council meeting scheduled for tomorrow, 6 August.

Still no news here on results of Seventh Fleet strikes. Khanh most interested (as am I).

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret Immediate; Exdis; Pierce Arrow. Also sent to the Department of Defense and repeated to CINCPAC, CIA, and the White House. Received at 6:09 a.m.

2 Documents 283 and 286.

290. Memorandum for the Record of the White House Staff Meeting 290. Memorandum for the Record of the White House Staff Meeting1

Washington, August 5, 1964, 8 a.m.

1. Mr. Bundy presided.

2. Southeast Asia. Much of today’s session was spent discussing various aspects of the Southeast Asia situation, and the entire waterfront was covered. Before getting into specifics, I should state that the general tone of the remarks, especially Bundy’s, was that thus far everything the US had done was well in hand. As to possible future developments, there was uncertainty, the feeling being that both friendly and unfriendly reactions would become better known during the day.

Bundy began by saying that it is difficult to understand the DRV motives in attacking US warships. He said there obviously was some relation between the recent covert attacks on DRV maritime bases, but how much was not clear. Further, he recognized the DRV might have feared stepped-up US actions against them and decided to act. Still it was difficult to conceive what kind of image they had of the US to think we could stand for such attacks.

Later in the meeting I came back to the point of DRV intentions by asking what steps we were taking to find out what Hanoi was thinking. I recalled that at one point we were trying to cultivate the Canadians to perform this chore. Bundy responded that things were being done but he chose not to mention them specifically. He added that one problem was that even after an outsider talked with Hanoi, it was difficult to determine what the DRV had in mind.

Wilson of USIA asked what evidence we could offer publicly that the attacks had taken place. Bundy replied that Rowan had stressed last night2 the importance of making the evidence public, and he was right. On the first attack, the evidence wou1d be pretty good. On the second one the amount of evidence we have today is less than we had yesterday. This resulted primarily from correlating bits and pieces of information eliminating double counting and mistaken signals. This much seemed certain: There was an attack. How many PT boats were involved, how many torpedoes were fired, etc.—all this was still somewhat uncertain. This matter may be of some importance since Hanoi has denied making the second attack.

Douglass Cater, sitting in at his first staff meeting, raised a question about the Congressional resolution on SE Asia. He said he had not thought it through completely, but the logic behind the resolution troubled him somewhat, and he also questioned use of the Middle East precedent—that turning out a not too successful venture. The logic that troubled him was how an attack on US forces specifically justified a resolution in favor of maintenance of freedom in SE Asia. Bundy, in reply, jokingly told him perhaps the matter should not be thought through too far. For his own part, he welcomed the recent events as justification for a resolution the Administration had wanted for some time.

Other points of interest mentioned:

Bromley Smith thought it prudent to emphasize that our attacks were reprisals. Thus he thought that restrikes or follow-on air attacks should not continue over an extended period of days. He asked who would approve restrikes. After the meeting I confirmed what Bundy thought: that authority for restrikes would come from Washington, at least from McNamara and probably from the White House. In the same vein, Bromley Smith also thought we should emphasize that “iron” bombs are being used, not nuclear ones. No one thought this a problem: this word is out already.

Someone asked what would happen if the ChiComs brought their air power on the DRV. Bundy cautiously said that our people thought we could handle them. He then looked at me and said, “General LeMay doesn’t think in terms of the enemy, does he? He assumes they won’t be there.” I made some response to the effect that General LeMay assumes some of his people will take care of the enemy for him; he doesn’t have to worry too much about that. All this was said in good humor, and the matter dropped.

Referring to the President’s meeting with the Congressional “leadership” yesterday,3 Bundy commented that “leadership” was a funny word in this case, in that there was little Congressmen could do in the way of leading in a situation in which the President’s role was so primary.

[Here follow brief discussions on Cuba, war games, and Daniel Ellsberg.]

6. President’s speech. The President originally was to speak of the dangers of nuclear war at Syracuse today He first, among others, decided today was the wrong day; so a new subject was chosen. SE Asia will be covered, to some extent, at least.

W.Y.S.4

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–202–69. Secret; Eyes Only. Drafted by William Y. Smith.

2 At the NSC meeting at 6:15 p.m., August 4; see Document 278.

3 See Document 280.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

291. Record of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting 291. Record of the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting1

Washington, August 5, 1965, 9:15 a.m.

Governor Harriman presided.2

1. INR (Mr. Hughes)

After reviewing the results of the U.S. strike in the Gulf of Tonkin, Mr. Hughes said that, while there was no official reaction from the CPR, diplomats in Peiping reported the CPR was taking a very grave view of the development. The U.S. strike would vastly increase chances of a direct Sino-U.S. confrontation in their view. There was continuing CPR silence on the original incident of August 3.

Japanese reaction was moderate and the Japanese were looking forward to the Security Council meeting.

DRV domestic radio has broadcast a statement attacking U.S. sabotage and subversive actions as well as an alleged U.S. air attack on a North Vietnamese village. The Maddox was alleged to have infringed DRV territorial waters on August 2, 3 and 4, and Hanoi radio claimed two U.S. planes have been shot down and three others damaged.

The British reaction was relatively favorable.

There was no official French reaction yet.

Governor Harriman said that, while South Vietnamese vessels have operated in DRV waters, participants in the meeting should tell their embassies in Washington that no U.S. vessels have done so.

Mr. Hughes said that Soviet comment so far was quite moderate.

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

2. FE (Mr. Green)

It looks as though the Tonkin Gulf action was very effective: about one-half the Swatows and PT boats were destroyed or badly damaged and the oil dump in Vinh has undergone 90 percent destruction. Various redeployments of U.S. forces are going on. The SEATO meeting was satisfactory. 3 The Japanese reaction has been surprisingly positive.

3 A brief report on the special SEATO Council meeting on August 5, which indicated that most of the Council representatives had privately expressed their satisfaction with the U.S. actions, was transmitted in telegram 141 from Bangkok, August 5. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147. Secret. Drafted by Richard T. Davies, Deputy Executive Secretary.

2 Secretary Rusk was at a breakfast with Senators Fulbright and Saltonstall and Representatives Morgan and Arends to discuss the Congressional resolution. Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book)

292. Editorial Note 292. Editorial Note

At 11:30 a.m. on August 5, President Johnson spoke at the dedication ceremonies for a new journalism building at Syracuse University. After reviewing the attacks in the Gulf of Tonkin, he told of the U.S. reprisals and the referral of the question to the United Nations. He then reviewed U.S. policy in Vietnam since 1954 and the aggression of North Vietnam toward its neighbors.

Later in the day, the President sent a special message to Congress asking for a resolution “expressing the unity and determination of the United States in supporting freedom and in protecting the peace in Southeast Asia.”

Both the address and the message to Congress are printed in Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book II, pages 928–932, and Department of State Bulletin, August 24, 1964, pages 260–263.

293. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy) 293. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, August 5, 1964, 2:22 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM MR. WM. BUNDY

[Here follows discussion of an unrelated subject.]

B. asked about the resolution—Sec. said Mac Bundy and Ball were now going over the final touches—it was a good resolution and only minor changes were made on the Hill. There is also a short statement which Sec. just went over with the Pres. Sec. said there will be Hearings in the morning—House and Senate. Sec. would like B. and his boys together with McNaughton to put together a ten minute statement to start off and it should among other things analyze the resolution—Sec. said start off with the purpose of the resolution—the purpose of our policy in Southeast Asia and the importance of maximum unity and making unity clear and end up a little bit on the same note.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by June M. Robinson of the Operations Staff.

294. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to the Secretary of State 294. Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs (Cleveland) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, August 5, 1964.

SUBJECT

Security Council Session on Tonkin Gulf Incident and its Implications—Action Memorandum

The first session of the Security Council dealing with the North Vietnamese attack on our vessels and our response could hardly have gone better today.2 After a procedural hassle in which the Deputy Soviet Representative, Morozov, made a pro forma protest at holding the session today without an opportunity to get instructions from Moscow, Ambassador Stevenson delivered the statement essentially as you approved it in the wee hours this morning.3

Despite his allegation of unpreparedness, Morozov replied to Stevenson immediately at some length and introduced a resolution requesting the DRV be heard. While fairly long, the Soviet statement seemed largely improvised and based on press accounts. By normal Soviet standards, Morozov’s statement was moderate. He pleaded lack of factual information about the incidents. He said, in general terms, that the Soviet Government expects the United States to put an immediate end to military activities against the DRV, adding that if this were not done, the United States “shall bear heavy responsibilities for the consequences.” One almost had the impression that he was not defending a fellow Communist regime, or at least not his kind of Communist regime.

The only other speakers delving into the substance of the issue were the UK and China, who fully supported our action as justifiable self-defense within the UN Charter.

The French Representative professed inability to speak on substance at this point and merely supported hearing of [from?] the DRV. However, like several other Council members, he believed this could and should be arranged without a formal resolution such as the Soviets had requested.

Pursuant to your guidance,4 Ambassador Stevenson intervened a second time to say that the U.S. did not object to someone from Hanoi explaining their aggressive acts to the Council, but he pointed out that since these attacks were an extension of the war against South Viet Nam, a representative of the Republic of Viet Nam should also be invited.

The session concluded when the Council President, Nielsen of Norway, found a consensus in favor of scheduling no meeting for tomorrow and permitting the day to be used for consultations both on the manner in which North and South Viet Nam would be invited, and on the date of the next meeting.

In the absence of further hostilities or serious Communist threats the Security Council deliberation will resume, probably on Friday, in less of a crisis atmosphere and with a possibility that the sessions will be extended over a long period. We now need to consider with you where we want to go in the UN forum from here on in. The debate will inevitably broaden—particularly when and if representatives from Hanoi and Saigon appear. Now that we have discharged our reporting responsibility, we must reflect in longer range terms what if any UN action we can usefully seek to help cope with the vexing problems facing us in Southeast Asia. I very much hope that Ambassador Stevenson’s presence here tomorrow will provide an opportunity for us to review this question with you.

Late Bulletin: In a corridor conversation after the Council meeting, the Soviets have displayed uncertainty as to whether DRV would accept the invitation to appear in New York, even if it is tendered. Apparently, this feature of the Soviet role today was also improvised.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S/UN. Confidential. Drafted and initialed by Cleveland and sent to Rusk through S/S.

2 Discussion of the events in the Gulf of Tonkin before the U.N. Security Council began at 3 p.m. on Wednesday August 5 and continued at the same hour on August 7. For records of the discussions at these sessions, see U.N. docs. S/PV .1140 and 1141. Ambassador Stevenson’s statement is printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 24, 1964, pp. 272–274.

3 A draft of this statement, which is essentially the same as U.N. doc. S/PV .1140, is in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S.

4 See Document 288.

295. Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Johnson 295. Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Johnson1

Moscow, August 5, 1964.

Dear Mr. President: I deem it necessary to personally inform you about the concern that we feel in connection with the events unfolding in the Gulf of Tonkin.

From the very outset I want to mention that we know about these events solely from those statements which have been made these days in Washington, from the published orders to the American armed forces, from the reports of the news agencies and also from the statement, just published, by the spokesman of the High Command of the Vietnamese People’s Army concerning the incident on August 2 in the Gulf of Tonkin.2 We do not have other information as yet. One thing is indisputable, however, the situation there has sharply deteriorated and military conflicts are taking place near the coast of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam and the Chinese People’s Republic, in which warships of the U.S. Navy are participating as well as military planes—based on American aircraft carriers. Also obvious is the seriousness of these developments—indeed, it is impossible to rule out that they may mushroom into such proportions and turn in such a way that it will be difficult to say where they will stop.

We do not know exactly now just what has happened there. But even irrespective of this the fact remains that the warships of the U.S. Navy have entered the Gulf which cuts deeply into the territories of the DRV and the CPR, and that it is from these ships that fire was opened and aircraft are being launched which according to the latest reports, are making strikes against objectives on the territory of the DRV. Suffice it to look at the map to convince oneself that except the DRV and the CPR there are no other states the territories of which adjoin the Gulf of Tonkin and that, consequently, the very fact of introduction of American warships in that Gulf under any circumstances cannot be viewed in any other way but as a military demonstration, as a challenge to the states whose shores are washed by that Gulf.

With all frankness I must say that if these actions of American warships and air forces pursue the aim of strengthening somehow the position of the corrupt and rotten South Vietnamese regime which exists—and this is no secret to anyone—only because of the foreign support, then such actions will not achieve the given aim. But to increase the danger of a serious military conflict—they can.

A question arises before me: have not clouds been deliberately darkened around the developments in the Gulf of Tonkin? Is not the influence felt here by those quarters and persons who do not conceal their desire to inflame the passions, to pour oil on the flame and whose militant frame of mind one should regard with great caution and restraint? But if this influence is indeed real and if it has an ear, then another, more serious question arises—where the present developments can lead to?

It would be unnecessary to speak in detail now about the enormous responsibility which our two powers bear, you personally as President of the United States and I as Chairman of the U.S.S.R. Council of Ministers, in keeping the peace, in ensuring that dangerous events whichever area of the globe they begin with, would not become first elements in the chain of ever more critical and maybe irreversible events. I believe that you should agree with this. And if this is so, then at this moment it is most important to draw from this necessary practical conclusions and proceeding from this lofty responsibility to look at the circumstances around the developments in the Gulf of Tonkin with maximum objectivity and to again and again weigh possible consequences.

I would not like here to give play to feelings although this, in all appearance, is justified by the situation. Because of lack of reliable information I confine myself to expressing those thoughts which follow from the main and undeniable fact, namely, that the warships and air forces of the United States have taken military action in the Gulf of Tonkin area.

I want to emphasize that no one has asked the Soviet Government to address you in connection with the developments near the coast of the DRV and the CPR. If there appears a threat to peace, I am deeply convinced that we should not wait for requests or appeals from anybody but must act so as to remove that threat without delay.

I would like to hope that on your part there will be shown necessary composure and restraint in order to remove the military tension and stop defiant actions of the American armed forces in the Gulf of Tonkin area which may lead to an appropriate response from the other side.

Sincerely,

N. Khrushchev3

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification marking. The Russian text of the signed original, which was handed to Ambassador Kohler at 9 p.m. on August 5 is ibid. Presumably this translation was made in the Embassy in Moscow.

2 Not found.

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

296. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 296. Memorandum From the Director of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, August 5, 1964.

SUBJECT

Speculation on the Background and Possible Implications of the Tonkin Gulf Incidents

1. The Setting. The North Viet Nam PT-boat attacks occurred against a background marked, in recent weeks, by divergent tendencies as seen from Hanoi: a. Their military and political prospects in South Viet Nam have substantially improved, and this fact was appreciated and reflected, for example, in General Giap’s speech of July 26.

b. On the other hand, the U.S. commitment to the defense of Southeast Asia and support of peripheral offensive actions increased both in Laos and in Viet Nam. The covert moves against North Viet Nam and the discussion of the possibility of more direct action against North Viet Nam have been, evidently, taken seriously despite the evident desire of President Johnson to limit the terrain of conflict. They may have reckoned that this danger would rise in the months ahead, notably after our election.

It is out of this mixed setting of simultaneously enlarged hopes and fears, with perhaps a sense that time might not be their friend, that they took a course extremely difficult to explain by attacking directly units of the Seventh Fleet.

2. Alternative Theories. The following four major hypotheses might explain the action. a. The least likely, that the attacks on the Seventh Fleet were an effort to seek a response which could be used as a provocation for a previously planned massive military assault on Laos and South Viet Nam either by the overt use of ground forces across frontiers or by forces previously secreted in those areas.

b. More likely, Hanoi may have concluded, on the basis of its assessment of SVN politics, that a U.S. failure to react sharply to these attacks might have persuaded the Khanh government that further reliance on the U.S. was unprofitable and that Saigon should seek the best terms it could find with Hanoi. The incident may have been linked in its timing to such a planned or hoped for cave-in by the GVN.

c. The attacks could be a device for so raising the international noise level and anxiety about war in Southeast Asia as to force the U.S. into a conference in which the issue of the violation of the 1954 and 1962 Accords would be obscured; that is, they could have regarded the move as a device to place us in a position of negotiating under conditions where it would be extremely difficult for us to continue to increase direct pressure on the North, while they continued their military and political campaign in the South, hoping, as in 1954, for a Dienbienphu during the conference. U.S. acceptance of a conference on such terms would be assessed in Hanoi as a damaging, if not mortal, blow to GVN morale.

d. The attacks may have been intended as a limited reaction to covert intrusions into the North, and the raised level of our support in SVN and Laos, probably designed to make us back off or to deter us from conducting further operations of this type or from continuing to expand our commitment in the area.

3. Comment on the Hypotheses. We know of no evidence to justify the view that a massive ground force attack by the Communists in Southeast Asia is planned. However, a heightening of all forms of intelligence collection on Communist troop dispositions and movements in Southeast Asia does appear justified. The hope that the U.S. might respond so passively as to trigger a cave-in or coup inside Saigon is a more tenable hypothesis; although the political evidence available from South Viet Nam does not make a connection clear. What is clear, however, is that a failure to react vigorously by the U.S. might, in fact, have had the result of inducing Khanh to throw in his hand. One likely strand in their action was a felt need to make a show of force in the face of our increasing involvement in the area. So far as a conference is concerned, what is clear is that a direct U.S.-Hanoi confrontation may prove a more effective way of forcing us to the conference table, in their view, than a focusing of attention on the state of the 1954 and 1962 Accords, taken by themselves.

In short, we cannot give a straight, confident answer to the question: Why did they do it? The most likely elements appear a desire to make a show of force against us; a desire to force us to the conference table on unfavorable terms; and the hope that we would so behave as to weaken the political base in Saigon.

4. The Next Stage. On the whole, it is likely that they did not count on a response as substantial as that now under way. From their point of view, the U.S. strike will appear a rather massive countermove, however limited it may be judged by us. It will create a new situation. Specifically, we would agree in general with the memorandum of August 4 to you from Tom Hughes,2 suggesting that they would feel impelled to increase their actions in South Viet Nam and, perhaps, in Laos; that they would seek to bring us to the conference table on unfavorable terms; and that the Chinese Communists might make some move of limited support in air defense, at least.

As a contingency matter, however, we should be prepared for the possibility that Hanoi will feel itself so cornered or humiliated as to feel impelled to engage their ground forces, which constitute their major unused asset, more overtly and substantially in Laos or, even, in South Viet Nam than the Hughes memorandum suggests. This might be more likely if Hanoi interpreted the military deployments we will now be making in the Pacific for deterrent purposes as the prelude to massive attack. Lacking lucid communication from us, they may undertake what they would regard as preemptive action on the ground.

5. Policy Consequences. The Tonkin Gulf incidents, taken as a whole, are likely to have a momentum of their own which we should seek to direct for our own purposes. Specifically, they will tend to shift the vision of the problem out of the context of a struggle for control over Southeast Asia by local Communists, with the U.S. as marginal defenders of the area, to one of direct U.S. confrontation with the Asian Communists. As we suggested to George Ball and Harlan Cleveland last night,3 this requires of us, in our Security Council presentation, to ensure that the Tonkin Gulf incidents do not become the exclusive focus for discussion but are kept in the larger perspective of purposeful Communist violation of the 1954 and 1962 Accords. It also would make advisable that we strictly discipline our public reporting on the air strike against North Viet Nam to portray the action as an essentially limited retaliatory move, minimizing the details of military reporting, ancillary damage, etc.

The fundamental issue raised by these incidents, however, is the following: (a) if a limited Communist response permits, should we seek to treat these incidents as closed by our action, while we carry forward substantially our present policy on Southeast Asia; or (b) should we take the occasion of these incidents and the perhaps transient unity they bring about in U.S. public opinion and the Congress, to move on to force Hanoi to cease its aggression and to return, essentially, to compliance with the 1954 and 1962 Accords.

I believe it is to this fundamental choice that you and the President may wish to address yourselves as the hour-by-hour events of the occasion unfold. Public opinion at home and abroad will require prompt decision and continuing leadership if the Tonkin Gulf incidents are not to result in confusing debate which could gravely weaken our position in Southeast Asia and elsewhere. Although the Communist response to our retaliatory strike may determine the choice for us, we should seek to guide the forces set in motion by the Communist attacks on our fleet, to the maximum extent possible.

In any case, as we go forward from these incidents and try, by whatever route the President chooses, to move towards a settlement which would restore the 1954 and 1962 Accords, we shall have to shift focus quite rapidly from the Tonkin Gulf incidents themselves to the basic problem of indirect Communist aggression in Laos and South Viet Nam

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam. Secret. Initialed by Rostow and sent to Rusk through S/S. The source text bears the handwritten notation “Secretary Saw.” Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 92C.

2 Published ibid., 92A.

3 The only record of a meeting at which Rusk, Ball, Rostow, and Cleveland were present on August 4 is an entry in the Secretary’s appointment book for 5:30 p.m. (Johnson Library)

297. Editorial Note 297. Editorial Note

At 9 a.m. on August 6, Rusk, McNamara, and General Wheeler appeared before a joint session of the Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services Committees to testify on the August 2 and 4 events in the Gulf of Tonkin, and in support of the joint Congressional resolution. For texts of their statements and related discussion, see Southeast Asia Resolution: Joint Hearing before the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Armed Services, United States Senate, Eighty-Eighth Congress, Second Session (Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1966). Some of the deleted sections in this hearing are included in Goulden, Truth. The statements are also printed in Department of State Bulletin, August 24, 1964, pages 263–268.

Later that morning, Rusk, McNamara, and Wheeler also appeared before the House Foreign Affairs Committee. Rusk and McNamara repeated the statements they had made in the Senate, but no record of the rest of the discussion has been found.

298. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House 298. Memorandum of a Conversation, White House1

Washington, August 6, 1964.

SUBJECT

U Thant on Southeast Asia

PARTICIPANTS

The President

Secretary General U Thant

Under Secretary of UN Dr. Ralph Bunche

Ambassador Adlai E. Stevenson

Special Assistant to the President McGeorge Bundy

Assistant Secretary of State Harlan Cleveland

Ambassador Angier Biddle Duke

The President and the Secretary General had been together alone for about twenty minutes. The other members of the party joined them in the President’s office a little after 12:00 Noon. The Secretary General said they had been discussing Southeast Asia and asked about the recent reports of an impending coup in Saigon. Mr. Bundy said there had been about 200 of these rumors over the past couple of years; that obviously the situation was somewhat unstable in view of the previous coups and the fact that “many of the opposition had not been purged and still were in a position to maneuver for power.”

The Secretary General then spoke of Ho Chi Minh. He said that when he and then Prime Minister U Nu of Burma visited Hanoi and Peking in 1954, their assessment was that Ho Chi Minh was deeply influenced by French culture and traditions, that he was not a Communist or even a pro-Communist—at that time. While conceding that this assessment was more than nine years old, he thought it might be worth pursuing a private probe with Ho. The best channel for such a probe, he thought, would be the Pakistani,2 who had indicated to him some interest in such a role. He said Burma and Cambodia were also natural possible channels, but under present conditions Cambodia was not sufficiently reliable, and that as far as Burma was concerned, he had discussed the matter with General Ne Win on his (U Thant) recent visit to Rangoon and found Ne Win negative on the subject. Ne Win, said the Secretary General, “does not want to be involved in any foreign implications” for the time being.

Mr. Bundy said that some signal had been sent through the Pakistani to Peking. On Hanoi, we have made some effort to get through but it seems to be a blank wall.

The Secretary General said that he thought Ho was probably pro-Moscow rather than pro-Peking now—and added that this was also true of the leadership of the Indonesian Communists and Burmese Communists. Many of the rank and file leaders in Burma, however, were oriented toward Peking. But in Burma, he said with emphasis, the backbone of the Communist Party has been broken.

Continuing on Southeast Asia, the Secretary General referred to talk of a UN role. If there were a consensus, including North Viet-Nam but not necessarily Peking, he felt the UN could come in to take some responsibility for administering the agreed arrangements.

The President asked Mr. Bundy whether Ayub had not let it be known he was acting as an intermediary between us and the Chinese Communists. Mr. Bundy said that apparently there was a leak in Paris but was not clear that Ayub was personally involved. The President thought that maybe they had blown up the Secretary of State 1s suggestion, adding that if they were going to take credit for being a channel perhaps they are not the best channel.

Mr. Bundy added that in any event it doesn’t look to us as though the North Vietnamese are ready for political discussion.

The Secretary General reverted to his previous experience in Burma with the Chinese Communists. In 1947, he said, the Chinese Communists told the Burmese Government that they would not subvert the Burmese Government, and not aid the Burmese Communists, if Burma did not have any “Western bases”. “They even gave us the names of political refugees seeking asylum in Communist China,” U Thant said. For 17 years, he added, the Chinese Communists have not helped the Burmese Communists inside Burma. He had checked on this during his recent visit to Rangoon, he said, and reamed that there had been “no single instance of material aid”. But the other side of the Chinese position was a threat: if Burma did the way Pakistan, the Philippines, Laos and other countries were doing and accepted “foreign installations” in their country, the Chinese Communists would have to “destroy” them.

Even in Laos, the Secretary General said, while it was “definitely established” that North Viet-Nam has taken a hand in helping the Pathet-Lao, he was not sure about the role of the Chinese Communists.

The Secretary General then repeated that the Pakistanis had hinted that they are available for soundings in Peking and said he had reported this to Ambassador Stevenson.

Mr. Bundy said it was somewhat hard to use the Pakistanis because of the relationship with India. Mr. Bundy added that if what the Secretary General was saying, in effect, was that the Chinese Communists thought that the problem of Southeast Asia was getting the Americans out, on this at least we could agree with them, since nothing was clearer than our desire to leave Southeast Asia under proper conditions.

The President reinforced this in the following words: “We are ready to get out tomorrow if they (the Communists) will behave.”

The Secretary General, again reverting to earlier history, said there had been a chance in 1954 to implement the Geneva Accords. Of course, there had been damaging flaws in the Geneva Accords, notably the troika concept of peacekeeping machinery established under those Accords. (Mr. Bundy interjected that the idea of early elections was also a flaw, and the Secretary General agreed.)

The Secretary General said he had talked to John Foster Dulles at the time about possible arrangements for internationally-sponsored neutrality of Southeast Asian countries, but “he didn’t believe in neutrality”. The Secretary General said he still felt that some internationally-guaranteed neutrality was the best answer for Southeast Asia, and repeated that it was not too late to probe Ho Chi Minh’s private feelings.

At this point in the discussion, Mrs. Johnson, who had joined the group a few minutes before, took the Secretary General out into the Rose Garden for the scheduled walk around the garden.

1 Source: Department of State, President’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 149. Confidential. Drafted by Cleveland and approved in the White House on August 17. U Thant held a similar conversation with Rusk at 1:15 p.m. during a working luncheon at the Department of State. (Ibid., Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330)

2 Reference is to Mohammed Ayub Khan, President of Pakistan

299. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) 299. Memorandum of a Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State and the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)1

Washington, August 6, 1964, 1:10 p.m.

TELEPHONE CALL FROM MR. McCONE

Sec said his secure phone was not buttoned up and he would have to talk to M on this one. M said he had gone into the question of the use of some of the sensitive information to prove the night attack and disprove Hanoi’s allegation that it did not take place; it just cannot be used; we will have to have eyewitness accounts and things of that kind.

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. No classification marking. Transcribed by Proctor.

300. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 300. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 7, 1964—noon.

332. For Rusk from Taylor. DOD for McNamara, White House for Bundy. As you are aware, we have suspended actions under Operations Plan 34–A in order to avoid confusing signals associated with recent events in the Gulf of Tonkin. The JCS has now asked CINCPAC to recommend a date for the resumption of these actions. From a military point of view, maritime operations could be resumed about Aug 10. Air operations, which depend upon the moon phase, could be scheduled to begin Aug 17.

From this perspective, I cannot judge the total political consequences which might result from resumption of these actions at an early date. In general, I would expect that, unless the DRV obtains jet fighters in the near future, air operations, which are principally resupply drops and propaganda leaflets drops could be resumed with the moon phase on Aug 17. However the maritime operations, which include two or three bombardments from ship to shore, as well as junk captures, could adversely interfere with action underway in the Security Council and elsewhere. I therefore hesitate to concur in any recommendation by MACV to CINCPAC that these maritime operations recommence as early as Aug 10 without knowing Washington’s planning in the larger political arena.

On the other hand, it is my conviction that we must resume these operations and continue their pressure on North Vietnam as soon as possible, leaving no impression that we or the South Vietnamese have been deterred from our operations because of the Tonkin Gulf incidents. I would therefore appreciate your collective guidance in the light of the circumstances which you can perceive from the Washington perspective. Since the boats employed in the maritime operations have been dispersed and should be reassembled at their main base as soon as possible, I would appreciate an early response.2

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Also sent to the Department of Defense and the White House. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Sullivan and signed for Taylor by Johnson. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 The Embassy in Saigon was informed later on August 7 that further OPLAN 34A operations should be held off pending review of the situation in Washington. (Telegram 379; ibid., Central Files. POL 27 VIET S)

301. Editorial Note 301. Editorial Note

At 1 p.m. on August 7, former Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge met with President Johnson and agreed to undertake a trip to Europe as the personal representative of the President and Secretary of State “to acquaint our allies with conditions in Viet-Nam and seek their support.” (Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary, and Department of State, Rusk Papers: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations) Preparations for the trip began immediately, and on August 12 the Department of State sent a circular telegram to the missions that Lodge would visit describing it as follows: “Major purpose of his trip, although this will not be indicated publicly, will be to enlist support for increased economic and technical assistance from third-countries to Government of South Vietnam, notably as regards getting more third-country personnel out into the field. For public consumption it will be stated that purpose Amb Lodge’s trip is to explain to leaders of various foreign governments in Europe the current situation and US policies in Vietnam.” (Ibid., Central Files, POL 7 US/Lodge)

Lodge left Washington on August 16 and during the next 2–1/2 weeks addressed the North Atlantic Council and discussed Vietnam with government officials in France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, the Federal Republic of Germany, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom before returning to Washington on September 2. Lodge’s reports on the individual discussions are ibid., and in Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XVI, Cables. A discussion of the forthcoming trip by the Vietnam Coordinating Committee on August 12 is in the Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 306, Box 41, Country Files.

302. Letter From President Johnson to Chairman Khrushchev 302. Letter From President Johnson to Chairman Khrushchev1

Washington, August 7, 1964.

Dear Mr. Chairman: I share the concern expressed in your message of August fifth2 concerning the incidents in the Gulf of Tonkin.

I also fully share your view of the heavy responsibility which we both bear for keeping the peace and for preventing incidents anywhere in the world from starting a chain of dangerous and irreversible developments. It was for this reason that we took only the minimum defensive action in response to the first attack upon the American destroyer in the Gulf of Tonkin. I think you can understand that the second deliberate attack—on which there is complete and incontrovertible evidence—could not be allowed to pass without reply. Our action was carefully measured to fit the circumstances, and we have no wish at all to see this matter go further. We have, of course, made appropriate deployments in the area as we are uncertain of the purpose of these flagrant attacks on our ships on the high seas. We do not know, for example, whether they were instigated by Peiping or made by the North Vietnamese in an effort to draw Peiping into the area. I have made it clear, publicly, that we ourselves do not wish an escalation of this situation.

Our position with respect to South Vietnam has been made clear on many occasions. I repeat that we seek no military base or special position in this area and that our sole purpose is to enable the nations there to maintain their independence without outside intervention. Our complete withdrawal from Laos following the agreement of 1962, about which I have already communicated with you,3 is convincing evidence of the sincerity of our purpose. Anything you can do to restrain either the North Vietnamese or Peiping from further reckless action in this area will be most helpful to peace. My country will always be prompt and firm in its positive reply to acts of aggression, and our power is equal to any such test. But the mission of that power is peace.

Sincerely,4

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Correspondence: Lot 77 D 163. No classification marking. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 315B.

2 Document 295.

3 Reference is to the President’s August 1 letter. (Telegram 316 to Moscow, August 1; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS)

4 Printed from an unsigned copy.

303. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 303. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Saigon, August 8, 1964—3:15 p.m.

MAC JOO 7565. Joint planning discussions with GVN.

1. At 1100Z August [7?], selected members of MACV staff and I met with Generals Khanh, Khiem and Thieu, C/S JGS, and Col Thang, J3 JGS. Meeting at my initiative to set stage for effective combined planning with GVN High Command.

2. The meeting was opened with a short briefing for Gen Khanh on the current status of U.S. air defense measures and capabilities in the RVN and their tie in with the overall SE Asia system. Khanh and group interested and asked several pertinent questions. I then gave Khanh a summary of damage done to the DRV by recent naval operations.

3. I then reviewed the threat including air, sea, infiltration and sabotage, ground attack by VC in concert with overt outside Communist incursions. Also emphasized the psychological threat to RVNAF forces of their becoming defensive minded in their counterinsurgency campaign, stressing need for balance between security and mobile offensive operations against the VC. Vulnerabilities were specified to include airfields, Saigon port channel and POL storage. Khanh and group agreed and outlined some of the security measures already ordered.

4. Then took up the topic of need for combined planning. Acknowledged that we had both been doing much unilateral planning but it now seemed wise to get together. I noted that combined planning for increased crossborder operations into Laos was underway but should be accelerated. We must be informed and prepared for probable increased infiltration and movement of PAVN forces through Laos. Khanh agreed. I then emphasized that we must immediately plan for defense against overt aggression, particularly in the northern part of RVN.

5. I told him I thought any offensive operations outside the RVN should primarily rely on air to punish the DRV and interdict routes of communication and infiltration to the South while the RVNAF put offensive pressure on VC forces within the RVN to discourage or defeat them. I then outlined a concept of categorizing targets for contingency air operations. Category I targets directly support the VC insurgency within RVN. This category has two sub groups—those in Laos and those in the DRV. Category II includes all important military targets in the DRV. Category III includes non-military targets which if destroyed, would extinguish the will and capability of the DRV to launch and support aggression against the RVN. I stated I felt that we would be able to provide specific targeting materials when the time came for detailed planning.

6. Up to this point Gen Khanh had made only occasional comments. Gen Khanh then stated the DRV has already committed aggression against his country and was increasing it. I replied that I appreciated his point of view but that my government would deal on a timely basis with specific provocative acts by the DRV.

7. I then returned to combined planning, which I considered particularly urgent. There would be two simultaneous missions. One would be to continue pacification, while the other would be operations against the external threat. Command arrangements then came into the discussion. I suggested that we defer this subject to a later meeting but did mention that our Korean experience might be helpful in developing a concept. Khanh was agreeable to postponing further discussion on this subject.

8. Gen Khanh then asked how the US defines “overt aggression”. He said he was convinced that we would not see PAVN units coming into the RVN with “ID cards and in uniform.” They would come in as VC reinforcements, absorbing PAVN units into VC battalions or regiments, but all under the guise of VC. He was concerned that the PAVN would build up forces in places like the Attopeu area without our knowing it until they initiated an attack inside RVN. Gen Khanh further stated that he felt that Communist forces will increase pressure on Saigon with numerous units infiltrated from Cambodia through the Tay Ninh/Binh Duong/Hau Nghia area. He was certain that with French and Cambodian connivance the Communists could build up and concentrate large forces just across the border without our knowing about it. He identified a large French rubber plantation in Cambodia north of Tay Ninh province as one place he feared. I stated that it would be necessary to carefully review intelligence in order to determine the extent of aggression.

9. I then asked about the reported alternate CP at Vung Tau, stating we had done some preparatory planning plus installing some badly needed commo gear and that we could be operating in 24 hours. Gen Khiem and Gen Khanh then explained that Vung Tau was to be the alternate national command post. It would become a “second Saigon” if Saigon became untenable. They agreed that Nha Trang would be the best location for a combined, field command post for military operations.

10. Discussion then turned to civil defense at which time Gen Khanh outlined the decree of national emergency which he was to issue later in the day. His philosophy is to prepare the nation psychologically for more trying times. He made the interesting comment that for too long the people in the cities have been living in peacetime conditions while in the country there is war everywhere. The decree also would provide the legal basis for many measures that cannot be taken in peacetime associated with a ban on strikes and mass meetings, resource and population control, arrest and detention of VC and other security and anti-sabotage actions, etc. He also assured us that the p lan to pacify the Saigon area and to conduct a large and sustained RVNAF offensive operation in Binh Duong will be aggressively executed as scheduled.

11. The meeting concluded with agreement to have a JGS-MACV planning team get together immediately to start on specifics.

12. Comment: The meeting was a constructive one, both sides airing in general terms their views of the problems and agreeing to get together immediately at the staff level to start solving them.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11888. Top Secret. Repeated to the Embassy in Saigon and to the JCS.

304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Canada 304. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Canada1

Washington, August 8, 1964—4:41 p.m.

169. Following message was handed directly to Canadian Embassy here for transmittal to Seaborn by fastest channel. This is for your information only.

“Canadians are urgently asked to have Seaborn during August 10 visit make following points (as having been conveyed to him by US Government since August 6): A. Re Tonkin Gulf actions, which almost certainly will come up: 1. The DRV has stated that Hon Ngu and Hon Me islands were attacked on July 30. It should be noted that the USS Maddox was, all of that day and into the afternoon of the next day, over 100 miles south of those islands, in international waters near the 17th parallel, and that the DRV attack on the Maddox took place on August 2, more than two days later. Neither the Maddox nor any other destroyer was in any way associated with any attack on the DRV islands.

2. Regarding the August 4 attack by the DRV on the two US destroyers, the Americans were and are at a complete loss to understand the DRV motive. They had decided to absorb the August 2 attack on the grounds that it very well might have been the result of some DRV mistake or miscalculation. The August 4 attack, however—from the determined nature of the attack as indicated by the radar, sonar, and eyewitness evidence both from the ships and from their protecting aircraft—was, in the American eyes, obviously deliberate and planned and ordered in advance. In addition, premeditation was shown by the evidence that the DRV craft were waiting in ambush for the destroyers. The attack did not seem to be in response to any action by the South Vietnamese, nor did it make sense as a tactic to further any diplomatic objective. Since the attack took place at least 60 miles from nearest land, there could have been no question about territorial waters. About the only reasonable hypothesis was that North Viet-Nam was intent either upon making it appear that the United States was a ‘paper tiger‘ or upon provoking the United States.

3. The American response was directed solely to patrol craft and installations acting in direct support of them. As President Johnson stated: ‘our response for the present will be limited and fitting.’2

4. In view of uncertainty aroused by the deliberate and unprovoked DRV attacks this character, US has necessarily carried out precautionary deployments of additional air power to SVN and Thailand.

B. Re basic American position: 5. Mr. Seaborn should again stress that US policy is simply that North Viet-Nam should contain itself and its ambitions within the territory allocated to its administration by the 1954 Geneva Agreements. He should stress that US policy in South Viet-Nam is to preserve the integrity of that State 1s territory against guerrilla subversion.

6. He should reiterate that the US does not seek military bases in the area and that the US is not seeking to overthrow the Communist regime in Hanoi.

7. He should repeat that the US is fully aware of the degree to which Hanoi controls and directs the guerrilla action in South Viet-Nam and that the US holds Hanoi directly responsible for that action. He should similarly indicate US awareness of North Vietnamese control over the Pathet Lao movement in Laos and the degree of North Vietnamese involvement in that country. He should specifically indicate US awareness of North Vietnamese violations of Laotian territory along the infiltration route into South Viet-Nam.

8. Mr. Seaborn can again refer to the many examples of US policy in tolerance of peaceful coexistence with Communist regimes, such as Yugoslavia, Poland, etc. He can hint at the economic and other benefits which have accrued to those countries because their policy of Communism has confined itself to the development of their own national territories and has not sought to expand into other areas.

9. Mr. Seaborn should conclude with the following new points: a. That the events of the past few days should add credibility to the statement made last time, that ‘US public and official patience with the North Vietnamese aggression is growing extremely thin.’3

b. That the US Congressional Resolution4 was passed with near unanimity, strongly re-affirming the unity and determination of the US Government and people not only with respect to any further attacks on US military forces but more broadly to continue to oppose firmly, by all necessary means, DRV efforts to subvert and conquer South Viet-Nam and Laos.

c. That the US has come to the view that the DRV role in South Viet-Nam and Laos is critical. If the DRV persists in its present course, it can expect to continue to suffer the consequences.

d. That the DRV knows what it must do if the peace is to be restored.

e. That the US has ways and means of measuring the DRY’s participation in, and direction and control of, the war in South Viet-Nam and in Laos and will be carefully watching the DRY’s response to what Mr. Seaborn is telling them.”5

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared in draft with McNamara, Ball, and McGeorge Bundy. Also sent to Saigon. The message and a McNaughton draft of it, dated August 7, are printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 519–522.

2 See Document 286.

3 Regarding Seaborn’s approach to North Vietnam in June, see Document 222.

4 See Document 308.

5 Seaborn met with Prime Minister Pham Van Dong on August 12 at Hanoi and conveyed the U.S. message with the exception of final points d and e. Seaborn reported that the Prime Minister became “very angry,” and warned that the United States was escalating the war. Seaborn concluded that despite the meeting he was still little wiser as to the motivations for the attacks on August 2 and 4. (Candel 419, August 15; Johnson Library. National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. 15, Cables)

305. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 305. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 9, 1964—9 p.m.

363. Ref: Deptel 378.2 From our vantage point we can see positive disadvantages to our position in SEA in pursuing course of action outlined reftel.

1. In first place rush to conference table would serve to confirm to ChiComs that US retaliation for destroyer attacks was transient phenomenon and that firm ChiCom response in form of commitment to defend NVN has given US “paper tiger” second thoughts. Moreover, much of beneficial effects elsewhere resulting from our strong reaction to events in Gulf of Tonkin would be swiftly dissipated.

2. In Viet-Nam sudden backdown from previous strongly held US position on PDJ withdrawal prior to conf on Laos would have potentially disastrous effect. Morale and will to fight, particularly willingness to push ahead with arduous pacification task and to enforce stem measures of Khanh’s new emergency decree, would be undermined by what would look like evidence that US seeking to take advantage of any slight improvement in non-Communist position as excuse for extricating itself from Indochina via conf route. This would give strength to probable pro-Gaullist contention that GVN should think about following Laotian example by seeking negotiated solution before advantage of temporarily strengthened anti-Communist position recedes.

3. General let-down in Viet-Nam which would result from softening of our stand in Laos just after we had made great show of firmness vis-a-vis Communists would undoubtedly erode Khanh’s personal position. with prospects of increased political instability and coup plotting,

4. It should be remembered that our retaliatory action in Gulf of Tonkin is in effect an isolated US–DRY incident. Although this has relation, as Amb Stevenson has pointed out, to larger problem of DRV aggression by subversion in Viet-Nam and Laos, we have not yet come to grips in a forceful way with DRV over the issue of this larger and much more complex problem. Instead, we are engaged, both in Viet-Nam and Laos, in proxy actions against proxy agents of DRV. If, as both Khanh and Souvanna hope, we are to parlay the consequences of our recent clash with the DRV into actions which specifically direct themselves against DRV violations of the 1954 and 1962 Agreements, we must avoid becoming involved in political engagements which will tie our hands and inhibit our action. For example, any effort to undertake credible joint planning operations with GVN re interdictory air strikes upon infiltration network in southern DRV and especially in Panhandle would be completely undercut if we were engaged in conf discussing the Laos territory in question.

5. Similarly, it would seem to us that Souvanna’s willingness to hold fast on pre-conditions or [for?] substantive negotiations bears direct relationship to his assessment of US willingness to meet the problem where it originates-in North Vietnam itself. This fact shines clearly through his recent brief letter to Pres Johnson.3 Moreover, it would be folly to assume that Khanh, who is now in fairly euphoric state as result of our Gulf of Tonkin action, would do anything other than slump into deepest funk if we sought to persuade him to send GVN del to conf. Emb prediction is that he would resign rather than send del.

6. Intensified pressures for Geneva-type conf cited in reftel would appear to us to be coming almost entirely from those who are opposed to US policy objectives in SEA (except possibly UK which seems prepared jump on bandwagon). Under circumstances, we see very little hope that results of such conference would be advantageous to us. Moreover, prospects of limiting it to consideration of only Laotian problem appear at this time juncture to be dimmer than ever. Even though prior agreement reached to limit conf, we do not see how in actual practice we could limit discussion solely to Laos if others insist on raising other issues. To best our knowledge, we never “withdrew” from room when DRV attempted raise extraneous issues during 1961–1962 conf. Instead, we insisted to chair on point of order and had DRV ruled out of order. Prospect of informal corridor discussions with PL, DRV and ChiComs is just what GVN would fear most and may well increase pressures on GVN to undertake negotiated solution so as to avoid their fear of being faced with “fait accompli” by US.

7. Rather than searching for “safety valve” to dissipate current “generalized pressures” SEA, it seems to us we should be looking for means which will channel those pressures against DRV; seems to us “safety valve”, if needed (for example by Soviets), exists in current UNSC discussion. We should continue to focus attention in all forums on Communist aggressive actions as root cause of tension in SEA and reinforce our current stance. In the final analysis, this stance would be more valid deterrent to escalation by PL/VM than attempt seek accommodation within context Laos problem alone.

While not specifically within our province, we would point out that PL/VM appear to have capability of retaking territory regained by RLG in Operation Triangle at any time of their choosing and that therefore “territorial swap” envisaged in Deptel may be highly illusory. Moreover, any territorial deal which seems to confirm permanent PL/VM control over corridor as an arrangement acceptable to US would be anathema to GVN and indicate our willingness accept infiltration network as tolerable condition on GVN frontiers. Such situation would in their and US Mission opinions vitiate against any hope of successful pacification of GVN territory.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 33–6 US–VIET N. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 522–524.

2 Telegram 378, August 7, discussed the preconditions for a possible conference on Laos and asked for the reactions of the South Vietnamese Government. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 LAOS)

3 Not further identified.

306. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 306. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 10, 1964—9 p.m.

377. For the President. For the Secretary of State. This is a US Mission report. The following situation report based on a combination of June and July data is submitted in compliance with Deptels 108 and 270.2 Because of the disruptive effect of the two coups on the operations of the GVN and the invalidation of much of the database used to measure progress in the earlier months (e.g., the status of fortified hamlet program), it is virtually impossible to measure the present situation against that existing far enough in the past to provide a meaningful comparison. It is hoped that the present report will serve as a baseline from which to measure progress in future months.

This is the first situation report in which estimates of such factors as army and public morale, combat effectiveness of military units, US advisor-GVN counterpart relationships, and effectiveness of GVN officials have been based largely on a country-wide canvass of the views of the responsible US advisors and observers. By repeating this procedure on a monthly schedule, we hope to develop a more reliable basis for reporting on these important factors which in the past have had no yardstick for measurement.

In this first sampling of advisor opinion, we have been surprised by its optimism which, generally speaking, has exceeded that of most senior US officials in Saigon. It will require some time to determine where the right lies—it may be only another illustration that the front line morale is usually better than that of the command post.

Where possible, we have indicated where we hope to be in our programs at year end. There is little scientific in these projections which merely indicate goals which, if vigorously pursued in a reasonably stable political environment, appear feasible of attainment.

Introduction

The Communist strategy in the their continuing effort to take over South Vietnam has been clearly defined by North Vietnamese leaders both in the Hanoi regime and in the puppet National Liberation Front. It is not their purpose to attempt to defeat the superior Republic of Vietnam military forces in the field or to seize and conquer territory by military means. Instead, it is their announced intention to harass, erode and terrorize the population and its leadership into a state of such demoralization that a political settlement favorable to the Communists will ensue. They propose to achieve this political objective by stages, passing first through “neutralism”, using the liberation front machinery, and the technique of a coalition government. It is against this goal that we should measure US–GVN progress.

Faced with this kind of challenge, the Khanh government is called upon to execute an extremely complex body of programs involving not only military actions, but also social, economic, psychological and, above all, administrative measures of a highly sophisticated nature. The ability of the GVN to rise to this level of performance is the prime determinant of the unfolding situation in South Vietnam. For this reason, and in spite of the difficulty in discussing the situation in neat categories, we present our evaluation in the following order: political-economic, military, overall.

As indicated above, the most important and most intractable internal problem of South Vietnam in meeting the Viet Cong threat is the political structure at the national level. The best thing that can be said about the present Khanh government is that it has lasted six months and has about a 50–50 chance of lasting out the year although probably not without some changed faces in the Cabinet. Although opposed by Minh and resisted less openly by Dai Viet sympathizers among the military, Prime Minister Khanh seems for the time being to have the necessary military support to remain in power. However, it is an ineffective government beset by inexperienced ministers who are also jealous and suspicious of each other. Khanh does not have confidence or trust in most of them and has not been able to weld them into a group with a common loyalty and purpose. However, there is no one in sight who could do better than Khanh in the face of the many difficulties which would face any head of government.

On the side of positive achievement, Khanh seems to have allayed the friction between Buddhists and Catholics at least for the moment, has won the cooperation of the Hoa Hao and Cao Dai, and has responded to our suggestions for improved relations between the GVN and US Mission.

The attitude of the people toward the Khanh government, mostly confused and apathetic since its inception, is only slightly more favorable than a few months ago. Despite considerable efforts, Khanh has not succeeded in building any substantial body of active popular support in Saigon. In the countryside, US Embassy provincial reporters indicate that support exists for the GVN in direct proportion to the degree of security established by government forces. There are grounds to conclude that no sophisticated psychological approach is required at this stage to attract the country people to the Khanh government—the assurance of a reasonably secure life is about all that is necessary.

The intriguing inside his government and the absence of dramatic military or political successes react upon Khanh who is inclined to be moody and occasionally subject to fits of despondency. Seeing the slow course of the counterinsurgency campaign and frustrated by the weakness of his government, Khanh has turned to the “march North” theme to unify the home front and to offset the war-weariness which he asserts is oppressing his people and his armed forces. US observers, in assessing the symptoms of war-weariness and of the bad military morale which Khanh reports, are inclined to feel that the symptoms of defeatism are more in the minds of the inexperienced and untried leadership than in the people and the army.

Khanh’s state of mind will be an important factor in the future conduct of the war and in his relations with the representatives of US policy. He and many of his colleagues are finding it very difficult to face up to the long hrs of slow, hard slugging which is all they see ahead under the present rule of operational conduct. While they received a dramatic lift from our August 5 action against North Vietnam, its very success may whet their desire for positive action against the North particularly if the situation tends to subside again into the doldrums of continued Viet Cong incidents and indecisive bloodshed. In the coming months, we may expect to face mounting pressures from the GVN to win the war by direct attack on Hanoi which, if resisted, will create frictions and irritations which could lead local politicians to serious consideration of a negotiated solution or local soldiers to a military adventure without US consent.

The economic problems of SVN have thus far appeared to be of second order importance. Prices are stable and inflation is under control. Industrial investment continues to be insignificant although there has been some recent rise. Industrial production, though small, has risen steadily from 140 percent of the 1962 level on April 1 to 143 percent on July 31 and is projected at 150 percent at the end of the year, a 30 percent rise over 1963. Exports are off this year so that any rise in capital goods imports would, if not covered by US assistance, lead to a major balance-of-payments problem. For a variety of factors, one of which is uncertainty as to the government’s attitude toward the Chinese community, the black market rate of the plaster has dropped to 135–40 to the dollar (legal rate: 72 plasters). A more penetrating scrutiny, however, may indicate certain basic weaknesses in the economic policy and operation of the GVN. The tax structure, import policy and the present multiple exchange rate system may be acting as drags both on the competence and effectiveness of governmental administration and the proper use of total resources in the prosecution of the war against Communist aggression. USOM is examining these problems in depth and will submit its findings for Mission Council consideration.

Both political and economic factors play an important part in the counter VC pacification program. As the armed forces clear the identified VC forces from an area, it is essential to follow up quickly with representatives of the civilian ministries of the government representing police, education, public works, interior, information, rural affairs, health and finance. It is the task of the United States Operations Mission (USOM) and the United States Information Service (USIS) to energize these forces of government and to mesh their contribution in the provinces with the military pacification effort. This task is proving to be a most difficult one primarily because of the inefficiency of the ministries, their ineptitude in planning and their general lack of spirit of team play. To step up the job, USOM has strengthened its provincial representation from 45 in March to 64 in July but the number of Americans is still insufficient. A year end objective has been established of two Americans in all provinces, often reinforced with a third public safety officer. USIS has 16 American personnel in the field and expects to remain at about that strength.

On the government side, provincial and district administration is in the hands of inexperienced junior officers operating under the policy and fiscal supervision of remote, poorly-staffed civilian ministries in Saigon. In spite of this unpromising background, US observers reported in July that in about three-fourths of the provinces the GVN provincial and district officials were performing effectively; also that in general they were working well with their US counterparts. This situation is indicative of progress since the governmental upheavals at the time of the coup, but there is still much to be done to bring the civil capabilities of the government abreast of its military.

As a major vehicle for achieving the improvements which we seek, the US Mission, working jointly with the GVN, has developed a significant pacification plan (which has been given the name Hoptac) building outward from the “oilspot” urban center of Saigon-Cholon. Not only is this area of paramount strategic importance both politically and militarily, but, in its broadest extension, it contains 40 percent of the nation’s population, almost all of its limited industry, and its centers of social and political power. In grappling with tangible problems of this plan, we hope to induce the Vietnamese (a) to work together better as a functioning government, (b) to build both their urban areas and the outlying rural areas towards a sounder administrative, social and economic reality, and (c) finally to achieve some pragmatic military successes which will bolster their morale, engage the energies of their best qualified people, and drive the Viet Cong effectively away from the nation’s heartland.

The US Mission has recognized in its information and psychological programs the need to present the Khanh government in its most favorable light at home and abroad, particularly in the United States. We are obtaining a more balanced and wider media coverage by improving facilities for the press by inviting foreign media representatives to Vietnam and by helping the Khanh government to improve its press relations. Our own effectiveness both in the press and psychological fields has been increased by placing coordination responsibility for all US assets in the Director, USIS.

We are always impressed with the need to improve our intelligence on the enemy. The level of competence among Vietnamese personnel, both military and civilian, leaves much to be desired. In both categories, we have underway extensive programs for improvement particularly in the area of war interrogation where we expect to triple the Vietnamese capability by the end of the year.

Military Evaluation

The military aspects of the counterinsurgency campaign in SVN are showing signs of slow improvement since the period of deterioration which followed the two coups in November 1963 and January 1964. The personnel strength of the armed forces of SVN as well as of the paramilitary forces (regional forces and popular forces) is slowly rising and by January 1965 should reach about 98 percent of the target year and [end?] strength of 446,000. The desertion rate of the army has currently dropped to about 5.72 percent or half of the rate of last March. In spite of unofficial reports of bad morale, only one unit in the Army, an infantry regiment on a static security mission, is considered by the responsible US advisors to have unsatisfactory morale.

The reequipping of the VNAF with the A1H aircraft is on schedule so that three squadrons will be combat ready by 30 September 1964 and a fourth by 1 December 1964. The pilot training program directed at attaining a two-pilot-to-one-aircraft ratio should reach that goal by year end.

In the view of US advisors, more than 90 percent of the battalions of the army are at least marginally effective. Two out of thirty regiments, one out of 101 battalions (infantry, marine, airborne), three out of twenty Ranger battalions and one out of 20 engineer battalions are rated as not combat effective. The principal defects throughout the army are low present-for-duty strengths and weak leadership at the level of junior officers and NCO’s.

In general, it is believed that the weaknesses in the military forces have been identified and are receiving corrective treatment. The recently authorized increase in US advisor strength should assure increased progress throughout the rest of the year in improving the performance of the military forces of all categories.

Against this improvement on the side of the GVN, one must take into account the accepted estimate in main and local force VC strength of at between 28–34,000, in contrast with 23–27,000 estimated accepted prior to July 1964. In terms of equipment and training, the VC are better armed and led today than ever in the past. Infiltration continues both from Laos and Cambodia and there is no indication that the VC are having difficulty in replacing their losses in men and equipment. However, there is no reason to believe that in the coming months they will wish to risk their past gains in an overt military confrontation with GVN forces although they keep a sizable unused force in the Central Highlands with considerable offensive capability. Finally, they have unused dirty tricks in their bag such as the mining of the Saigon River, sabotage of POL stocks and terrorist attacks on civilian communities and US dependents.

Overall Forecast

In early July, the percentages of the rural and combined rural and urban populations under governmental control, VC control and contested were as follows: Rural Rural and Urban

GVN control 33 percent 40 percent

VC control 20 percent 18 percent

Contested 47 percent 42 percent

By year end, assuming no further political upheavals, the following percentages should be attainable: Rural Rural and Urban

GVN control 40 percent 47 percent

VC control 16 percent 14 percent

Contested 44 percent 39 percent

This change in percentages, if achieved, will represent modest progress toward stabilizing the in-country situation. It will not represent a dramatic advance toward cutting down the VC to size, stopping infiltration or justifying a forecast of final success. It is not likely to be enough to induce General Khanh to give up his campaign in favor of attacking NVN or to convince Hanoi to give up the contest in South Vietnam.

In the light of the foregoing considerations, it is felt that the US efforts should focus on the following actions during the coming months: a. Do everything possible to bolster the Khanh government.

b. Improve the in-country pacification campaign against the VC by concentrating efforts on strategically important areas such as the provinces around Saigon (the Hoptac plan).

c. Undertake “show-window” social and economic projects in secure urban and rural areas.

d. Be prepared to implement contingency plans against North Vietnam with optimum readiness by January 1, 1965.

e. Keep the US public informed of what we are doing and why.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Received at 10:07 a.m. and passed to the White House, the Department of Defense, and CIA later that day. A summary of the telegram is printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 530–533.

2 Neither printed.

307. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, Cabinet Room, White House 307. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, Cabinet Room, White House1

Washington, August 10, 1964, 12:35 p.m.

PRESENT

The President, Secretaries Rusk, McNamara, Ball, Vance, Messrs. McCone, Wheeler, Reedy, McG. Bundy

For second item: William Bundy, John McNaughton

[Here follows item 1, “Cyprus.”]

2. Southeast Asia

Mr. McCone began with a brief report on the intelligence situation. He mentioned the report of a U–2 pilot over North Vietnam to the effect that missile bursts had been sighted and indicated his own inclination to discount the pilot’s report. He reported existing intelligence on air and ground movements and mentioned the possibility that we might now face increased Communist air activity over Laos or intensified infiltration.

It was also reported that there might be a meeting of the three Laotian factions in Paris in August.

The Secretary of State 1ndicated his own view that we should hold up on such actions as 34–A, DeSoto patrol, or any other additions to our current course at least until we see what the other side does. He emphasized, as he has repeatedly before and since, the importance from his point of view of keeping the responsibility for escalation on the other side.

The Secretary of Defense indicated that our side was well prepared for a response to any likely form of escalation.

The President expressed his basic satisfaction with what had been accomplished in the last week. He said the reaction from Congress was good, and also from the people, judging by the polls. He said this response was quite a tribute to the Secretaries of State and Defense. He warned, however, that if we should fail in the second challenge, or if we should do nothing further, we could find ourselves even worse off than before this last set of events. The President did not wish to escalate just because the public liked what happened last week. We would have to pick our own ground; nonetheless, instead of letting the other side have the ball, we should be prepared to take it. He asked for prompt study and recommendations as to ways this might be done with maximum results and minimum danger. He did not believe that the existing situation would last very long.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on Southeast Asia, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy.

308. Editorial Note 308. Editorial Note

On August 10, President Johnson signed into law Joint Resolution 1145, “To Promote the Maintenance of International Peace and Security in Southeast Asia” as Public Law 88–408. (78 Stat. 384) The Joint Resolution had passed the Senate (88–2) and the House of Representatives (416–0) on August 7. For text of President Johnson’s remarks at the signing, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson, 1963–64, Book II, pages 946–947, and Department of State Bulletin, August 31, 1964, pages 302–303.

The resolution expressed Congressional approval and support of the “determination of the President, as Commander in Chief, to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression.” It is printed ibid., August 24, 1964, page 268. For an earlier draft of the resolution, see the attachment to Document 278.

IX. Changes in the Government of South Vietnam, August 11–September 5IX. Changes in the Government of South Vietnam, August 11–September 5

309. Memorandum for the Record by the Commanding General, U.S. Army Mobility Command (Sibley)

Saigon, August 14, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret. Sibley had been Deputy Chief of the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam in 1961.

310. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 11, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC, the White House, CIA, and the Department of Defense. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted and initialed for Taylor by Johnson. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

311. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 11, 1964—7:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared in substance with William Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC.

312. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 12, 1964—11:35 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Although the source text is a Department of State telegram form, the internal structure and references in the telegram (see footnote 2 below) show that it is the text as repeated to CINCPAC.

313. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, August 13, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on Southeast Asia, Vol. 1. Top Secret.

314. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, August 14, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President, Vol. VI. No classification marking.

315. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)

Honolulu, August 14, 1964—5:51 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11885. Secret; Limdis.

316. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, August 14, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Secret.

317. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 15, 1964—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

318. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 17, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to the White House, the Department of Defense, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted and initialed by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

319. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 18, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Taylor. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, Vientiane, and CINCPAC. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp.545–548.

320. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Desk Officer of the Vietnam Working Group (Furness) and the Vietnamese Charge (Rau)

Washington, August 21, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Furness on August 25.

321. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 22, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

322. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 24, 1964—9:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 12 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 10:42 a.m.

323. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 24, 1964—6:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared with William Bundy and McNaughton. Repeated to CINCPAC and Munich.

324. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 25, 1964—4 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Cables, Vol. XVI. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 7:38 p.m., August 24.

325. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 25, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 9:18 a.m.

326. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency

Saigon, August 25, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Cables, Vol. XVI. Secret. Neither the time of transmission nor receipt is legible on the source text. The CIA sent copies to the White House for Thomson at 10:39 a.m., to the Department of State for Forrestal, and to DIA for Carroll. The source text is the White House copy.

327. Summary Notes of the 541st Meeting of the National Security Council

Washington, August 25, 1964, 12:35 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 3, Tab 23 Top Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

328. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 26, 1964—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CIA, the White House, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 12:16 a.m.

329. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain

Washington, August 26, 1964—5:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US (LODGE). Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Breckon, cleared with William Bundy, and initialed by Forrestal.

330. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 27, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 13–2 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, Manila, Tokyo, London, Paris, Rome, and CINCPAC.

331. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, August 27, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 381 Southeast Asia. Top Secret; Sensitive. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol III, pp. 550–552.

332. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 28, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Limdis. Also sent to the Department of Defense, CIA, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC and Rome.

333. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, August 31, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to the Department of Defense, CIA, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 10:38 a.m. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

334. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, August 31, 1964—7:55 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared in draft with Forrestal and in substance with Rusk, McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC.

335. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, August 31, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 107C.

336. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 2, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, Paris, London, Manila, Tokyo, and CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents. 1979, 94D.

337. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 2, 1964—11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 12:08 p.m.

338. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 4, 1964—3 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

309. Memorandum for the Record by the Commanding General, U.S. Army Mobility Command (Sibley) 309. Memorandum for the Record by the Commanding General, U.S. Army Mobility Command (Sibley)1

Saigon, August 14, 1964.

On Tuesday afternoon, 11 August 1964, during a briefing at Tan Son Nhut by General Oden and the Support Command staff, I received a message at about 1500 hours that Khanh wanted to see me at 1545 in his office. His aide took me into his office immediately on my arrival and told me that a couple of correspondents and several others who had appointments were being asked to wait. I met with Khanh from 1540 hours until 1620 hours in his office with Major Kwasigroch present. The entire conversation was in French, of which Major Kwasigroch only picked up a few words. Khanh walked across the room and embraced me when I entered, asked about Ellie, my wife, and said, “We have missed you very much here, Sib.” I congratulated him for his having become Prime Minister of his country and he said:

“I could not stand by and see my country fall to the communists. After the November coup, there was much relaxation, wining and dining, and little serious prosecution of the war effort. The intelligence organization which I had helped President Diem build up over six years was completely destroyed and many of the hard-core Viet Cong whom we had collected so painstakingly over the years were released by opening a Pandora’s box. These two things that are apparatus for learning when and where the VC were going to strike combined with the return of their hard-core leadership just released are primarily responsible for the intensification of their efforts over the last 6 months.” (My observation: Evidently, the incident rate has increased from an average of some 50 a week when I was here in 1961 to some 500 odd per week currently.)

I asked him what would be the results of the recent U.S. attack on the North Vietnamese bases. He said that the men in the streets of Hanoi reacted to this attack with smiles on their faces. I asked him how he knew this. He said that while his infiltration effort into the north left much to be desired, he was getting enough intelligence to know it and, if I didn’t believe him, he told me to ask our own CIA. He said this confirmed his impression that the North Vietnamese people were disenchanted with the hardships and provision under the communist regime and would welcome the unification of North and South Vietnams under his (Khanh’s) leadership. He said that he would thus become a kind of Tito. He repeated this several times and I believe that he meant to identify himself with Tito as a national leader, a champion of the people, who would thus be unified as a Vietnamese nation out from under the shadow, as he put it, of “our traditional enemy, the Chinese.” He said that the North Vietnamese, including their leaders, are afraid of the Chinese and are resisting their overtures to “help”. He said Ho Chi Minh is still there but he is too old to come to the office and that the real power is held by several of his principal lieutenants, two of whom are Moscow oriented communists rather than Peking sympathizers. He said:

“Sib, we are not expert in guerrilla warfare in spite of our ranger training center at Duc My and our efforts with your Special Forces. This is a new kind of war in which neither we nor the great powers like you have much experience in spite of our recent efforts to learn. On the contrary, these people in the north are true experts in guerrilla warfare, sabotage, assassination, political subversion, coup d’etat, and all the paraphernalia which has become classic doctrine to them since the time of Marx and Lenin. This is a war against our people and as long as we continue to try to fight their kind of war, they can succeed with only a small force of about 20,000 against the mobilization of our entire manpower to keep this going on forever. Therefore, we must open the war up. We must turn to the kind of conventional military operations which we understand and not continue to try to fight their kind of war which is new to us. If we do this, our people will rally to our cause because they will know that they are fighting for their country and the enemy will be identified to them.”

“Our penetrations in the north are primarily for intelligence not for sabotage and, while we have achieved some success, we still have much work to do.”

I asked him whether we could expect a Chinese retaliation for our strike on the North Vietnamese bases. He said:

“No, not the kind of retaliation you would expect. They only have Mig 15’s and 16’s which are Korean vintage aircraft far less capable than the American planes and I have learned that the Russians have recently cut off the supply of spare parts to the Chicom.”

I challenged him on this one and he said that this was his intelligence. He said the Chicom lack the military capability to intervene militarily in North Vietnam today and that such intervention would be opposed by the North Vietnamese because of their fear of the Chinese.

He said, “This is my personal view of free-world strategy and, while I have not studied it out in detail, I will tell you what I think:

“For centuries, the great powers—the British, the French, and the Russian empire under the Tzars—have had a traditional enemy, the Chinese. This has been our traditional enemy over the centuries as well. Today the Chinese have massive manpower. We, that is the great powers, have massive firepower. The Chicoms are trying desperately to build their firepower. When they do, it is impossible for me to imagine how we could live with a totalitarian and aggressive regime such as this. It would then be too late for the free world. They would go on the offensive immediately.”

“You know they are working hard to develop an atomic capability. When they are able to make their first test explosion, although it will not be significant firepower-wise, the psychological effect will rock all Asia. They will become immediately more aggressive. We can’t live with such a situation.”

“Now the South Chinese are tired of the communist regime. I mean those in Canton and the south Chinese provinces. They would welcome Chiang Kai-shek tomorrow and he has the capability of cutting China in two from East to West and liberating the South Chinese. We should first insure that the Moscow-Peking split is effective and then Chiang should split China in two. The South Chinese would be happy and would welcome him. Moreover, he has the military capability of doing this today with perhaps some support from the United States.”

Khanh again referred to the Viet Minh and the Vietnamese as seeing in him, Khanh, a nationalist leader such as Tito, but I didn’t interpret this as implying a Tito in the communist sense but rather in the sense of a strong national leader under whom his people could be reunited.

He said that he appreciated the strong support that McNamara is giving him and that he is delighted to have Ambassador Taylor here with his splendid people like General Westmoreland, who he considers the cream of the crop. He reiterated that if we continue the “people’s war” there may be no end to it, that we must open up the war, “il faut ouvrir la guerre”, unify the people in support of the national effort, identify the VC as the people’s enemy and go to conventional military operations which we understand and in which we have experience.

I told him I was so pleased to hear that he had just pinned a fourth star on General Khiem at Vung Tau and that I felt he had made an excellent choice in a loyal and very capable officer. He said,“we must have a stronger military organization, Sib, and it must be headed by officers of appropriate rank.” I gathered that he had in mind some additional promotions in the near future. He said, “I will not promote myself as I am now up to my neck in this political game.” He said, of course with his characteristic modesty, that he felt himself to be uniquely qualified for leadership of his country because of his experience in the political field as President Diem’s Chief of Staff as well as his military background. I observed that Diem had kept the military promotions down and had consistently resisted all efforts to achieve unbroken military chains of command in the armed forces because Diem, fearing another coup, interrupted the military chain with political appointments at province chief and higher levels who reported back to him through Nhu. I asked if Khanh still felt he had to counterbalance the military with a civilian organization. He replied that he felt the answer was to have a strong military organization with an uncompromised military chain of command and with leaders who were loyal and whom he could trust.

I recalled that he had kept the correspondents and a number of others waiting for nearly three-fourths of an hour and he said that it had been worth it to have a heart to heart chat with an old friend. I asked to take his picture in front of the stuffed tiger in his office and he said, “Why don’t we have our picture taken together, Sib?” Major Kwasigroch took a couple of pictures of us. In parting, he sent his warm regards to Ellie and asked me to bring her over with me the next time I came.

In leaving the palace, I asked his aide about Generals Don, Dinh, and Xuan, whom I had known very well. The aide replied that he was sure that General Khanh would be delighted to have me call on them in Dalat if I had time during my trip and that they would be delighted to see me. He said that of course they were not in prison, that I would understand that they had to be under surveillance for the time being.

I told the aide that I supposed the industrialist, Mr. Buu, whose steamship line and other businesses had been confiscated, would be released from the hospital before long as Vietnam needed strong businessmen of this type. The aide nodded and said he would mention it to Khanh who knew Mr. Buu very well.

I left the office at 1625 hours and drove back to MACV Headquarters where I reported the substance of the above to General Westmoreland and, at his suggestion, to Ambassador Taylor later that evening.

Alden K. Sibley
Major General, USA

1 Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret. Sibley had been Deputy Chief of the U.S. Military Assistance Advisory Group in Vietnam in 1961.

310. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 310. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 11, 1964—6 p.m.

387. Am disappointed to note from JCS 7828 to CINCPAC2 that proposal for further patrol in Gulf of Tonkin not approved at this time. As noted Embtel 364,3 we feel that it is important to continue these patrols at frequent intervals.

Although we know in past such patrols have only been on widely spaced periodic basis, are concerned that both DRV/ChiCom as well as GVN will interpret present action as retreat in face deployment of MIGs to DRV. From standpoint Communists, this may encourage them to resume attacks when patrols begin again at later date. From standpoint GVN and public attitudes here, it will tend to hasten and accentuate drop in morale which received major lift from August 5 action.

Insofar as “normal requirements” are concerned, it seems to us presence of MIGs in DRV has raised previously existing requirements for patrols, including necessity closely following by [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] development of GCI capabilities in DRV.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC, the White House, CIA, and the Department of Defense. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted and initialed for Taylor by Johnson. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 Telegram JCS 7828 is presumably an incorrect reference. Telegram JCS 7827, August 10, informed Sharp that a DeSoto patrol into the Gulf of Tonkin August 12–17 was not approved, but would be considered at a later date. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files)

3 Telegram 364, August 9, reported that OPLAN 34A actions would be suspended until further notice, but that the destroyer patrols would be continued. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

311. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 311. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 11, 1964—7:51 p.m.

405. Ref Embtel 388.2 Agree your conclusion removal Quat and Oanh from GVN. Our main concern here is effect reorganization on U.S. opinion. Quat only recently visited Washington3 and made rather good impression. Oanh is, of course, well known in both domestic and international economic community, and his removal bound to have some adverse effect on confidence in management GVN economic problems. Realize risks in U.S. intervening too directly in support of individuals, but nevertheless you may wish draw on these points when you see Khanh as well as emphasize need for type of public explanation which best maintains impression of stability.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared in substance with William Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 388, August 11, received in the Department of State at 8:01 a.m., transmitted a lengthy report on a proposed governmental reorganization. Among the contemplated changes was the removal of Oanh and Quat, both of whom were regarded favorably by the Embassy in Saigon. (Ibid.)

3 See Document 195.

312. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 312. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 12, 1964—11:35 p.m.

393. Ref. A. Embtel 189. Ref. B. Embtel 171.2 Spent an hour with Khanh this morning devoted largely to a discussion of pending changes in government organization and personnel. I introduced the subject by mentioning Thao’s visit yesterday to Alex Johnson (Embtel 189) and expressing an interest in his plans if they were ready for discussion.

He indicated some annoyance that Thao has raised these matters before he had had an opportunity to do so but then plunged into a discussion of his intentions using notes which he had prepared for the occasion.

A provisional constitution is being drafted, a copy of which will be furnished us on Friday. It will provide for a government generally as reported in Embtel 171, consisting of independent legislative, executive and judicial branches with the MRC remaining as the capstone over the entire structure. The legislative assembly will be composed of 60 appointed military officers (all or most retired), 60 members elected by provincial councils, and 30 appointed from politicians, notables and confessional representatives. Out of the 150 members of the assembly, Khanh reckons there will be about 60 anti-government members to form a loyal opposition. The legislative branch will not have sole lawmaking authority since the executive will have the concurrent power to issue decrees in time of war or emergency.

The executive will be headed by a president (Khanh) and a vice-president (Khiem) in charge of military affairs. No mention was made of the appointment of Vu Van Mau (see Embtel 189) to a similar position for political affairs, but this may still be in the cards. The present ministries will be aligned as departments under the presidency. Khanh is planning some changes among present ministerial incumbents to obtain greater unity and competence but was not inclined to discuss personalities. Nonetheless, I took opportunity to put in plug for Quat along line of Deptel 388. He replied that he would probably keep Quat although he was too much of a partisan Dai Viet for Khanh’s liking.

Khanh’s only remark on the judiciary was that it would be independent as in US.

Khanh hopes to announce these governmental changes by the end of the week. He still has the problem of Minh and the four Dalat Generals.3 He intends to offer Minh an ambassadorship; if he declines, then Khanh wants us to take him off his hands by a military or civil school assignment. In any case, he expects Minh to leave the country amicably-otherwise he will release information to public highly damaging to Minh. I urged importance of handling this matter quietly and without a public scandal and he promised to do his best.

Khanh had hoped to salvage Don from the other Dalat Generals but this solution is proving unacceptable to certain unspecified military colleagues of Khanh’s. Hence places for all four must be found abroad either in Embassies, US schools.

Asked about changes in the military high command, Khanh indicted intention to replace General Xuan commanding I Corps for unsatisfactory performance of duty (possibly outcome of Hue incident reported in Embtel 378)4 and General Tri commanding II Corps. Tri is needed to provide Khiem with an operational planner to work with Westmoreland’s staff.

I gave Khanh two general comments, the first being concern over renewed instability which will result from these sweeping changes. Khanh recognized point but insists that the country could never progress under present government. I am afraid that he may think personality problems will [fade?] away if he changes the organizational framework.

The second point made was to emphasize the need to explain adequately these changes in advance as a realignment made necessary by the state of emergency. Khanh made note of this point which we will reopen with him on Friday when the Mission Council meets with the National Security Council at Cap St. Jacques. Following that meeting Khanh wants to discuss with us the text of the provisional constitution which we will presumably have seen by that time.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Although the source text is a Department of State telegram form, the internal structure and references in the telegram (see footnote 2 below) show that it is the text as repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 189 to CINCPAC is the same as telegram 388 from Saigon; see footnote 2, Document 311. Telegram 171 to CINCPAC (355 from Saigon, August 8) reported Khanh’s plans for a provisional government and constitution. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

3 Generals Dinh, Don, Le Van Kim, and Xuan.

4 Apparently an incorrect reference since telegram 378, August 11, refers to two incidents in the central provinces. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

313. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 313. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, August 13, 1964.

The attached memorandum will be the main topic of discussion at the meeting scheduled for noon tomorrow, Friday. In the main, the paper speaks for itself, but you should know of a couple of important issues which it does not state directly.

The most important section of the paper begins on page 7 and deals with possible limited pressures forward in the direction you indicated in the Monday meeting. Within this section, on page 8, there is a discussion of cross-border operations into the Panhandle, and you should know that General Taylor and many others would now like to move toward U.S. air operations against the infiltration routes. Bob McNamara is strongly opposed. I think you may want to hear argument on both sides on this issue. Max Taylor’s cable giving his view is attached at Tab A.2

On page 9 there is a discussion of the DeSoto patrol. There is difference of opinion on when this patrol should go back. Most of us here in Washington think it can wait ten days to two weeks (as the memo says on page 1). Max Taylor would like it to go almost right now, on grounds of signal to the Communists and encouragement to our friends. On this one also you may wish to hear argument.

More broadly, it occurs to me that this meeting may be a good time for you to emphasize again the priority we put on Saigon. At Tab B is a very private letter from Mike Forrestal to John McNaughton2 which shows that the Army is using rather routine assignment and reassignment methods there. A bit of questioning from you to Wheeler might do a lot of good on this point.

Finally, I will give you a one-sheet wrap-up on this before the noon meeting.

McG.B.

Attachment

Washington, August 13, 1964.

Memorandum by the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Bundy)3

NEXT COURSES OF ACTION IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

I. Introduction

The next ten days to two weeks should be a short holding phase in which we would avoid actions that would in any way take the onus off the Communist side for escalation.

We will send the DeSoto patrol back, will hold up on new 34A operations (continuing only essential re-supply of air-dropped missions, plus relatively safe leaflet drops), but will continue intensive reconnaissance of the DRV and the Panhandle (PDJ if necessary). Within Laos, the attempt to secure Phou Kout would continue (napalm may be used in discretion of Ambassador Unger), as would T–28 operations and consolidation of Triangle gains, but no further military action would be done or indicated. In view of possible Communist moves in Laos, road watch and other intelligence efforts should be intensified accepting some greater risks.

We are not yet sure what the Communist side may do in this period. They have introduced aircraft into North Vietnam, and may well send in at least token ground forces. VC activity could step up markedly at any moment. Although the volume of Chicom propaganda and demonstrations is ominous, it does not yet clearly suggest any further moves; if they were made, we would act accordingly. This paper assumes the Communist side does not go beyond the above.

II. Essential Elements in the Situation

A. South Vietnam is not going well. The mission’s monthly report (Saigon 377)4 expresses hope of significant gains by the end of the year. But it also says Khanh’s chances of staying in power are only 50–50, that the leadership (though not so much the people or the army) has symptoms of defeatism and hates the prospect of slugging it out within the country, that there will be mounting pressures for wider action “which, if resisted, will create frictions and irritations which could lead local politicians to serious consideration of a negotiated solution or local soldiers to a military adventure without US consent.”

In other words, even if the situation in our own view does go a bit better, we have a major problem of maintaining morale. Our actions of last week lifted that morale temporarily, but also aroused expectations, and morale could easily sag back again if the VC have successes and we do nothing further.

B. Laos, on the other hand, has shown real military progress—so much so that a Communist retaliatory move is a real possibility. If Phou Kout can be secured, present military areas of control are if anything better for Souvanna than the line of last April. T–28 operations have been a major factor, and really hurt PL morale. Souvanna’s internal position is also stronger, though the right-wing generals and colonels could make fools of themselves again at any time.

C. Laos negotiations may start to move in the near future whatever we do. Souvanna has accepted a tripartite meeting in Paris, and suggested August 24th. With his gains in hand, he has already indicated he is likely not to insist on his previous precondition of Communist withdrawal from the PDJ before agreeing to a 14-nation conference. The USSR (at least publicly), India, and France—and the UK and Canada only slightly less so—are pressing for a conference or at least clear motion toward one. Souphanouvong’s silence and other indicators suggest the Communist side may still not accept an early tripartite meeting or push for a conference, but we must recognize that, if they do accept a tripartite, it will be a real step toward an eventual conference. We can and will urge Souvanna to go slow, but our control will be limited.

D. Hanoi and Peiping, as of now, are certainly not persuaded that they must abandon their efforts in South Vietnam and Laos. The US response to North Vietnamese naval attacks has undoubtedly convinced the Communist side we will act strongly where US force units are directly involved-as they have previously seen in our handling of Laos reconnaissance. But in other respects the Communist side may not be so persuaded we are prepared to take stronger actions, either in response to infiltration into SVN or to VC activity. The Communists probably believe that we might counter air action in Laos quite firmly, but that we would not wish to be drawn into around action there.

III. Essential Elements of US Policy

A. South Vietnam is still the main theater. Morale and momentum there must be maintained. This means: 1. There is advantage in devising the best possible means of action that for minimum risks get maximum results in terms of SVN morale and pressure on DRV.

2. We must continue to oppose any Vietnam conference, and must play the prospect of a Laos conference very carefully. We must particularly avoid any impression of rushing to a Laos conference, and must show a posture of general firmness into which an eventual Laos conference might fit without serious loss.

3. We particularly need to keep our hands free for at least limited measures against the Laos infiltration areas.

B. It is in our interest to stabilize the Laos situation as between Government forces and the Communist side, and to reduce chances of a Communist escalating move on this front. (If such a move comes, we must meet it firmly, of course. We should also be stepping up Thai support to deter and prevent any Communist nibbles.) However, Souvanna should not give up his strong cards, particularly T–28 operations, without getting a full price for them. Moreover, we must seek to reduce as much as possible the inhibiting effect of any Laos talks on actions against the Panhandle.

C. Basically, a solution in both South Vietnam and Laos will require a combination of military pressure and some form of communication under which Hanoi (and Peiping) eventually accept the idea of getting out. Negotiation without continued military action will not achieve our objectives in the foreseeable future. But military pressure could be accompanied by attempts to communicate with Hanoi and perhaps Peiping-through third-country channels, through side conversations around Laos negotiations of any sort-provided always that we make it clear both to the Communists and to South Vietnam that military pressure will continue until we have achieved our objectives. After, but only after, we have established a clear pattern of pressure hurting the DRV and leaving no doubts in South Vietnam of our resolve, we could even accept a conference broadened to include the Vietnam issue. (The UN now looks to be out as a communication forum, though this could conceivably change.)

IV. Timing and Sequence of Actions

A. Limited Pressures (late August tentatively through December)

There are a number of limited actions we could take that would tend to maintain our initiative and the morale of the GVN and Khanh, but that would not involve major risks of escalation. Such actions could be such as to foreshadow stronger measures to come, though they would not in themselves go far to change Hanoi’s basic actions.

1. 34 A Operations could be overtly acknowledged and justified by the GVN. Marine operations could be strongly defended on the basis of continued DRV sea infiltration, and successes could be publicized. Leaflet operations could also be admitted and defended, again on the grounds of meeting DRV efforts in the South, and their impunity (we hope) would tend to have its own morale value in both Vietnams. Airdrop operations are more doubtful; their justification is good but less clear than other operations, and successes have been few. With the others admitted, they could be left to speak for themselves-and of course security would forbid any mention of specific operations before they succeeded.

2. Joint US/GVN planning already covers possible actions against DRV and the Panhandle. It can be used in itself to maintain the morale of the GVN leadership, as well as to control and inhibit any unilateral GVN moves. With 34A surfaced, it could be put right into the same planning framework. We would not ourselves publicize this planning, but it could be leaked (as it probably would anyway) with desirable effects in Hanoi and elsewhere.

3. Stepped-up training of Vietnamese on jet aircraft should now be undertaken in any event in light of the presence of MIG’s in North Vietnam. The JCS are preparing a plan, and the existence of this training could be publicized both for its morale effect in the GVN and as a signal to Hanoi of possible future action.

4. Cross-border operations into the Panhandle could be conducted on a limited scale. To be successful, ground operations would have to be so large in scale as to be beyond what GVN can spare, and we should not at this time consider major US or Thai ground action from the Thai side. But for air operations there are at least a few worthwhile targets in infiltration areas, and these could be hit by GVN air. US reconnaissance missions in the Panhandle would of course continue in any event; suppressive missions might be considered at some point, but not until after the GVN has acted in this area. (Our Panhandle reconnaissance does not have the justification of a request from Souvanna, as our PDJ operations do.) Probably we should avoid publicity on air operations so as not to embarrass Souvanna; the Communist side might squawk, but in the past they have been silent on this area.

5. DeSoto patrols could be reintroduced at some point. Both for present purposes and to maintain the credibility of our account of the events of last week, they must be clearly dissociated from 34A operations both in fact and in physical appearance. In terms of course patterns, we should probably avoid penetrations of 11 miles or so and stay at least 20 miles off; whatever the importance of asserting our view of territorial waters, it is less than the international drawbacks of appearing to provoke attack unduly. The 20-mile distance would not appreciably change the chances of a North Vietnamese reaction, while it would deprive them of a propaganda argument (since a great many other countries also assert a 12-mile territorial waters limit.)

6. Specific tit-for-tat actions of opportunity could be undertaken for any special VC or DRV activity. As Saigon 377 points out, the VC have “unused dirty tricks” such as mining (or attacks) in the Saigon River, sabotage of major POL stocks, and terrorist attacks on US dependents. The first two, at least, would lend themselves to prompt and precise reprisal, e.g., by mining the Haiphong channel and attacking the Haiphong POL storage.

7. US Dependents. This has two aspects. If there were substantial terrorism against our dependents, we should consider some specific reprisal against the DRV; however, this has disadvantages in that it might appear that we were reacting only when US nationals were hit, and ignoring the regular pattern of terrorism against South Vietnamese. The second aspect, whether or not there are terrorist attacks, is the possible withdrawal of our dependents. If the situation should reach another intense point, withdrawal might be useful in itself as a signal to Hanoi that we were really getting ready for business.

8. The sequence and mix of US and GVN actions needs careful thought. At this point, we should emphasize both the GVN role in actions and rationales directly relating actions to what is being done to the GVN. Overt 34A actions should be the first moves, and the GVN would go first in air attacks against the Panhandle. But there are advantages in other respects to actions related to US forces. If we lost an aircraft in the Panhandle, we could act hard and fast, and of course similarly for any attack on the DeSoto patrols. Probably the sequence should be played somewhat by ear, with the aim of producing a slightly increased tempo but one that does not commit us prematurely to even stronger actions.

Summary. The above actions are in general limited and controllable. However, if we accept—as of course we must—the necessity of prompt retaliation especially for attacks on our own forces, they could amount to at least a pretty high noise level that might stimulate some pressures for a conference. New DRV air and AA capability may also produce incidents.

These actions are not in themselves a truly coherent program of strong enough pressure either to bring Hanoi around or to sustain a pressure posture into some kind of discussion. Hence, we should continue absolutely opposed to any conference.

B. More Serious Pressures

All the above actions would be foreshadowing systematic military action against the DRV, and we might at some point conclude such action was required either because of incidents arising from the above actions or because of deterioration in the SVN situation, particularly if there were to be clear evidence of greatly increased infiltration from the north. However, in the absence of such major new developments, we should be thinking of a contingency date for planning purposes, as suggested by Ambassador Taylor, of 1 January 1965.

Our present thinking is that systematic action against the DRV might start by progressive attacks keyed to the rationale of infiltration routes and facilities, followed by other selected military-related targets. However, the mix is now hard to foresee and would obviously depend heavily on specific incidents and desired signal strength at any one time.

C. Handling Laos Negotiations

1. We would wish to slow down any progress toward a conference and to hold Souvanna to the firmest possible position. Unger’s suggestion of tripartite administration for the PDJ is one possibility that would be both advantageous and a useful delaying gambit. Insistence on full recognition of Souvanna’s position is another point on which he should insist, and there would also be play in the hand on the question of free ICC operations. As to a cease-fire, we would certainly not want this to be agreed to at the tripartite stage, since it would remove Souvanna’s powerful T–28 lever. But since Souvanna has always made a cease-fire one of his preconditions, we must reckon that the other side might insist on it before a conference was convened-which we would hope would not be for at least 2–3 months in any case.

2. If, despite our best efforts, Souvanna on his own, or in response to third-country pressures, started to move rapidly toward a conference, we would have a very difficult problem. If the timing of a Laos conference, in relation to the degree of pressures we had then set in motion against the DRV, was such that our attending or accepting the conference would have major morale drawbacks in South Vietnam, we might well have to refuse to attend ourselves and to accept the disadvantages of having no direct participation. In the last analysis, GVN morale would have to be the deciding factor.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides Files, McGeorge Bundy, Meetings on Southeast Asia, Vol. 1. Top Secret.

2 Not further identified.

3 Top Secret. The source text bears the typed note: “Third Draft.” The original draft of this memorandum has not been found, but a second draft, which is the same in format but missing some of the subsections, is printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 524–529. A memorandum from Robert Johnson to William Bundy, dated August 12, with comments on the second draft is in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199 R. Johnson Chron.

4 Document 306.

314. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 314. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, August 14, 1964.

RE

12 o’clock meeting on Southeast Asia

The immediate Southeast Asia situation has not changed since last night. If you have had time to read the paper,2 you can say so and reduce discussion by turning attention to specific questions. John McCone would like to open with a few minutes of intelligence briefing and I think this is helpful. The only significant new piece of intelligence is that we have some new [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] photography of Chinese nuclear facilities which raises a question as to whether they are not coming quite near an explosion. The pictures have not yet been analyzed and no direct estimate is available today, but McCone may mention this new evidence on a most important problem.

You will want to ask Rusk for a brief discussion. The specific questions which I suggest are these: 1. You assume we plan to put these matters succinctly to CINCPAC and to Max Taylor for comment.

2. You understand there is difference of opinion about means of attacking the infiltration routes and especially on the question of U.S. aircraft. You would like to hear argument on this point.

3. Is there any consensus on the timing of the next DeSoto patrol and on its combat instructions.

4. You may wish to repeat to others what you have said to me about following upon Goldwater’s assertion that you gave an admonition to commanders to use any weapons, including nuclear weapons. I have been pressing this with many newspaper men and find a surprising reaction—which is that everyone knows Barry is this kind of fool and there is not much news in it any more! My own conclusion is that if you wish to put more light on this folly, you may have to do it yourself in a press conference, and I am working on possible language.

5. You may wish to ask Wheeler if the Army is using all its best—and also its most experienced—men in South Vietnam.

The general result of this meeting should be agreement on further study and refinement of a program in which we are free to take appropriate initiatives, together with an instruction to consult further in the Pacific. McNamara will be away all next week, and if the situation does not change sharply, we will probably not wish to make big decisions until his return on Monday, the 24th.3

McG.B.4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President, Vol. VI. No classification marking.

2 Attachment to Bundy’s memorandum, Document 313.

3 The off-the-record meeting took place in the Cabinet Room of the White House from 12:31 to 1:14 and was attended by the President, Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, McGeorge and William Bundy, Ball, Vance, McNaughton, McCone, Wheeler, and Ray Cline. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary) No record of the meeting has been found.

4 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

315. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) 315. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)1

Honolulu, August 14, 1964—5:51 p.m.

150351Z. Personal for Gen Westmoreland from Sharp. Security of US resources in SVN.

1. I know you share my concern over the vulnerability to possible VC attack of heavy concentrations of recently deployed US aircraft on airfields such as Bien Hoa, Tan Son Nhut and Danang. I am particularly concerned about the possibility of mortar attacks from locations difficult to secure. VC reaction to Pierce Arrow operation may well single out these and other vital US resources for reprisal, from which they would derive tremendous psychological advantage. This would be in addition to the substantial loss we would sustain from successful attacks of any type.

2. I am sure that you will impress upon RVN necessity for all possible security measures.2

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11885. Secret; Limdis.

2 On August 16, Westmoreland replied that the possibility of attacks on the airfields was “fully recognized.” After describing the actions taken unilaterally and with the Vietnamese, Westmoreland concluded:

“I believe we have explored all defense possibilities and have organized our resources to the best to meet the potential threat. This matter will continue to be given my personal attention.” (MAC JOO 8214; ibid., Reel 11888)

316. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 316. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, August 14, 1964.

JCSM–701–64

SUBJECT

Next Courses of Action in Southeast Asia

1. With reference to the draft policy paper, subject as above, dated 13 August 1964,2 the Joint Chiefs of Staff are in general accord with the policy and courses of action contained in the paper provided that more serious pressures, comparable to those referred to in subparagraph IV B of the paper, be implemented as necessary along with the limited pressures outlined in subparagraph IV A. This will provide for military courses of action, to include attack of targets in the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV), as necessary, with the objective of destroying the DRV will and capabilities to continue support of insurgent forces in Laos and the Republic of Vietnam.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the recent sharp and immediate military action taken by the United States against the DRV, more clearly than any United States action in some time, conveyed to both friend and enemy the measure of US resolution in Southeast Asia. The sudden advantage gained by this military action must be retained. The actions proposed in the draft paper, as modified by paragraph 1 above, if promptly pursued, should sustain the US advantage gained and, at the same time, maintain the higher morale and momentum generated in the Republic of Vietnam as a result of recent US military operations.

3. The next military courses of action in Southeast Asia are now being analyzed as a matter of urgency by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The referenced draft paper will be considered in the development of these military courses of action. Upon completion of this analysis, appropriate recommendations will be forwarded for your consideration before implementing actions are taken on the Bundy memorandum.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Secret.

2 Attachment to Document 313.

317. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 317. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 15, 1964—11 a.m.

415. CINCPAC for POLAD. After August 14 meeting of GVN SC and U.S. Mission Council, I stayed for picnic lunch, accompanied by Sullivan and Manfull (Johnson has been laid up with flu). After lunch, Khanh took us aside and produced a rough English translation of his new constitution. Full text, with notes, transmitted by septel.2 We found it brusque in language and suggested to Khanh that in present form it would raise criticism in U.S. and in world press. We stressed to him that internal problems of acceptance in Vietnam were his own affair, and we could only offer observations on the objective issue of international reactions.

Khanh heard out these observations with apparent understanding and then suggested that we should perhaps meet with the commission which had drafted this document in order to discuss our observations with them. I proposed that Sullivan and Manfull should remain in Cap St. Jacques for this purpose while I returned for commitments in Saigon.

Sullivan and Manfull were then taken to province chief’s residence while call went out to various villas in Cap St. Jaques to assemble the constitutional commission. When mission arrived at residence, it proved to be headed by one-time P.M. Tran Chanh Thanh, and to be composed of Tran Le Quang, plus five prominent jurists, one of whom had recently been Chief Justice of Constitutional Court under Diem regime.

During two and one-half hour frank exchange and after full explanation, accompanied by occasional jocular commentary from judicial experts, Sullivan and Manfull made fol points:3 (1) Preamble did not make clear provisional nature of new “charter”.

(2) Preamble should stipulate that MRC felt compelled to assume authority because of threat to republic, but that this authority should be relinquished as conditions permitted.

(3) Chapter II, concerning “bill of rights” was unnecessarily abrupt. Rights should be spelled out in detail, even if charter specified that they must necessarily be curtailed temporarily because of emergency. Comparison was drawn between twenty articles concerning rights of citizens in old Diem constitution, and only two articles in new charter devoted to this subject.

(4) Several articles, notably those affecting Council of Govt and High Council of Magistrates, were cryptically obscure in their meaning.

(5) Whole document would be considered as unduly permanent formalization of military takeover. Therefore most careful preparation needed in public relations field if this to be done smoothly.

In general, constitutional commission accepted all these observations in good spirit. They undertook to convene forthwith and examine means by which any or all of them could be put into effect. Sullivan and Manfull then withdrew, and, by prior arrangement with Khanh, returned to latter’s villa for final consultation with him prior their return to Saigon.

At Khanh’s villa, meeting of top level Military Revolutionary Council reps was in session when Sullivan and Manfull arrived. Khanh withdrew from meeting, listened to recital of observations listed above, and expressed general agreement that these matters should be dealt with. However, he laid great emphasis upon urgency with which action had to be taken. He had, he said, “five days at the outside” and “at the inside”, maybe only a couple of days. He therefore wanted all the help he could obtain soonest.

He said he and his colleagues would draft a proclamation which they would deliver to Embassy August 15 for our comments and that he would appreciate any advice we could give on public relations handling of this enterprise. He doubted there was time to get professional legal advice from Washington and also questioned whether it would be really useful in these “special circumstances”. With this, he returned, very solemnly, to the room where his MRC colleagues, equally solemn, were busily scratching on foolscap, presumably drafting their proclamation.

Comment: We conclude that Khanh and his military colleagues have decided that this sort of change is indispensable. It is of course still not determined what Gen Minh’s attitude will be. We have considered possibility of seeking legal aid from Washington to review this charter, but feel this would not be useful because this document departs so widely from U.S. experience and because time is so short. We have therefore decided that our best efforts would be devoted to (1) making wording of document less brusque and therefore more palatable both in Vietnam and abroad and (2) assisting in proclamation and other measures of public relations nature explaining necessity for this sort of change. Whether we like it or not, this is the constitutional form which the MRC fully intends to impose, and we see no alternative but to make best of it.4

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 416 from Saigon, August 15, 12:10 p.m. (Ibid.)

3 For another account of this meeting, see Sullivan, Obbligato, pp. 205–208.

4 The new constitution, sometimes called the Vung Tau Charter, was promulgated on August 16.

318. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 318. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 17, 1964—9 p.m.

457. There is need for guidance to COMUSMACV in the execution of joint military planning now underway with RVNAF. This planning will involve three contingency areas: (1) cross-border operations into Laos, (2) DRV ground attack against northern provinces of SVN, (3) air attack of targets in DRV by VNAF and/or US air forces. I should like to comment by category with regard to some of the emerging problems.

A. Cross-border operations into Laos

This kind of operation has already been undertaken with limited success in the form of the Leaping Lena parachute drops. This pattern has the advantage of making reasonably sure that a reconnaissance team arrives at destination and does not turn back at some point before getting there. I do not think that we should be discouraged by poor initial results but should proceed to reestablish the capability for Leaping Lena operations which is currently virtually nil as the result of disaffection of trainees at Nha Trang.

In expanding cross-border operations, consideration is now being given to a concept involving the establishment of three “bridgeheads” of considerable dimension in Laos as described in MACV 8213 to CINCPAC1CS DTG 160943Z.2

As I understand the proposal, it seems to me to be subject to several objections. It is overly ambitious in relation to the forces which could properly be made available without detriment to the pacification effort which should always remain the bread-and-butter preoccupation of RVNAF. Since such diverted forces, in my judgment, should not exceed at this time about 2–3 battalion equivalents additional to present border forces the cross-border operations are likely to be relatively ineffective in stopping infiltration. To achieve any effectiveness, I would agree with the joint planners that US advisors should accompany the ground forces.

It is proposed to provide VNAF air support for these ground operations on approval of CINCRVNAF and COMUSMACV. Such air operations would raise some of the questions posed by Ambassador Unger in Vientiane’s 160 [170]3 to Department and would cause concern in my mind over loss of US control of air actions outside of SVN, which could have great political and military significance to US interests. US Mission is presently studying pros and cons of using US air against Panhandle targets as described in Embtel 2364 rather than VNAF and results of this study will bear on our position with regard to use of air in cross-border operations.

Notwithstanding these adverse comments, I am in favor joint cross-border planning not because of its probable effectiveness but because us [it?] will have value in letting off some of the steam building up in local military.

B. Defense against DRV ground/air attack

COMUSMACV has described in following terms the most probable (in view of JCS) offensive ground reaction of DRV in case of military escalation: “Entire units of PACV could be infiltrated on an intensive scale probably with unit designations changed and in VC uniforms but otherwise maintaining unit integrity. This infiltration could take place across the demilitarized zone and through the Laotian Panhandle. Forces equivalent to division strength could be thus infiltered and marshalled in Quang Nam or Thua Thien and could make a sudden and violent descent upon Da Nang and Hue or both, with little or no warning. An attack at Da Nang could be highly destructive and would represent a direct blow against a major US air base.”

In view of this threat, COMUSMACV recommends holding a BLT on call to land at Da Nang within 6 hours and the remainder of MEF to follow as soon as possible. In addition, he wishes a US brigade available on call to move to the defense of Tan Son Nhut and Bien Hoa if needed and to provide a general reserve. He also recommends deployment to SVN ASAP logistic, communication and anti-aircraft missile units, the latter for the air defense of Saigon complex, Da Nang and Nha Trang.

In summary, COMUSMACV feels that a DRV ground action in I Corps is sufficiently probable to require a BLT to remain indefinitely afloat off Da Nang (with the remainder of MEF on alert presumably at home stations on Okinawa), to keep a brigade available for quick deployment to Tan Son Nhut and Bien Hoa, and to deploy now the logistic and communications elements necessary to support the additional combat forces and the air defense elements necessary in anticipation of hostile air attacks on Saigon, Da Nang and Nha Trang.

There is considerable logic behind the ascribed capability of DRV to create a serious ground situation in I Corps if PAVN units are added to the VC. However, if the form of the attack were the infiltration mode described above, a concurrent air attack on Saigon, Da Nang and Nha Trang seems incompatible with the covert character of the ground action. Nevertheless it is quite clear that an air threat against these crowded bases always exists in any circumstance.

The question comes down to the point of deciding whether or not the DRV actions in the Gulf of Tonkin have so changed our evaluation of the capabilities and possible intentions of Hanoi as to warrant preparation against a ground attack in I Corps and the consequent threat to Da Nang by positioning the Marines, alerting the army forces and taking now the air defense/logistic measures mentioned above (including increasing military forces permanently in SVN).

Another question arising in joint planning concerns command relationships in case US ground forces are brought into SVN. This question could become an area of futile debate if not brought under early control and should be avoided if possible. If something must be said, COMUSMACV could comment that the Korean pattern of allied command relationship, with appropriate modifications, would probably be favored by US but this matter need not be decided now.

C. Air attack of targets in DRV

Joint planning will soon give consideration to the air attack of targets in DRV either under the tit-for-tat concept of Category II CINCPAC OPLAN 37–64 or the mounting pressure concept of Category III, same plan. Here we are brought face to face with certain new factors which bear on the OPLAN 37–64 concept.

It is well to remind ourselves that this CINCPAC plan was drawn up with the idea of applying military pressure in DRV through overt actions of GVN with US participation limited to reconnaissance beyond capability of VNAF and to Farmgate activities to which would be added the contribution of the B–57’s. Since this early concept, several new factors have come into play. The DRV attack in the Gulf of Tonkin has required a US posture of readiness reflected in CINCPAC Fragorder 062335Z 5 which calls on US air forces alone to attack NVN targets. The crash requirement for a plan ready for immediate implementation caused the movement of the B–57’s to SVN as US, not Farmgate, aircraft. Finally, the appearance of MIG 15/17’s at Phuc Yen Airfield, Hanoi, has set definite limits upon what the VNAF propeller planes can do in contributing to OPLAN 37–64.

5 This cable transmitted the fragmentation operations order summarized below (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

These new factors call for a quick review of OPLAN 37–64 to decide what role the US wishes VNAF (without and with Farmgate) to play in any air action against NVN. Emphasize quick review because COMUSMACV needs guidance today as to how to conduct his planning discussions. For example, he will need to know whether VNAF can hope to get jets (particularly the B–57’s) and, if so, when and how many. All of these questions do not need to be answered now but we do need to decide in general what role the GVN should be encouraged to play in out-of-country air operations. It will not do to say the role is zero as now implied in CINCPAC Fragorder. This government must be given a significant military role to play which will stimulate enthusiasm without diverting attention from the in-country pacification plan. This is going to be a hard balance to strike.

In conclusion, I recommend approving following joint planning guidance for use by COMUSMACV with GVN: A. Cross-border operations (1) Only one area of ground operations to be undertaken at outset, preferably the one offering greatest promise of success.

(2) Not more than two battalion equivalents to be committed at any one time (beyond present border forces).

(3) Plans for air actions in Laos to make provision for use of either VNAF/Farmgate or US air without prejudice to final decision.

(4) All air operations in Laos to be on approval by COMUSMACV (who will obtain necessary US clearances).

B. Defense against DRV ground/air attack (1) No planning for landing US ground forces in SVN beyond Marines at Danang to protect airfield in case of clear threat. CINCPAC to have logistic support responsibility for the Marines.

(2) No indication of any intention to increase permanent US garrison beyond possible introduction of Hawk units if [unknown amount of source text missing].

(3) Discussion of command relationship to be avoided as long as possible. If necessary, use Korean pattern as basis for planning without commitment.

C. Air attack of targets in DRV (1) Include B–57’s in Farmgate for planning purposes.

(2) Joint planners to examine MIG threat and decide what targets could be safely given to propeller aircraft under current conditions.

(3) Eventually assure appropriate participation of VNAF in light of foregoing examination.

This message, while bearing on some of the matters contained in Deptel 439,6 was prepared before its receipt and does not constitute an answer to it.

The foregoing has been discussed in detail with Westmoreland who concurs with the above recommended guidance for joint planning with GVN. He reaffirms his position on military posture as described in MACV 8149 DTG 150123Z.7

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to the White House, the Department of Defense, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted and initialed by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 An abbreviated text of this telegram is printed in the Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 539–540.

3 Document 250.

4 Document 251.

6 See footnote 2, Document 319.

7 This telegram reviewed the military situation in South Vietnam and proposed various troop deployments to improve it. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

319. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 319. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 18, 1964—7 p.m.

465. Deptel 439.2 This is a US Mission message. In preparing our reply, we have found it simpler to produce a new paper which undertakes to state the problem in South Viet Nam as we see it in two possible forms and then to provide a course of action responding to each statement of the problem.

Underlying our analysis is the apparent assumption of Deptel 439 (which we believe is correct) that the present in-country pacification plan is not enough in itself to maintain national morale or to offer reasonable hope of eventual success. Something must be added in the coming months.

Statement of the Problem—A. The course which US policy in South Viet Nam should take during the coming months can be expressed in terms of four objectives. The first and most important objective is to gain time for the Khanh Government to develop a certain stability and to give some firm evidence of viability. Since any of the courses of action considered in this cable carry a considerable measure of risk to the US, we should be slow to get too deeply involved in them until we have a better feel of the quality of our ally. In particular, if we can avoid it, we should not get involved militarily with North Viet Nam and possibly with Red China if our base in South Viet Nam is insecure and Khanh’s army is tied down everywhere by the VC insurgency. Hence, it is to our interest to gain sufficient time not only to allow Khanh to prove that he can govern, but also to free Saigon from the VC threat which presently rings it and assure that sufficient GVN ground forces will be available to provide a reasonable measure of defense against any DRV ground reaction which may develop in the execution of our program and thus avoid the possible requirement for a major US ground force commitment.

A second objective in this period is the maintenance of morale in South Viet Nam, particularly within the Khanh Government. This should not be difficult in the case of the government if we can give Khanh assurance of our readiness to bring added pressure on Hanoi if he provides evidence of ability to do his part. Thirdly, while gaining time for Khanh, we must be able to hold the DRV in check and restrain a further buildup of Viet Cong strength by way of infiltration from the North. Finally, throughout this period, we should be developing a posture of maximum readiness for a deliberate escalation of pressure against North Viet Nam, using January 1, 1965 as a target D-Day. We must always recognize, however, that events may force us to advance D-Day to a considerably earlier date.

Course of Action—A. If we accept the validity of the foregoing statement of the problem, we then need to design a course of action which will achieve the four objectives enumerated above. Such a course of action would consist of three parts: the first, a series of actions directed at the Khanh Government; the second, actions directed at the Hanoi Government; and third, following a pause of some duration, initiation of an orchestrated air attack against North Viet Nam.

In approaching the Khanh Government, we should express our willingness to Khanh to engage in planning and eventually to exert increased pressure on North Viet Nam, providing certain conditions are met in advance. In the first place before we would agree to go all out against the DRV, he must stabilize his government and make some progress in cleaning up his operational backyard. Specifically, he must execute the initial phases of the Hop Tac plan successfully to the extent of pushing the Viet Cong from the doors of Saigon. The overall pacification program, including Hop Tac, should progress sufficiently to allow earmarking at least three division equivalents for the defense in I Corps if the DRV steps up military operations in that area.

Finally, we should reach some fundamental understandings with Khanh and his government concerning war aims. We must make clear that we will engage in action against North Viet Nam only for the purpose of assuring the security and independence of South Viet Nam within the territory assigned by the 1954 agreements; that we will not join in a crusade to unify the North and South; that we will not even seek to overthrow the Hanoi regime provided the latter will cease its efforts to take over the South by subversive warfare.

With these understandings reached, we would be ready to set in motion the following: (1) Resume at once 34A (with emphasis on Marine operations) and DeSoto patrols. These could start without awaiting outcome of discussions with Khanh.

(2) Resume U–2 overflights over all NVN.

(3) Initiate air and ground strikes in Laos against infiltration targets as soon as joint plans now being worked out with the Khanh Government are ready. Such plans will have to be related to the situation in Laos. It appears to us that Souvanna Phouma should be informed at an appropriate time of the full scope of our plans and one would hope to obtain his acquiescence in the anti-infiltration actions in Laos. In any case we should always seek to preserve our freedom of action in the Laotian corridor.

By means of these actions, Hanoi will get the word that the operational ground rules with respect to the DRV are changing. We should perhaps consider message to DRV that shooting down of U–2 would result in reprisals. We should now lay public base for justifying such flights and have plans for prompt execution in contingency of shoot down.

One might be inclined to consider including at this stage tit-for-tat bombing operations in our plans to compensate for VC depredations in SVN. However, the initiation of air attacks from SVN against NVN is likely to release a new order of military reaction from both sides, the outcome of which is impossible to predict. Thus, we do not visualize initiating this form of reprisal as a desirable tactic in the current plan but would reserve the capability as an emergency response if needed.

Before proceeding beyond this point, we should raise the level of precautionary military readiness (if not already done) by taking such visible measures as introducing US Hawk units to Danang and Saigon, landing a Marine force at Danang for defense of the airfield and beefing up MACV’s support base. By this time (assumed to be late fall) we should have some reading on Khanh’s performance.

Assuming that his performance has been satisfactory and that Hanoi has failed to respond favorably, it will be time to embark on the final phase of Course of Action A, a carefully orchestrated bombing attack on NVN, directed primarily at infiltration and other military targets. At some point prior thereto, it may be desirable to open direct communications with Hanoi if this has not been done before. With all preparations made, political and military, the bombing program would begin, using US reconnaissance planes, VNAF/Farmgate aircraft against those targets which could be attacked safely in spite of the presence of the MIG’s, and additional US combat aircraft if necessary for the effective execution of the bombing programs.

Pros and Cons of Course of Action—A. If successful, Course of Action A will accomplish the objectives set forth at the outset as essential to the support of US policy in South Viet Nam. It will press the Khanh Government into doing its homework in pacification and will limit the diversion of interest to the out-of-country venture. It gives adequate time for careful preparation estimated at several months, while doing sufficient at once to maintain internal morale. It also provides ample warning to Hanoi and Peking to allow them to adjust their conduct before becoming over-committed.

On the other hand, Course of Action A relies heavily upon the durability of the Khanh Government. It assumes that there is little danger of its collapse without notice or of its possible replacement by a weaker or more unreliable successor. Also, because of the drawn-out nature of the program, it is exposed to the danger of international political pressure to enter into negotiations before NVN is really hurting from the pressure directed against it.

Statement of the Problem—B. It may well be that the problem of US policy in SVN is more urgent than that depicted in the foregoing statement. It is far from clear at the present moment that the Khanh Government can last until January 1, 1965, although the application of Course of Action A should have the effect of strengthening the government internally and of silencing domestic squabbling. If we assume, however, that we do not have the time available which is implicit in Course of Action A (several months), we would have to restate the problem in the following terms. Our objective should be action at once which will hold the government together and will avoid the possible consequences of a collapse of national morale. To accomplish these purposes, we would have to open the campaign against the DRV without delay, seeking to force Hanoi as rapidly as possible to desist from aiding the VC and to convince the DRV that it must cooperate in calling off the VC insurgency.

Course of Action—B. To meet this statement of the problem, we need an accelerated course of action, seeking to obtain results faster than under Course of Action A. Such an accelerated program would include the following actions:

Again we must inform Khanh of our intentions, this time expressing a willingness to begin military pressures against Hanoi at once, providing that he will undertake to perform as in Course of Action A. However, US action would not await evidence of performance.

Again we may wish to communicate directly on this subject with Hanoi or await the effect of our military actions. The scenario of the ensuing events would be essentially the same as under course A but the execution would await only the readiness of plans to execute, relying almost exclusively on US military means.

Pros and Cons of Course of Action—B. This course of action asks virtually nothing from the Khanh Government, primarily because it is assumed that little can be expected from it. It avoids the consequences of the sudden collapse of the Khanh Government and gets underway with minimum delay the punitive actions against Hanoi. Thus it lessens the chance of an interruption of the program by an international demand for negotiation by presenting a fait accompli to international critics. However, it increases the likelihood of US involvement in ground action, since Khanh will have almost no available ground forces which can be released from pacification employment to mobile resistance of DRV attacks.

Conclusion: It is concluded that Course of Action A offers the greater promise of achievement of US policy objectives in SVN during the coming months. However, we should always bear in mind the fragility of the Khanh Government and be prepared to shift quickly to Course of Action B if the situation requires. In either case, we must be militarily ready for any response which may be initiated by North Viet Nam or by Communist China.

Miscellaneous: As indicated above, we believe that 34A operations should resume at once at maximum tempo, still on a covert basis. Similarly, DeSoto patrols should begin at once, operating outside 12-mile limit. We concur that a number of VNAF pilots should be trained on B–57’s between now and first of year. There should be no change now with regard to policy on evacuation of US dependents.

Recommendation: It is recommended that USG adopt Course of Action A while maintaining readiness to shift to Course of Action B.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Taylor. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, Vientiane, and CINCPAC. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp.545–548.

2 The text of Bundy’s draft memorandum (attached to Document 313), without the last three paragraphs, was transmitted to Saigon in telegram 439, August 14. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S; also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 533–537) The draft memorandum was also sent to Vientiane and CINCPAC for comments. Both replied on August 17. The Embassy in Vientiane expressed doubts about how much action in the Panhandle Souvanna could or would accept and felt that Laos was a holding action until the situation in Vietnam could be resolved. (Telegram 310 from Vientiane; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) CINCPAC stressed the need for increased military pressure, stated that no conference on Southeast Asia should be held before the insurgency was overcome, and commented point by point on the items in the memorandum. (Telegram 170530Z; Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11885) Both replies are printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol III, pp.541–545.

320. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Desk Officer of the Vietnam Working Group (Furness) and the Vietnamese Charge (Rau) 320. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Desk Officer of the Vietnam Working Group (Furness) and the Vietnamese Charge (Rau)1

Washington, August 21, 1964.

SUBJECT

Conversation on Political Situation in Viet-Nam

Mr. Rau asked me for lunch on August 21 and discussed various aspects of the political situation in Viet-Nam and a few other subjects.

Political Situation in Viet-Nam

We first discussed the recent elevation of General Khanh to the presidency of Viet-Nam. Rau indicated that he had gained the impression from conversations with other State Department officers that Khanh had actually consulted with the Embassy as to whether or not he should take the office of President. I indicated to Rau that it was my understanding that while Khanh had told Ambassador Taylor and others that he was planning to reorganize the government and might assume the office of Chief of State himself, I did not believe that he had ever told us that he was planning to take the office of President. I told him that Khanh had shown us his first draft of the new provisional constitution and that we had been able to make changes in it. Rau indicated that he believed that Khanh’s taking of the office of President created resentment among Vietnamese. Rau felt Khanh’s future depends on how effectively he operates in the future and only if he is able to win the cooperation of other political figures in Viet-Nam. Rau indicated that as far as he knew, the Vietnamese see no great distinction in the fact that Khanh calls himself “Chu-Tich” instead of “Tong-Thong” and that they were immediately reminded of the Diem regime when Khanh assumed the office of President.

Rau said he has received very little information from the Foreign Office (he says he gets monthly reports about two months late); I indicated that we would do our best to keep him informed of new developments. He asked if we had any information as to the composition of the new cabinet; I told him we did not know who was to be appointed to the new cabinet but that we did have an idea as to how it would be organized. I described the cabinet structure and Rau remarked that it was very much like the organization under Diem. I told Rau I understood that Khanh was considering appointing former Foreign Minister Vu Van Mau, now Ambassador to London, as Vice President and that this office would be, in effect, the executive of the government. I asked Rau whether he thought Mau would be a good appointee for this position. Rau said he thought Mau might do a good job but wondered if he would be willing to accept the position. Rau said Mau might feel he would not be given sufficient authority by President Khanh, given the experience of the previous Deputy Prime Ministers under Khanh. I asked Rau what other civilian might make a good Vice President if Mau did not accept, but Rau made no suggestion. Rau said he knew very little about Lt. General Tran Thien Khiem, except that he was apparently one of the few thoroughly “clean” senior officers. In response to a question, Rau said he believed Khiem had been given his extra star “to keep him happy”, but made no further comment. Rau described Do Mau as an intriguer and a danger.

Action Against North Viet-Nam

Rau indicated that he had learned through a friend who had just returned from Saigon that the Vietnamese populace had been greatly encouraged by the U.S. strike against North Vietnamese PT boat bases, but that our failure to follow-up on this action has caused a let-down. He said the lack of any response by the North Vietnamese and Chinese indicated we could have done considerably more. I said that I believed that our ordering the strikes was a new departure in our policy and that we had made it clear that our response was limited and related to the fact that the U.S. destroyers had been attacked by the North Vietnamese patrol craft and not related directly to the war in South Viet-Nam. Rau stated, however, that he believed it would be extremely difficult to win in South Viet-Nam without bringing the attack to North Viet-Nam. I said that while this question was continually being studied, Assistant Secretary Bundy and others had indicated we should concentrate on trying to win in South Viet-Nam but had not excluded the possibility of taking action against the North if Hanoi’s actions made this necessary. I said that I believed that we should try to make our counter-insurgency operations in the South more effective, and only if we found that this strategy failed, should we try further attacks against the North. I also pointed out the danger of escalation leading to land war with China and possibly nuclear war. Rau seemed disappointed and I had the impression that he believes there is not time left to concentrate only in operations in the South.

Activities of the Front

Rau said that he had learned that a film on the Liberation Front had been seized by Customs on the East Coast but that another copy of the film was circulating on the West Coast. Rau said he would like to view the film, and hopes we will impede its circulation. I said that I would attempt to find out about it. He also said that many Vietnamese who had left North Viet-Nam in the 1930’s, now living in the United States and in Paris, Cambodia and Thailand and elsewhere, looked to Ho Chi Minh for allegiance, though they were not Communists and that the Front would probably find a fertile field among these individuals. He gave me the name of a former ship’s cook who came to the United States in 1953 or 1954, who falls into this category and who is circulating Front literature from California. Rau said that about 100 people had left his own village in North Viet-Nam to go South in the 1930’s and that many of them look to Ho as the leader of the country even though they are living in the South.

I mentioned to Rau that we thought that the Front might try to capture prominent politicians living in exile and use them to try to attract allegiance of non-Communist Vietnamese. He thought that Tran Van Huu, Phan Van Giao and Nguyen Van Xuan were all has-beens and would not have much appeal. General Nguyen Van Hinh would probably not be interested as he has a high-ranking job in the French Armed Forces (Chief of Staff). Rau said we should watch particularly Nguyen Ngoc Bich and Nguyen Huu Chau.

Miscellaneous

Rau asked if we could provide him a copy of a report prepared by Professor Milton Sachs in 1949 entitled Political Alignments of Vietnamese Nationalists as well as any other information on current political parties in Viet-Nam. I said I would try to find the above report and see if I could work anything up on the political parties.

Comment

I have subsequently learned that Political Alignments of Vietnamese Nationalists is misleading and inaccurate and not for distribution outside the Department. I plan to inform Mr. Rau that it is out of print, but that I will try to find him information on current political groupings.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret. Drafted by Furness on August 25.

321. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 321. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 22, 1964—8 p.m.

520. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embassy contact close to both Tri Quang and Nguyen Ton Hoan came to Embassy yesterday to report on recent conversations these personalities. Claimed he was acting as emissary for both. In conveying substance his conversation with Tri Quang, source reviewed line of reasoning being pushed by Buddhists that Gen Khanh is in fact captive of other Generals at present time. Source believes Tri Quang sincere in his belief that apparatus exists within government inimical to Buddhist interest-this group led by Generals Khiem and Thieu and comprised of ex-Can Lao members, Catholics, and certain key Dai Viets. According to source Tri Quang believes Catholics in fact control Dai Viet party. Tri Quang mentioned following personalities as members Can Lao-Catholic-Dai Viet combine: Generals Khiem, Thieu, Lam, Phat (Interior), Cao (Khanh’s Chef de Cabinet), Dzu (ex-Commander Second Division), Col. Ben (Chief of Police), Col. Phuoc (Chief MSS), Col. Huyen (Information), Xuong (Head Popular Forces) and Dr. Truong (Minister of Health). Tri Quang feels Buddhists must neutralize or destroy this organization.

According to source Tri Quang has informed Gen. Khanh through intermediaries that Gen. Khanh has choice to throw in his lot with above group or with the “Buddhists and the people”. Tri Quang believes that with Buddhist support Khanh would be able to neutralize or eliminate the Khiem/Thieu faction. However, if Khanh does not opt for Buddhists, Tri Quang intends launch campaign of passive resistance. Tri Quang would not resort to demonstrations or to violence but would call on Buddhist faithful not to cooperate with government. Non-cooperation campaign on part of Buddhist faithful would proceed in three phases: 1) in general population; 2) in civil service and bureaucracy; and 3) in army. No timing was indicated by Tri Quang as to when he expected reply from Khanh to Buddhist demands, nor did he indicate nature his specific demands.

According to source, Hoan shares view that Khanh merely frontman for Khiem and Thieu. Hoan informed source that Khiem and Thieu were real leaders of, and had Dai Viet support for, January coup and at last moment decided push Khanh forward as “leader”. Hoan claims Khanh has sought destroy Dai Viet organization since that time and this is why Hoan has consistently opposed Khanh since his return to SVN. Hoan fears that Khanh, with Buddhist support, will seek consolidate his personal position, neutralize Khiem/Thieu group and destroy Dai Viet party at the same time. Hoan believes Khiem content to have Khanh serve as lightning rod and pick up pieces after Khanh is brought down.

Source claimed Hoan had commissioned him to try arrange meeting with Tri Quang soonest to explain basic Dai Viet position as not anti-Buddhist nor pro-Catholic. Source says Hoan would be prepared accept position President of National Assembly if offered. However, if major confrontation between Buddhist leadership and Hoan’s faction of Dai Viets should ensue, Hoan would likely leave country.

In subsequent meeting last night with EmbOff, Tri Quang confirmed all above points attributed to him, although denying source had been commissioned as his emissary. Tri Quang unwilling indicate precisely what he is after beyond destruction of above “cabal” of Can Lao-Catholics-Dai Viets. Tri Quang added that he was not personally against Khanh per se nor was he personally in favor of General “Big” Minh, whom he still considers to be of little capacity.

Today, Thich Tam Chau’s liaison officer with Embassy invited Political Counselor and EmbOffs to joint meeting tonight at An Quang Pagoda with Tam Chau, Tri Quang, and Thien Minh. Will probe intentions and at same time attempt steer Buddhists towards less negative pursuits and towards more positive support of Khanh, making it clear we do not intend to act as intermediary between him and Khanh.2

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Taylor reported that at the meeting on August 22 Tri Quang presented the official Buddhist position essentially along the lines described here. The Embassy officials stressed the unfortunate effect continued divisive actions had in the United States and emphasized the duty of the Buddhists to deal directly with their government. (Telegram 528, August 23; ibid.)

322. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 322. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 24, 1964—9:20 p.m.

541. CINCPAC for POLAD. Accompanied by Alex Johnson and Manfull, I called on Khanh at Vung Tau this afternoon to impress on him our view of seriousness of situation arising from the student-Buddhist demonstrations2 and to encourage him to take certain actions. The outcome was agreement to the following actions which conform generally to our recommendations:

1. He will endeavor to announce his government on Thursday3 following Vu Van Mau’s return on Wednesday. He hopes that Vu Van Mau will accept the vice presidency; if he declines, the announcement of the government may be delayed.

2. He will meet the Buddhist leadership to hear their complaints and seek enlist their help in forming government. They will be told the time schedule Khanh is working on to preclude drawn out discussions. Khanh has invited and offered his plane to Tam Chau. Thien Minh and Tri Quang to meet with him this evening at Vung Tau for this purpose. While he had an agreement with them “in principle”, he would prefer to have them actually present at Vung Tau before making any announcement of the meeting. However, if they fail to show, he will announce that he has made the offer.

3. Khanh will announce this evening steps he is prepared to take to meet certain student demands, such as limiting press censorship (freedom of press, etc.) and relaxing curfew hours.

4. Khanh will issue orders to police to prevent further violations of law by the students but he intends to proceed with utmost caution to avoid a physical clash with the students which might produce unwanted martyrs.

5. GVN will proceed urgently with mobilization decrees under which Khanh could draft into military service a selected number of students. However, these decrees will not be issued until after new government is installed.

6. Khanh will return to Saigon tomorrow afternoon and remain in Saigon until current situation abates. Khanh reluctant return Saigon because he claims he unable work with constant incursions on his time. However, in view public and press comment, he would return tomorrow afternoon following his meeting with members of MRC at Vung Tau.

For our part, we undertook to explain to Washington that the situation here, while serious, is not falling apart and to pass the word to Buddhists that we have no sympathy for their divisive machinations.

Full report on above and other items discussed follow by septels.4

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 12 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 10:42 a.m.

2 On August 23 and 24, students and Buddhists in Hue, Da Nang, and Saigon demonstrated against the Khanh government and the August 16 constitution. At the Secretary of State’s Staff Meeting on August 24, Hughes stated that they were “quite serious and have definite anti-American undertones.” (Ibid., Secretary’s Staff Meetings: Lot 66 D 147) In a memorandum to the President on the same date, Ball characterized them as “near-riots,” but not as serious as the ones against Diem the year before. (Ibid., President’s Reading File: Lot 74 D 164)

3 August 27.

4 The full report was transmitted in telegram 545 from Saigon, August 25. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

323. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 323. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 24, 1964—6:51 p.m.

507. CINCPAC for POLAD. Munich pass Ambassador Lodge. Although probably too early make accurate assessment significance past two days events, following is our current thinking which we are using on background basis in answer official and press inquiries:

1. This is end academic year lycées and universities when students, under pressure examinations; are not attending classes. As in past they tend to let off steam in demonstrations at this time. So far size and scope demonstrations do not equal those of last year.

2. Buddhists still wrangling over assault on pagodas last August and have picked anniversary date to revive old fears oppressive government actions, but their activities are still more restrained and under control than was case last year.

3. Although certain elements among both students and Buddhists have made anti-Khanh and anti-U.S. statements, this does not appear to be widespread. GVN has not reacted violently to demonstrations, and appears to be undertaking discussions with leaders student and Buddhist factions.

We note that you are indirectly in touch Tri Quang, Chau, and Hoan; and are no doubt making point violent activities could lead to complete breakdown resistance aggression from North, and thus make it extremely difficult U.S. maintain its stepped up efforts bring pacification program to early conclusion. Report Embtel 5412 that Khanh plans early announcement members new government including Vu Van Mau seems excellent step. You might consider suggesting early establishment National Assembly, where prominent Buddhist personalities could let off steam in debate rather than on streets.

In view of attacks by students on Catholic villagers in Da Nang area, would it be possible to cast any police action there in terms of protecting innocent peasants?

We have no plans for USG statement on merits dispute, but we stand ready to give quick and favorable consideration any suggestion you may make as situation develops.

Finally, we unable determine here whether these political disturbances could in any way reflect Hanoi or VC campaign mounted as reaction Tonkin Gulf incident. Would appreciate your comments.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared with William Bundy and McNaughton. Repeated to CINCPAC and Munich.

2 Document 322.

324. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 324. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 25, 1964—4 a.m.

542. Khanh requested that Johnson, Manfull and I meet with him at 1 am this morning to inform us of his meeting with Buddhist del. Khanh said he was unable to meet with Buddhist del at Vung Tau and returned to Saigon. The Buddhist del, composed of Tam Chau, Thinh Minh, and Tri Quang, filed with him written prepared statement of their demands substance of which follows: 1. The Aug 16 charter to be annulled or at the minimum its application immediately suspended.

2. The charter to be replaced by provisional constitution drafted by “juridical authorities.”

3. The MRC to elect the pres (under new provisional constitution) and then MRC to disband itself, the pres to form provisional govt from “patriotic and capable elements”.

4. The pres to appoint committee to draft permanent constitution and electoral law to go into effect by Nov 1, 1965.

5. The pres to call for national religious council that would include all religious groups.

6. Council for press censorship to be formed of MinInfo and reps of the press.

7. All those guilty of crimes to be severely punished.

8. All Can Lao elements to be dismissed “even if wearing Dai Viet labels”.

Buddhist statement concluded by statement that if above demands not met Buddhists would embark on campaign of passive resistance “without collaborating with any other group”. In presenting statement, Buddhists asked Khanh to make proclamation accepting their demands which Buddhist leaders could refer to at demonstration At central market scheduled for 0800 Aug 25.

Khanh stated that he had informed Buddhists that he could not give them immediate answer. Subsequently he discussed matter with General Khiem. According to Khanh, Khiem said it was Khanh’s decision but suggested Khanh discuss problem with Americans, and if Americans agreed that Khanh should go along with Buddhist demands, then Khiem would support him. Khanh said he specifically requested Buddhists not publish their written statement. Khanh appeared disposed to accept Buddhist demands.

Khanh then requested my views as to how he should proceed. In response I stressed we were in no position give him any advice in any official capacity, but as interested third party could give him my tentative personal views. It was his responsibility to decide his course of action. On this basis I said I thought a mistake to give in to pressure from minority group on an issue of this importance, particularly to an ultimatum with short deadline. To do so may only create further demands. I suggested he inform Buddhist leadership that he would consider their demands carefully along with ideas and suggestions from other minority groups. I added that he could assure Buddhists that he was willing to sit down with them and attempt reconcile points of view over next few days but final decision must also accommodate legitimate aspirations and concerns of other groups. I said it appeared to me useful for him to emphasize throughout that charter was provisional in nature, was subject to modification or amendment with experience and not final definitive constitution. He should stress that in time of war it is essential that govt be formed quickly.

I informed Khanh that I intended to return Tam Chau’s call on Aug 25 and, without ref to current conversation, inform Chau that US was against shortsighted actions by any group which promoted disunity and divisions within the country.

Khanh emphasized throughout his fear of religious war or failing this extreme development, an extended conflict between Buddhist and Catholic groups which would inevitably sap the morale of armed forces. He also seemed attracted by possibility of eliminating the MRC from the picture. In reply to question, he said there would not be any ambiguity in identifying “Can Lao” elements, they being well known.

In conclusion Khanh said that he agreed with informal comments we had made and that he had in fact drafted his own proclamation along following lines, prior to seeing Buddhists, which was designed to assuage certain concerns of both students and Buddhists:

1. He is now in process of consulting religious groups and politicians form govt of capable honest men.

2. He intends to ease restrictions on censorship and to modify existing curfew (note: to meet student demands).

3. He is willing to modify provisional charter as necessary (note: Khanh made point that this was to “modify” but not to “suspend” provisional charter as demanded by Buddhists).

4. Crimes including terrorism will be quickly punished by military court (note: Khanh considers this another nod to the Buddhists).

5. Recent incidents and demonstrations have destroyed public and private property and have killed innocent people. These activities must cease.

6. Only VC and neutralists profit from activities which create disunity and divisive forces among the people.

7. Current critical situation does not permit people to engage in activities which aid the VC and he appeals to patriotism of Vietnamese to rally behind govt.

In sum Khanh believed that such proclamation would meet certain concerns of students and some of the legitimate concerns of the Buddhists. However it was still clear that he found certain attractions in the Buddhist demands.

Taylor

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Cables, Vol. XVI. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 7:38 p.m., August 24.

325. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 325. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 25, 1964—8 p.m.

555. CINCPAC for POLAD. Following the meeting of the MRC on 25 August, the following proclamation was made: “The MRC meeting on the morning of 25 August 1964 at the office of the ARVN Commander in Chief has resolved the following:

1. To revoke constitution of 16 August 1964.

2. To call an urgent meeting of the MRC to elect a new Chief of State.

3. Following the election of a new Chief of State, the MRC will be dissolved and will return the powers of leadership to the armed forces of the Republic of Vietnam in order to oppose Communism, neutralism, colonialism and every form of treacherous dictatorship.

4. The new Chief of State will be entrusted with the responsibility of calling a national assembly in order to develop the national structure in going along with the aspirations of all the people in a position which will oppose Communism, neutralism, colonialism and each form of treacherous dictatorship and reconstruct the nation in democratic freedom.

5. In the meantime, the work of managing the nation will be carried out by the present government.

Saigon, 25 August 1964

Steering Committee of the MRC”

I called on Khanh at 4:00 pm to obtain his interpretation of recent events to include the meaning of the very general language of the foregoing proclamation. He gave me the following information.

The new Chief of State will be elected by the MRC at a meeting in Saigon, 10:00 am, 26 August. All Generals, including the four Dalat Generals, have been invited to attend. Khanh asked me if I would pass the word to Minh that his presence would be appreciated in the interest of national unity. I agreed to do so.

Khanh explained that with the dissolution of the MRC there will be no political body above the president who will appoint the members of the executive, the key figures of the judiciary and the members of the national assembly. Although the exact composition of the assembly is still under study, Khanh is thinking in terms of 300 members representing the various political and religious groupings. He feels that it will take at least a couple of weeks to get the assembly going whereas he expects to round out the executive by the end of this week.

With regard to the executive, he intends to have a civilian vice president and Vu Van Mau is still the front running candidate. The heads of executive departments will be largely civilian; in fact, Khanh (who seems to have no doubt that he will be elected president a second time) intends to have only the Department of Defense headed by a military incumbent.

Khanh stressed that all of this arrangement was provisional and that, within a year, he hopes to have drawn up a permanent constitution and be in a position to hold general elections for a permanent assembly. For the next few days, the government will continue to function as at present.

We then discussed some of the factors which have been in the background of recent developments.

Khanh says that he had no particular trouble getting the Generals of the MRC to agree with this sweeping concession to Buddhist demand which results in the dissolution of the Council. (This easy acquiescence is hard to believe.) He anticipates some trouble with the Dai Viets but feels it will be manageable. He is particularly incensed against Deputy Premier Hoan who, in the midst of yesterday’s events, published a letter critical of Khanh.

The master mind behind these incidents has been Buddhist leader, Tri Quang. His control of the student rioters was proved by the quickness with which order was restored in Saigon today after Khanh agreed to his demands. Tri Quang and his Buddhist colleagues have promised to endorse Khanh’s actions and to come out publicly for the first time against Communism.

Now the question is whether the Buddhists will keep their word and Khanh is clearly anxious. Khanh asked if I or other Embassy representatives could see Tri Quang and urge upon him the essentiality of living up to his part of the bargain. He described Tri Quang as a “type special”, more of a politician than a bonze for whose power he, Khanh was obvious respect.

I pressed Khanh hard on the question of whether this was going to be a Buddhist government or a national government, whether he would be Buddhist president or a national president. He fought back hard on both points insisting that he knew the importance of a national government and the impossibility of winning the war without broad national support.

I asked him whether he feared a Catholic reaction at this time and I received a negative reply. He would like to discuss his plans with the Catholic leaders but unfortunately Archbishop Binh is out of town and the new Papal Delegate, Palmas, has not yet presented his credentials. I expressed the view that in spite of these circumstances he should explain his position to the Catholics at an early date.

In closing, I asked Khanh how I should interpret these events to Washington where they were being watched with deep concern. He replied that today’s decision marked the withdrawal of the army from politics. Any other alternative would have resulted in the use of armed force against fellow citizens, a solution which he, Khanh found was intolerable. If the Buddhists make good on their word, the counterinsurgency program can proceed apace. If they do not, Khanh sees no military solution to bring the war against the Viet Cong to a successful conclusion.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 9:18 a.m.

326. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency 326. Telegram From the Central Intelligence Agency Station in Saigon to the Agency1

Saigon, August 25, 1964.

The following is dated August 25 for your background use.

1. Ambassador Taylor had long meeting with General Khanh afternoon 25 August which is being reported in considerable detail in Embtel 555 to Department of State.2 After you have read that telegram, you will note that Khanh, even if his most optimistic views obtain, has in effect put his government completely in the hands of Tri Quang, and by so doing has similarly bound over to Tri Quang’s safekeeping our own government’s equity, commitment, and policy in this country.

2. The alternatives to Khanh’s continuing in normal power would seem to be, at this point: a. The reappearance of Big Minh again as a figurehead nominally leading a government acceptable to Tri Quang.

b. Rejection of the Buddhist demands by a new junta headed by Khiem, with further domestic convulsions to follow.

c. Some other kind of impasse with results difficult to anticipate.

In any event, a new and dangerous period has begun, and the effects of the current upheavals have not yet shown themselves in terms of popular or military morale, but the prognosis of [on?] this side is not optimistic.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Cables, Vol. XVI. Secret. Neither the time of transmission nor receipt is legible on the source text. The CIA sent copies to the White House for Thomson at 10:39 a.m., to the Department of State for Forrestal, and to DIA for Carroll. The source text is the White House copy.

2 Document 325.

327. Summary Notes of the 541st Meeting of the National Security Council 327. Summary Notes of the 541st Meeting of the National Security Council1

Washington, August 25, 1964, 12:35 p.m.

[Here follows discussion of Cyprus.]

William Bundy: As to South Vietnam, Prime Minister Khanh has suspended the constitution and the Buddhists have made their demands on the government. The Military Council will meet tonight to elect a new President. A new National Assembly is to be called. President Khanh has told Ambassador Taylor that he expects to be reelected. These developments are the result of some kind of a bargain between President Khanh and the Buddhists. Two major uncertainties are apparent: A. Will the Buddhists carry out their part of the bargain and come out against the Communists?

B. Does President Khanh have sufficient military support to be reelected? The generals may not sit still for a downgrading of the Military Council.

Some very tough decisions will have to be made soon, but none right now. After the election of the new Assembly, we will have to support whoever comes out on top. It is a messed up situation.

Secretary Rusk: We should not call off Ambassador Taylor’s planned trip to Washington. We have a strong team in the field and we don’t know when would be a better time for him to come.

Bromley Smith

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, NSC Meetings, Vol. 3, Tab 23 Top Secret; Sensitive; For the President Only. Drafted by Bromley Smith.

328. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 328. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 26, 1964—11 a.m.

559. After events Aug 25,2 and despite fact that MRC publicly endorsed Khanh’s capitulations to Buddhist demands, it became soon clear that major elements of MRC were happy [unhappy] with outcome and wished upset results. Those officers centered around Khiem and Thieu immediately began politicking during evening and night of Aug 25 with primary purpose of ousting Khanh from presidency. Khanh, in meantime, had gone to Vung Tau in order “get some sleep” and presumably to withdraw himself from central arena of bargaining.

In early evening Aug 25, Khiem and Thieu sought out Big Minh, gave him a somewhat biased account of day’s events and apparently left Minh with impression that he, Minh, would be a strong candidate in Aug 26 MRC elections for president. Other pro-Khiem elements of MRC, especially Lam, were busy making contact with MRC members, reportedly sounding them out on voting possibilities. I had sent Westmoreland to see Khiem and sent Stilwell to see Thieu during evening to sound out their state of mind. During night, Lam had insistently sought info from his MACV adviser, wishing to know US Govt opinion of possible change from Khanh to some other General as President. I had also sent a note to Big Minh encouraging him to attend MRC meeting and cast his vote there.

On morning Aug 26, I received word that Minh wished see me at 9:00 am (elections were scheduled for 10:00 am). I also had received reports re politicking activities during night of Aug 25. I therefore decided upon and took following actions.

(1) I went to see Minh (detailed report by septel)3 and told him US wanted no change in govt. Our candidate was Khanh.

(2) I sent De Silva to see Khiem to convey same message to him.4

(3) I sent Gen Lam’s MACV adviser to see Lam and tell him we had no alternate candidate to Khanh.

(4) After these events (at about 9:40) I telephoned Khanh, reported my conversation with Minh, assured him of our support, and wished him good luck in elections.

It was my conviction, in taking these actions, that US could not possibly afford confusion that would result from loss of Khanh, that internal maneuvers had to be stopped somewhere, and that Khanh is indeed the best bet we have in current circumstances. I am now awaiting report on results of election.5

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CIA, the White House, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 12:16 a.m.

2 Taylor’s diary describes the events of August 25 as a “rump meeting” of the Military Revolutionary Committee “with only the corps commanders and Chiefs of Staff present.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69, Box 55)

3 Telegram 561 from Saigon, August 26, noon. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 A report on De Silva’s meeting with Khiem was transmitted in telegram 564 from Saigon, August 26, 4 p.m. (Ibid., POL 15–1 VIET S) Following receipt of telegrams 561 and 564, the Department of State cabled Saigon that it fully concurred in the line taken with the Generals. The Mission was instructed to continue its efforts along these lines as long as deemed appropriate. (Telegram 521, August 26; ibid.)

5 At the end of the day, Taylor and Johnson met with Khanh, who reviewed the MRC sessions. Khanh reported that the going had been hard and that the Dai Viet were not above attempting a coup. A variety of organizational changes were discussed, but nothing settled. Khanh also reported that he had received a letter from Tri Quang pledging his support. (Telegram 572 from Saigon, August 27, 12:30 a.m.; ibid., POL 15 VIET S) Tri Quang had informed the U.S. Embassy about the letter at noon. (Telegram 570 from Saigon, August 26, 9 p.m.; ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

329. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain 329. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Spain1

Washington, August 26, 1964—5:55 p.m.

188. For Ambassador Lodge. Concur in line you have taken in private and public conversations that present unrest in South Viet Nam cannot deter us from primary goal of resisting Communist aggression and achieving stability in that country. Buddhist and student demonstrations which have forced Khanh to abrogate August 16 Constitution spring from continuing religious tension which is one of numerous critical problems GVN must meet in order to preserve its independence.

We do not intend to make any public statement here today on the subject of whom we favor in the current crisis. We are taking line that it not appropriate for US Government to comment while Military Revolutionary Council still in session. We are pointing out that Khanh is still head of GVN, and as we have stated many times in past, we continue to support GVN.

FYI: Ambassador Taylor has made clear to Generals Minh and Khiem that we strongly favor General Khanh’s continuance as head of GVN. August 26 meeting of MRC was inconclusive, and next MRC meeting scheduled to begin 0100Z August 27. End FYI.

We shall continue to pass you most important messages from Saigon on situation.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 7 US (LODGE). Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Breckon, cleared with William Bundy, and initialed by Forrestal.

330. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 330. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 27, 1964—5 p.m.

577. Rome for Lodge. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 5072 While we cannot be sure that we have all the facts nor that the so-called facts we have are fully reliable, we are inclined to view the events since about August 21 up to noon today in the following light:

The government which Khanh put together after the coup of January 30, 1964 achieved a tenuous equilibrium which fundamentally satisfied no single activist element in Vietnam politics, but which did not dissatisfy any significant political group enough to cause the outbreak of intractable opposition. At the same time, the government itself proved to be little more than a collection of individual personalities and ambitions which proved unable to work effectively together or to address themselves consistently to problems of national interest.

Khanh from the start seems to have lacked confidence in most of the politicians in his cabinet (as well as they in each other) and to have refrained from assigning them other than token responsibility. His incompatibility with his cabinet deepened and he came to rely to an ever growing degree upon the instrument of the armed forces, and especially on General Khiem (who had apparently played an important role in bringing Khanh to power), to accomplish whatever efforts the government was able to muster in the campaign against the Viet Cong. Even in this quarter, however, he had less than complete confidence and received less than wholehearted support. And, rightly or wrongly, he came to feel that General Minh was to some extent responsible for his military and political problems. He therefore concentrated a great measure of his attention, in the past several weeks, upon the problem of getting rid of General Minh in a manner which would not disrupt the army. Also, he developed general feeling that pacification programs were too slow and achieved at high cost in lives, and sensed, or thought he sensed a general malaise demanding dramatic developments on solutions. In casting about Khanh hit on the “march to the North” theme and with the August US attack on DRV he seized the favorable climate thus created to attempt emergency solution to perennial problems as well as opportunity he felt this gave him to remove Minh.

The scheme he hit upon to eliminate Minh along with certain unwelcome ministers was the creation of a provisional constitution which simply pulled Minh’s position out from under him. As early as May Khanh had begun to toy with this project, talking in terms of a “de Gaulle-Pompidou” system as well as straight presidential system. He had talked to various politicians such as Tran Van Do regarding the form it should take. It is quite certain that it was discussed in great detail with Khiem, who was Khanh’s greatest assurance of maintaining army unity. Khiem’s own role in this development is somewhat obscure and there are some indications that he found the scheme ill-advised, particularly the elimination of Minh. However, disregarding our advice Khanh failed to lay either the necessary political or public groundwork and when the new charter emerged under forced draft over a weekend and its authors became identified, it was recognized by many that former Can Lao elements (such figures as Tran Chan Thanh, Tran Le Quang and General Cao) had had a major role in drafting it. It also seemed probable that many of these Can Lao figures hoped to play a key role in the new government to be established under the new charter. Moreover, after it emerged in its final version from the MRC, it was evident MRC had put more of a strait jacket around Khanh, limiting the independence of MRC he had sought through his own first draft. Thus, though the charter in no way changed fundamental relationship of MRC asserting supreme power, with Khanh as leader of government, the charter did provide focal point and catalyst in bringing discontented elements to surface.

Khanh, therefore, in his concentration on the problem of Minh, had conjured up a whole new set of problems while attempting to solve an immediate one.

The Buddhists and students, who have been feeling their political oats since their successes against Diem, felt they had suffered a set back in the January 30 coup that put Khanh in power and now saw further setbacks in prospect. Goaded by the militant Tri Quang, they saw the specter of Diemism in the combination of the predominantly Catholic MRC and the old Can Lao. It should be emphasized it was only a specter as at no time had there been any evidence of a government policy of mistreatment of Buddhists.

The students, nettled by such petty annoyances as an 11:00 pm curfew and censorship of the press, and fearing the prospect of a much more effective National Service Law, saw the end of some of their teahouse leisure and were amenable to leadership of Tri Quang and Buddhists. (There is considerable evidence of concert between Buddhists and students although all the points of contact are not yet established.)

The Dai Viet, troubled by Khanh’s effort to upset the post-January governmental equilibrium were probably uncertain regarding his real motives and interpreted the charter of August 16 as possibly directed against them.

All three of these groups, plus dissident out-politicians began to agitate. Just how much and how deeply the Viet Cong were able to influence these events is difficult to say; but it can be taken for granted that they have been very bush [?] indeed.

Khanh, faced with these circumstances, found himself at the vortex of a perplexing mixture of forces. The two most extreme elements he had to deal with were the Buddhist/student militants, personified by Tri Quang, and the Can Lao-Catholic military not entirely logically personified by General Khiem. In between were a whole array, such as Hoan and the Dai Viet, General Xung and Thi of I Corps, and the Catholic clergy. Although we pointed out to him the dangers in appearing to capitulate to the ultimatum of a demagogic Tri Quang who represented only one element in the country, he seemed willing to let the Buddhists and students display their strength, perhaps in an effort to convince Khiem and the other Generals that the MRC did not control all of the levers of power. In his first meetings with the MRC he seems, at least superficially, to have been able to play this factor. As he told us, he faced those members of the MRC who were assembled Aug 25 with the choice of “shooting their own youngsters” or making concessions to satisfy the forces led by Tri Quang. Given this decision, and knowing that Khanh spoke with the tremendous asset of continued tangible US support, the MRC (really a rump version) nominally accepted an arrangement which was essentially a capitulation to Tri Quang’s demands.

At this stage, however, a “backlash” set in. When the full MRC (which is predominantly Catholic and pro-Dai Viet) assembled in Saigon Aug 26, there was considerable grumbling about the decision on dissolution taken by the rump session on August 25. Many of the senior Generals, who had participated in the decision Aug 25 reversed themselves and sought not only to renege on the decision re dissolution but also to oust Khanh. The groupings within the MRC who came to this persuasion were not clearly identified. Some obviously were associated with Minh, others (perhaps the majority) were closer to Khiem and the Catholics.

As matters now stand, the Catholic crowds have taken to the street. Whether Khanh will be able to cope with this confusion and emerge as the continuing symbol of authority is questionable. His greatest single asset—perhaps as of the moment at least equal to all those possessed by his potential rivals for power—is the continued, tangible support of the US for him personally.

Therefore, he remains very much a significant element of force in the power struggle. The other significant individual who has emerged is Tri Quang. He appears to be the most effective and potentially dangerous politician in Vietnam and having achieved this new victory cannot be expected now to retire into the shade of Bo Tree. There are some indications that he may have ambitions extending beyond Vietnam with talk of his desire to lead a neutralist Buddhist grouping in SEA that would also have room for Moslem Malaya and Indonesia.

We obviously have to learn much more about him and must see what we can do to influence him.

The Generals who make up the MRC, because of the bickering among themselves, have along with Khanh obviously lost prestige and [sic] in their demonstrated unwillingness or inability effectively to use their power to maintain public order and keep the government functioning. Their confrontations within the MRC will undoubtedly reinforce divisive tendencies among the military and tend further to polarize factions which previously existed but were dormant. Who among them will emerge as the dominant figure is unclear at this writing.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 13–2 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, Manila, Tokyo, London, Paris, Rome, and CINCPAC.

2 Document 323

331. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 331. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, August 27, 1964.

TCSM–746–64

SUBJECT

Recommended Courses of Action—Southeast Asia

1. In their memorandum to you dated 14 August 1964,2 the Joint Chiefs of Staff advised that they were analyzing the next military courses of action in Southeast Asia and that appropriate recommendations would be forwarded for your consideration before implementing actions are taken on the Bundy memorandum dated 13 August 1964.3 They also reiterated the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, less the Chairman, of 2 June 19644 that military courses of action should include attack of targets in the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRY) with the objective of destroying, as necessary, the DRV will and capabilities to continue support of insurgent forces in the Republic of Vietnam (RVN) and Laos.

2. In analyzing courses of action, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered the views of CINCPAC and Ambassadors Taylor and Unger. The Joint Chiefs of Staff also noted the DIA assessment dated 7 August 19645 of Asian communist capabilities and 15 probable courses of action following the 5 August retaliatory attack on North Vietnam and the current US buildup in the Western Pacific. This assessment indicates that the most likely course of action would be stepped up actions in RVN and Laos with attendant increased flow of men and supplies.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff have considered Ambassador Taylor’s statement of objectives and courses of action.6 In recognition of recent events in SVN, however, they consider that his proposed course of action B is more in accord with the current situation and consider that such an accelerated program of actions with respect to the DRV is essential to prevent a complete collapse of the US position in Southeast Asia. Additionally, they do not agree that we should be slow to get deeply involved until we have a better feel for the quality of our ally. The United States is already deeply involved. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that only significantly stronger military pressures on the DRV are likely to provide the relief and psychological boost necessary for attainment of the requisite governmental stability and viability.

4. Recent US military actions in Laos and against the DRV have demonstrated our resolve more clearly than any other US actions in some time. These actions showed both force and restraint. Failure to resume and maintain a program of pressure through military actions could be misinterpreted to mean we have had second thoughts about Pierce Arrow and the events leading thereto, and could signal a lack of resolve. Accordingly, while maintaining a posture of increased readiness in the Western Pacific, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the US program should have as concurrent objectives: (1) improvements in South Vietnam, including emphasis on the Pacification Program and the Hop Tac plan to clear Saigon and its surroundings; (2) interdiction of the relatively unmolested VC lines of communication (LOC) through Laos by operations in the Panhandle and of the LOC through Cambodia by strict control of the waterways leading therefrom; (3) denial of Viet Cong (VC) sanctuaries in the Cambodia-South Vietnam border area through the conduct of “hot pursuit” operations into Cambodia, as required; (4) increased pressure on North Vietnam through military actions. As part of the program for increased pressures, the OPLAN 34A operations and the DeSoto patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin should be resumed, the former on an intensified but still covert basis.

5. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe, however, that more direct and forceful actions than these will, in all probability, be required. In anticipation of a pattern of further successful VC and Pathet Lao (PL) actions in RVN and Laos, and in order to increase pressure on the DRV, the US program should also provide for prompt and calculated responses to such VC/PL actions in the form of air strikes and other operations against appropriate military targets in the DRV.

6. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that defining what might constitute appropriate counteroperations in advance is a most difficult task. We should therefore maintain our prompt readiness to execute a range of selected responses, tailored to the developing circumstances and reflecting the principles in the Gulf of Tonkin actions, that such counteroperations will result in clear military disadvantage to the DRV. These responses, therefore, must be greater than the provocation in degree, and not necessarily limited to response in kind against similar targets. Air strikes in response might be purely VNAF; VNAF with US escort to provide protection from possible employment of MIGs; VNAF with US support in the offensive as well as the defensive role; or entirely US. The precise combination should be determined by the effect we wish to produce and the assets available. Targets for attack by air or other forces may be selected from appropriate plans including the Target Study for North Vietnam consisting of 94 targets, recently forwarded to you by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.7

7. While a US program as discussed above will not necessarily provide decisive end results, the Joint Chiefs of Staff advocate its adoption and implementation at once. Anything less could be interpreted as a lack of resolve on the part of the United States. The military course of action which offers the best chance of success remains the destruction of the DRV will and capabilities as necessary to compel the DRV to cease providing support to the insurgencies in South Vietnam and Laos.

8. Attached as Appendices to this memorandum8 are discussions of the following: a. Operations in the Laos Panhandle—Appendix A.

b. OPLAN 34A operations—Appendix B.

c. Other possible actions against North Vietnam-Aerial mining against the DRV and resumption of the DeSoto patrol in the Gulf of Tonkin—Appendix C.

d. Other actions in RVN-Strict control of waterborne traffic on the Mekong and Bassac rivers and direct action against Viet Cong leadership—Appendix D.

9. In summary, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. The following military actions receive priority (not necessarily in the order listed): (1) Continuation of the Pacification Program in RVN with emphasis on the Hop Tac program to establish the security of Saigon and its surroundings;

(2) Continuation of the present forward deployment of US combat units;

(3) Resumption and intensification of OPLAN 34A operations with emphasis on maritime operations and with initiation of air operations against selected targets when practicable. OPLAN 34A operations should remain covert for the time being.

(4) Resumption of DeSoto patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin;

(5) Operations against the VC LOC, including staging base areas and infiltration routes in the Laos Panhandle by: (a) The RLAF;

(b) GVN and Thai forces in cross-border operations with US support as required;

(c) US armed aerial reconnaissance, attacking infiltration installations.

(6) Retaliatory actions by GVN/US forces against appropriate targets in the DRV in response to stepped up Viet Cong/Pathet Lao actions should such occur.

(7) Institution of “hot pursuit” operations into Cambodia.

b. The following related actions be taken: (1) Institution of strict controls on the Mekong and Bassac rivers;

(2) Direct action against the Viet Cong leadership in RVN.

c. Since the above actions will probably not in themselves accomplish our objectives of compelling the DRV to respond favorably, we should be prepared to: (1) Commence deployment of remaining Category III OPLAN 37–649 forces;

(2) Commence a US air strike program against targets in North Vietnam in accordance with current planning.

10. In light of recent developments in South Vietnam and the evaluations furnished by COMUSMACV, the Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that accelerated and forceful action with respect to North Vietnam is essential to prevent a complete collapse of the US position in Southeast Asia. They consider that a decision as to specific actions and the timing of these actions is urgent and recommend that conversations with Ambassador Taylor focus on this issue with a view to its early resolution.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Curtis E. Le May
Acting Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff10

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, 381 Southeast Asia. Top Secret; Sensitive. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol III, pp. 550–552.

2 Document 316.

3 Attachment to Document 313.

4 Document 191.

5 Not found.

6 See Document 319.

7 The 94-target study list was Appendix A to ICSM–729–64, dated August 24, which identified the most significant targets in North Vietnam in five categories: 1) airfields, 2) lines of communications, 3) military installations, 4) industrial installations, and 5) routes of armed reconnaissance. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, ICS Files)

8 None printed.

9 CINCPAC OPLAN 37–64, “Military Actions To Stabilize the Situation in RVN,” dated March 30, 1964. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files) See also footnote 4, Document 149.

10 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

332. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 332. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 28, 1964—7 p.m.

598. CINCPAC for POLAD. Rome for Lodge. This cable summarizes the outcome of discussions Alex Johnson and I held morning and afternoon 28 August with Generals Khanh, Minh and others re current governmental crisis. A more detailed report will follow.2

General Khanh has publicly announced that he has submitted his resignation as head of government to the MRC (now abolished) but that he has received no reply. He will shortly announce that his resignation (which he now says was based on reasons of health) has been rejected (presumably by his colleagues of the military triumvirate), that Khanh will remain as Prime Minister but that he has been authorized a short period of rest and recuperation during which time Nguyen Xuan Oanh will sign papers in his name. However, it will be made clear that this is a continuation of the Khanh government which does not lapse during his short leave of absence.

Khanh indicates that he really does not expect to be away any appreciable time although he looks badly in need of rest. I must say he will have little time for leisure if he stays on intended schedule.

The next step will be the formation of a new organ called tentatively the Committee of National Unity (CNU). As presently conceived, it would consist of representatives of the religious groups, the parties (if any representatives can be found after Khanh’s public denunciation of the Dai Viets) and Notables, with General Minh as Chairman representing the military. Just what role of the CNU would be is still under discussion. Among the powers which are being considered for attribution are those of approval of change from a ministerial to a presidential form of executive, approval of the President, recall of the President, advice to President and approval of certain of his acts, and establishment of the national assembly. Khanh wants at least two things from CNU-a semblance of national endorsement for his assumption of presidency and a dignified slot for Minh.

It is far from clear that Minh will be satisfied with this deal although Khanh had intimated that he expects no trouble. In our morning session, there seemed to be two problems: (1) to get Minh to give public support to Khanh and (2) to get Khanh to withdraw his resignation. We thought we had agreement on both counts before lunch although we suspected that Minh might impose the condition of his being retained as Chief of State. After lunch, Khanh led us to believe that the chairmanship of the CNU would satisfy Minh but when Johnson and I listened to some of the discussion among the officers conferring on the matter (Khanh, Minh, Khiem, Thieu, Co) we got clear impression that Minh is still resisting. If this point becomes a real stumbling block, I propose to urge Khanh to accept Minh as Chief of State for this period of provisional government.

Khanh hopes to get CNU going in a couple of days and realign his government on presidential lines in a couple of weeks. We think this very optimistic.

It is premature to consider any of the foregoing as final until officially announced by government here.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Limdis. Also sent to the Department of Defense, CIA, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC and Rome.

2 Telegram 606 from Saigon, August 28, 11 p.m. (Ibid., POL 15 VIET S)

333. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 333. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, August 31, 1964—7 p.m.

684. When Alex Johnson and I called on General Khanh in Dalat this morning (August 31), we found him suffering from hemorrhoids, high blood pressure, and an obsession over the preponderant strength of the Dai Viet. As his doctor was prescribing for the first two ailments, we addressed ourselves to the third.

Khanh seems to have come to Dalat from the meetings in Saigon impressed with the lust for power of the Dai Viet and their determination to attain their objectives. In spite of the unanimous vote of the Generals at the meeting on August 27th urging Khanh to remain as head of government, he has no illusion over the long-term loyalties of the Dai Viet Generals. After his public denunciation of the party, he is sure they are out to get him.

He went over the usual list of those whom he considered to be Dai Viet and the available troop strength. He points out that much of this strength is in the Saigon area and hence it would be easy for them to stage a coup in the city. He has in mind in particular the Saigon Police of Colonel Ben, the Armor of Colonel Nghia, and the 7th Division of Colonel Ton.

Khanh is also aware of a possible coup from a group of unspecified young Generals and Colonels. He says that he is in contact with this group who are generally anti-Dai Viet. He apparently considers that they are basically for him but he states that he is urging them not to make any move since, from a national point of view, a new coup would be disastrous.

Meanwhile, mulling over such thoughts as these, Khanh has been doing nothing in Dalat other than receive medical treatment and enjoy the sunshine. He seems oblivious to the need for getting his government going again and for taking those preparatory measures necessary to offset any possible move by the Dai Viet.

In the subsequent discussion, Johnson and I took as our primary objective an effort to bestir Khanh to activity. First, we went over the list of his enemies and compared them to the strength which he claims for his cause. On the political side, he agreed that he had the support of the Buddhists, Catholics and the sects. He considers that he has the large majority of the Generals, to include all of the Corps Commanders, particularly the strategically located III Corps Commander in Saigon. Even a fragment of the Dai Viet favors him. Thus, by any method of evaluation, his potential strength well outweighs that of his Dai Viet enemies, although the latter have some advantages in the location of their troops.

Hence, we saw no reason for him to hide out in Dalat when so much work remains to be done in Saigon. We emphasized the evidence of lack of government activity in Saigon and the confusion of the public and the press. He fought back feebly saying that Khiem and/or Minh and perhaps FonMin Quat were working on the composition of the proposed Council of National Unity. We told him that we had seen no sign of such activity.

We also emphasized the bad effect of the Oanh interview which indicated that Oanh was really the head of the government for the next two months and that he, Khanh, was practically a mental case.2 He laughed this off as best he could but got the point that he needed to show himself at an early date in Saigon.

At this point he asked us what we recommended that he do. While admitting that as foreigners we could never be sure of our judgment, particularly with regard to timing, we made the following points: I urged him to return to Saigon quickly, at least for one day, there to convene his Cabinet, issue orders and be visibly active in directing the government. At the same time he might consider some statement to or appearance before the press.

Thereafter, if he felt he had to return to Dalat to continue his medical treatment, he might bring the triumvirate back with him and hold meetings with prospective members of the Council of National Unity in Dalat. I suggested that he consider including among these labor [garble—leader?] Buu who has impressed us all favorably.

Next, we talked to him about the need for preparing his fences against a possible coup. Why not call to Dalat the principal non-Dai Viet Generals and be sure they are ready to act if the Dai Viet move? Once all preparations are made to defend against a coup, Khanh should consider calling in General Khiem and ordering the replacement of the Dai Viet Generals whom he considers a threat to his government.

We assured him that further inactivity would be fatal, that his actions were being watched closely in Vietnam, in Washington and other capitals abroad to see whether he could really govern this country. If he can give such evidence, the US is still behind him. If we ever become convinced that he cannot lead his country to victory, he can no longer count upon us.

Khanh inquired as to whether we had a substitute government if his failed. I assured him that we had no favorite and were not looking for a substitute at this time. He asked for the third or fourth time my opinion of General Minh. I repeated what I have usually said, namely that I have always been friendly with Minh but that I considered that he lacked leadership and was unwilling to work at any hard task. However, I would be inclined to let him remain in the Khanh government as Chief of State providing that his role as a dignified figurehead was clearly understood and agreed in advance.

I mentioned that in my meeting with Minh on Aug 283 he had admitted to an ambition to be either Chief of State or to head the army replacing General Khiem. Khanh does not like either alternative, stating that if he ever became head of a permanent government he would insist upon occupying concurrently the presidency and the Ministry of Defense. He reminded us that this is the way Diem had run things during his long presidency.

We ended on the note with which we had began—the need for activity, decisiveness and a display of initiative. All we got from Khanh was the statement that he would reflect on our suggestions. He says that he hopes to reappear in Saigon within a few days and to get things in order there by the end of the week.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to the Department of Defense, CIA, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 10:38 a.m. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 The interview has not been further identified.

3 No record of a meeting between Taylor and Minh on August 28 has been found, nor does Taylor’s diary have an entry for one. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–274–69) Regarding Taylor’s meeting with Minh on August 26, see Document 328.

334. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 334. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, August 31, 1964—7:55 p.m.

567. Following points raised at high level meeting today2 for your comment: 1. Urgent necessity is to get Khanh back into action and rehabilitate his prestige if possible. Embtel 6843 took exactly right line. We now wonder whether if Khanh remains reluctant it would be useful for you to have Presidential letter along lines following draft: “Dear Mr. Prime Minister:

I want you to know that I have been following closely the political problems that have arisen in the past week. I appreciate fully the difficulties you have faced, and I admire the restraint with which they have been handled.

Ambassador Taylor tells me you are taking a rest from the strain of recent days and indeed of the past six months. I hope that you will recover rapidly, as it seems to me urgently necessary to have your presence in Saigon just as soon as you possibly can, demonstrably leading your country in its fight against the Viet Cong and meeting the criticism being heard in some quarters that your government and the resolve and unity of your people have been weakened by recent events. You may be assured that, with such leadership, the US will continue to give its full support to your government.

I am also well aware of your continuing concern that your government be able to plan and consider with us possible stronger actions against the source of the Viet Cong insurgency. This activity too requires your firm presence and leadership.

With all best wishes,

Sincerely yours,”

Request your comment and re-draft if desired. Consider especially whether inclusion last paragraph desirable. It would preclude release of letter, and this may be desirable.4

2. We gather from your reports no evidence province chain of command seriously affected as yet. Can Oanh be persuaded to put out firm directives that would assist in preventing deterioration, or might GVN consider devolving special responsibilities temporarily onto four corps commanders so that they jack up province chiefs? Realize key to problem, if there is one, may be basic doubt who is in charge, but above are samples of things that might help.

3. View general uncertainty, a clear GVN success in one or more key province, especially in area near Saigon, would now be particularly helpful. Realize you and MACV have given this continuing consideration, and do not mean to suggest occasion warrants undue risk through troop movements.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared in draft with Forrestal and in substance with Rusk, McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 According to Rusk’s appointment book, the meeting took place at 5 p.m., but no record of it has been found.

3 Document 333.

4 On September 1, Taylor replied that he wanted to defer a decision on delivering the letter until he saw whether Khanh would return to Saigon and until he got a report on the meetings Khanh held at Dalat. (Telegram 697 from Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

335. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 335. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, August 31, 1964.

Welcome back!2

Our only really serious international problem is South Vietnam, but that could hardly be more serious. The immediate situation is that we just do not know whether Khanh still has it in him to resume full control. Taylor and Johnson saw him today3 and urged him once more to do so, and he indicated that he probably would go back to Saigon later this week and see what he could do. We here all agree that we ought to stay with him solidly, so that if he falls it will in no sense be our doing. A draft letter of encouragement from you to him is being considered by Max Taylor overnight,4 and we should have his advice on whether to use it in the morning. Meanwhile, Taylor’s return home has been rescheduled tentatively for September 7, and if things have not improved by then, our current inclination is to have Alexis Johnson come instead and keep Max on the job out there.

The larger question is whether there is any course of action that can improve the chances in this weakening situation. A number of contingency plans for limited escalation are in preparation. They involve three kinds of activities—naval harassments, air interdiction in the Laos panhandle, and possible U.S. fleet movements resuming a presence on the high seas in the Gulf of Tonkin. The object of any of these would be more to heighten morale and to show our strength of purpose than to accomplish anything very specific in a military sense—unless and until we move toward a naval quarantine.

One other possibility which we are discussing is the increase of a U.S. military presence in South Vietnam, perhaps by a naval base, or perhaps by landing a limited number of Marines to guard specific installations. Bob McNamara is very strongly against the latter course, for reasons that are not clear to me, and you may wish to question him on it if we have a luncheon meeting tomorrow.

A still more drastic possibility which no one is discussing is the use of substantial U.S. armed forces in operations against the Viet Cong. I myself believe that before we let this country go we should have a hard look at this grim alternative, and I do not at all think that it is a repetition of Korea. It seems to me at least possible that a couple of brigade-size units put in to do specific jobs about six weeks from now might be good medicine everywhere.

McG.B.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 107C.

2 The President had been in Texas to celebrate his 56th birthday.

3 See Document 333.

4 See Document 334.

336. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 336. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 2, 1964—9 p.m.

698. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 5772 Although political situation Vietnam is far from stabilized, we think it useful to make an interim assessment of events which have taken place during past few days subsequent to developments reported and analyzed in reftel.

First, it should be emphasized that Khanh has been largely frustrated in the attempt at governmental changes which he began immediately after the Gulf of Tonkin incident. It was his purpose to use the galvanizing force of those incidents to narrow the base of his government, give him more flexibility and make his politico/military efforts more effective. He has succeeded only in the partial elimination of General Minh, the dissolution of the MRC, and the disaffection of the Dai Viets. His tactical failure in pursuing his major objectives was due to the fact that he moved neither with lightning rapidity nor with deliberate consultative thoroughness. Instead he fell directly between stools, moving too slowly for a coup de theatre, and too rapidly for a politically negotiated deal. By the time he had issued his August 16 charter, he had apparently achieved his primary objective of getting rid of General Minh, but he had so seriously entangled himself in the MRC and had produced such sharp confrontations with the Buddhists and Dai Viets that his problems became greater than he could cope with. His efforts to cope with it led to further confusion because of his deals with the Buddhists and the frictions which these generated within the MRC.

The results of all the recent maneuverings, the street fighting, and the internal bickering among Generals and politicians have led, through a spasm of volatile excitement, to a sense of political exhaustion and sullen irritation on all sides. The Khanh/Minh/Khiem triumvirate which was created with the dissolution of the MRC does not represent a resolution of existing internal tensions among GVN leadership, but merely a moratorium which essentially leaves the basic issues unsettled.

However, everything is not precisely as it was on August 15. Essentially, the Buddhists and the Catholics have retained about the same measure of strength and influence within the tenuous equilibrium that they had at that time. Further, the unwillingness of either religious group to accept certain political or military personalities in a revamped government has remained unchanged or has hardened. But many other forces have been altered. The following is a listing of the 59 most significant changes: 1. Khanh: By the inept manner in which Khanh handled his effort to centralize his control, and by the lack of firmness which he demonstrated in discussions with the Buddhists and particularly the premature dissolution of MRC, his reputation as strongman has been seriously tarnished. Although he has always entertained strong suspicions of those who share leadership responsibilities with him, his sense of uneasiness and distrust of all of his colleagues has now reached almost paranoiac proportions. He himself is acutely aware of this, feels depressed and deflated, and there is great question whether he will ever be able to recapture the cocky confidence which has heretofore marked his career and to fully exert control over the political forces now unleashed. He particularly feels concern over and doubts about his ability to deal with the Dai Viets, yet if he acts soon, he may be able to recapture some of his strength for it has become increasingly evident that all the maneuvering has not brought forth any other figure around whom a reasonable consensus could be achieved.

2. Hoan and the Dai Viets: The Dai Viets have considered their participation in Khanh’s government primarily as an opportunity to K9enhance their own political status, to dispense patronage, and enforce their political organization for eventual elections. When they realized that Khanh sought to eliminate them in large measure from the government he attempted to create, they at first chose to turn this effort aside by remaining within the government in positions of lesser authority and continuing to work from within. However, at a critical juncture in the recent crisis, Hoan, contrary to all the cabalistic rules of Vietnamese politics, took his opposition outside the conference room and made his case publicly against Khanh.

Khanh had little choice but to reply in the same forum. Therefore, to all practical purposes, the split between Khanh and the Dai Viets (unless the party overwhelmingly repudiates Hoan as its leader) now seems complete and irreparable. Therefore association between Khanh and the Dai Viets in any future Cabinet seems unlikely.

3. The military: This split between Khanh and the Dai Viets will, of course, have serious repercussions among some senior military officers. A few of the top and more effective Generals are acknowledged Dai Viets. Some of them are now sharply disaffected with Khanh and can be expected either to leave Khanh or begin to plot to mount a coup against him.

Another factor has rather clearly emerged, however, from the MRC discussions. This was the fact that no single element in the MRC commanded enough authority to impose its domination upon the other factions. When the senior officers became aware of this fact and when it became clear that their continued bickering would only lead to deepening confusion and further bloodshed in the streets, they effected the Khanh/Minh/Khiem triumvirate formula. But as each member of the triumvirate has privately admitted, this is mere window dressing and not intended to solve anything.

What currently exists, therefore, with Khanh reposing at Dalat, is a serious vacuum in GVN leadership. “Jack Owen”3 is the personification and incarnation of this vacuum. He has no strength to back him up and no support from any known quarter except possibly from Dai Viets should they decide to use him as a frontman. His occupancy of Khanh’s office in the Presidency and the motions through which he is going pretending to act as Prime Minister cannot be taken seriously. The circumstances, therefore, lead [lend?] themselves dangerously to the ambitions of any person reckless and courageous enough to undertake a coup.

Greatest danger for the development of such a coup comes from the southern faction of the Dai Viets which could obtain substantial military support centered around General Thieu and Col. Ton. Another group consists of a clique of Colonels who center largely around Colonel Pham Ngoc Thao. This latter group, it will be recalled, came very close to precipitating a coup shortly after this time last year and might have succeeded if their plans had not alarmed and been overtaken by the group who eventually succeeded in the downfall of Diem on November 1. Again, it would be questionable this year whether Generals Khiem and Thieu and others of that stripe would permit Thao and his shabby Colonels to run a coup. In the current power vacuum both these groups can be expected to continue to plot with the possibility of either triggering off a coup in order to have a preemptive position.

Therefore, in the current circumstances it is obvious that the best solution we could anticipate would be the return of Khanh to a position of responsibility and authority. If this happens, as we are attempting to make it happen, Khanh is likely to be a chastened but less forceful young man than he was before August 16. On the other hand, at present he seems our only opportunity for anything resembling stability in the pursuit of pacification of Vietnam. We should not delude ourselves that we can put together any combination of personalities which will add up to a really effective government in the foreseeable future, given the political immaturity of the military and civilian leaders and the Vietnamese body politic. What is critically lacking here is any tradition of team play and any experience in making governmental institutions and evolutionary processes work. Without this “glue” we must expect to “rock” along indefinitely without a strong executive and play with the breaks.4

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, Phnom Penh, Paris, London, Manila, Tokyo, and CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents. 1979, 94D.

2 Document 330.

3 Nguyen Xuan Oanh.

4 On September 1, the CIA reached similar conclusions as expressed in a memorandum entitled “The Situation in South Vietnam.” Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Memos, Vol. XVII) A field report of the same date presented a similar estimate. (TDCS 315/00595, September 1; ibid.)

337. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 337. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 2, 1964—11 p.m.

714. Deptel 567.2 Our info is that Khanh is usefully employing his time in Dalat taking actions which are necessary prerequisites to his return to Saigon and full assumption of govt direction. The three principal problems with which he is grappling are (a) security against a coup (with Dai Viets as principal suspects), (b) establishing some limits upon voracious Buddhist demands, and (c) the constant problem of “Big” Minh. In general, he seems to be proceeding along lines which Alex Johnson and I commended to him the other day. (See Embtel 684)3 He has called in and obtained pledges of allegiance from all his principal Generals.4 He met this afternoon with Tam Chau in Dalat in [and] has asked Khiem to speak to Big Minh and attempt to remove the latter from active opposition.

For these reasons and because we have several reports indicating that he plans to return to Saigon Sept 3, I do not consider it necessary or advisable at this stage to employ the President’s letter.5 Delivery of the letter would require another conspicuous trip by me to Dalat enhancing the impression already current here that we are dragging a reluctant Khanh back to his responsibilities against his own will. Also we like to withhold weight of a Presidential message for a verified emergency.

However, there is always the possibility that Khanh may lose his nerve or that something could go awry in his preparatory actions. Consequently I believe it important that I have at my disposal an authorized text of a Presidential letter which I could use tomorrow or later at my discretion if the situation warrants.

We have reviewed carefully the text which you proposed in reftel. We believe the first two paragraphs are an excellent presentation of the US position in seeking Khanh’s early return to leadership. We are doubtful that the third paragraph, which refers to joint planning, would be desirable to include at this time.

We would propose substituting for the third paragraph, if you agree: “I am impressed with the importance of the period between now and Oct 27 in determining the future of your country. From here, the problem appears to fall into two parts. The first is the need to establish means which will develop a national consensus concerning the form of a future and enduring governmental structure for the Republic of Vietnam. The second is the requirement to restore national morale and confidence by exhibiting tangible success against the Viet Cong. For the latter purpose, I would think that the vigorous prosecution of the pacification drive which has now begun in the area around Saigon would offer a readily available means for achieving this much needed success.”

I will take a reading tomorrow morning, Saigon time, concerning Khanh’s plans. If it appears desirable for me to use the President’s letter, tomorrow I would plan to fly up to Dalat mid-morning, since the weather closes in at this season later in the afternoon. It would be my hope to have the authorized text of the President’s letter, as amended by the foregoing suggestion, available to me at that time if that contingency arises.6

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 12:08 p.m.

2 Document 334.

3 Document 333.

4 Westmoreland transmitted a brief account of this meeting, based on U.S. advisers’ reports, in MAC JOO 9139, September 2. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11925) At Taylor’s suggestion, Westmoreland had also visited Khanh at Dalat on September 1 to encourage him. (MAC JOO 9095, September 1; Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File. Vol. XVII. Cables)

5 Transmitted in Document 334.

6 At 8:20 p.m., the Department of State transmitted the text of a new letter combining the first two paragraphs of the first draft (with only minor changes) and the third paragraph as quoted here. (Telegram 584 to Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S) On September 5, Taylor reported that since Khanh had returned to Saigon of his own volition, the letter had not been used. (Telegram 757 from Saigon; ibid.)

338. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 338. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 4, 1964—3 p.m.

739. CINCPAC for POLAD. Alex Johnson and I called on General Khanh this morning to review with him the recent course of events in Dalat. Khanh had lost the bright look which he had when we last saw him in Dalat on Monday2 and seemed in face as tired as when he took off for his Dalat vacation. He had also lost his goatee, shaved, he explained vaguely, to mark end of a phase. He reported that in Dalat he had been seeing a constant stream of visitors, military and civilian, most of whom had come to urge his return to Saigon and assumption of full governmental powers. He confirmed that he had received written statements of fealty from all his principal Generals and that the Buddhists had pledged their support. Now he feels that he has a “carte blanche” to proceed with his plan for the reorganization of the government.

We asked him whether he had authorized Vice Premier Oanh’s statement in Hue on September 3 (see Embtel 730).3 He looked surprised and said he had no knowledge of it. When we showed him the text, he said he definitely had not authorized it and that it was entirely premature.

In the ensuing discussion, Khanh outlined his governmental plans in the following terms:

From now until about November 1st, the triumvirate of Khanh, Minh and Khiem will remain in existence. This morning, Khanh expects to offer Minh his old attributes of Chief of State less the title itself. Thus, he will be the front man in the interim government, receiving the credentials of Ambassadors and performing other ceremonial functions. Hopefully, he will do some useful work in the triumvirate in making preparations for the provisional government following November 1. Khanh will keep Oanh as his principal assistant in charge of civil affairs (although he is in a slow burn over Oanh’s intimation to the press on August 29 that Khanh was “fou” and over the indiscretion yesterday at Hue). Khanh, himself, will keep a personal eye on military activities and will guide the reorganization of the government.

In the latter field, the first requirement is putting together the National Front Committee (referred to in previous cable4 as the Committee for National Unity (CNU)) to be composed only of civilians with broad, national credentials. Concurrently with the formation of this committee, there will be appointed a small committee of legal experts to draw up a plan for the provisional government which will go into effect after November 1st. Khanh expects this government to resemble structurally the one which he had hoped to establish by the charter of August 16, i.e., a presidential system with separation of power between the three branches. The CNU will approve this governmental structure as well as the individual who will head the executive branch. Khanh is obviously not sure whether this will be he or some civilian. We gathered that he would be quite happy to bow out if he could do so gracefully.

Khanh expects to make a number of changes in his current interim government, generally in the direction of giving it a civilian aspect. All of its present military members, including Generals Khiem and Thieu, have submitted their resignations. He has not yet decided whether he can afford to accept them all, particularly that of Khiem, who is very useful to him in spite of his alleged Dai Viet association. I suggested he might consider keeping a few of his most useful military officials in a civilian status. He apparently intends to accept Thieu’s resignation at once. His Dai Viet enemy and late colleague, Dr. Hoan, he is asking to leave the country by Sunday. He hopes Vu Van Mau will return shortly and will accept a prominent position in the government.

Khanh announced his intention to make the following military changes: General Duc, presently commanding IV Corps, to replace General Thieu (whether as Deputy Defense Minister, as Chief of Staff, or as both was not clear); General Go, former Deputy Commander of IV Corps, to assume that command; General Tri, Commanding III Corps, to be replaced by General not yet selected, because of intense hostility of the Buddhists; General Xung, Commanding I Corps, who has requested transfer.

General Khanh emphasized that General Tam, III Corps, who is responsible for the execution of Plan Hop Tac, remains in place. He confirmed his intention to transfer the 7th Division to the IV Corps and move the 25th Division south to the III Corps.

Always concerned about the ripple effect of government changes, we asked about Khanh’s intentions to change officials in the provinces. He assured us that he had no such intention. Furthermore. Hop Tac would go forward as planned.

General Khanh explained the disturbances in Hue and elsewhere as symptoms of a current anti-militarism complex which he feels bound to conciliate. He is determined to get the army out of government and out of politics. When I expressed concern over possible weakness, unreliability or trend toward neutralism on the part of an all-civilian government, he assured me that the army would always be vigilant and ready to intervene before any serious damage could result. He is deeply impressed with the essentiality of Buddhist support. He believes the principal bonzes are with him now and he hopes to retain their cooperation. They have agreed to appoint lay representatives to the Committee of National Unity although, because of their religious status, they will not participate in person

Khanh hopes to formalize and expand the present inter-faith committee for handling religious issues. This committee will represent Buddhists, Catholics, Cao Dai and Hoa Hao and will work in contact with but outside the government.

When we asked about the Dalat Generals, Khanh said that, according to his understanding, each had telegraphed the appropriate US university with regard to matriculation. He indicated that he might have second thoughts on General Don and retain him for possible use in a military assignment. He then asked for six additional spaces in US civilian schools for other Colonels and Generals. The individuals he has in mind apparently include certain officers to whom he wishes to give advance schooling in preparation for diplomatic assignments abroad. In other cases, he may have in mind simply getting dangerous characters out of the country for awhile. We promised to see what we could do about meeting this new request.

We stressed the importance of careful public information preparations prior to making the governmental changes in offing and offered all US resources to assist. He seemed impressed with the consequences of neglecting such preparations in mid-August and may do better this time. He is transferring the unreliable Lt. Col. Thao from his present press assignment in Khanh’s office to the Psychological Warfare Branch.

Asked about his evaluation of the short-term future, Khanh indicated the expectation of the continuance of the present uneasy tranquillity but foresees much wrangling over the governmental questions which will arise in coming weeks. We are of the same opinion and doubt he can keep his present schedule based upon a new provisional government approved by the Committee of National Unity by November 1st.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

2 August 31; see Document 333.

3 Dated September 3, telegram 730 reported on a visit to Hue by Minh and Oanh during which the latter stated that two decisions had been made: 1) the Military Revolutionary Committee had repealed the August 16 charter, and 2) a committee would be formed in the near future representing the whole country to choose the new Prime Minister and President. Once the committee was formed, the triumvirate would be dissolved. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 Document 332

X. Ambassador Taylor’s Visit to Washington, September 6–10X. Ambassador Taylor’s Visit to Washington, September 6–10

339. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 6, 1964—4 p.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–161–69. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Taylor.

340. Memorandum From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)

Saigon, September 6, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret.

341. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, September 8, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Memos, Vol. XVII. Secret. Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board. Also published in Declassified Documents, 2978, 31A.

342. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, September 8, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XVII, Memos. Secret. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 561–562, and Pentagon Papers: New York Times Edition, pp. 357–359.

343. Memorandum of a Meeting, White House, Washington, September 9, 1964, 11 a.m.

Washington, September 9, 1964, 11 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File. Secret. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. For the President’s account of this meeting, see Vantage Point, p. 120. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 129B.

344. Memorandum From the Director of the Operations Mission in Vietnam (Killen) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)

Saigon, September 9, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Rand Report. Secret.

345. National Security Action Memorandum No. 314

Washington, September 10, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 314. Top Secret. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 565–566. The differences between the numbered paragraphs of NSAM 314 and the “Courses of Action for South Vietnam” (Tab A to Document 342) reflect the views of the TCS as indicated in CM–124–64, September 9. See footnote 3, Document 343.

339. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 339. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 6, 1964—4 p.m.

768. For the Secretary. The following is a review of the situation in South Vietnam, concurred in by the U.S. Mission Council, as it appears at the time of my departure for Washington.2 I would hope to use it as a basic document in our coming discussions. You will note that I have left the distribution to your decision.

While we must be disappointed by the political turmoil of recent days, we cannot consider it totally unexpected. The very nature of the social, political and ethnic confusion in this country makes governmental turbulence of this type a factor which we will always have with us.

What has emerged from these recent events is a definition within fairly broad limits of the degree to which perfectability in government can be pushed. It should be remembered that the recent fracas started when Khanh sought to make his broad and cumbersome government more tractable and more effective. His motives were of the best even though his methods were clumsy. But now, after this recent experience at government improvement, we must accept the fact that an effective government, much beyond the capacity of that which has existed over the past several months, is unlikely to survive. We now have a better feel for the quality of our ally and for what we can expect from him in terms of ability to govern. Only the emergence of an exceptional leader could improve the situation and no George Washington is in sight.

Consequently we can and must anticipate for the future an instrument of government which will have definite limits of performance. At the very worst, it will continue to seek a broadened consensus involving and attempting to encompass all or most of the minority elements with political aspirations until it approaches a sort of popular front. This amalgam, if it takes form, may be expected in due course to become susceptible to an accommodation with the Liberation Front, which might eventually lead to a collapse of all political energy behind the pacification effort.

At best, the emerging governmental structure might be capable of maintaining a holding operation against the Viet Cong. This level of effort could, with good luck and strenuous American efforts, be expanded to produce certain limited pacification successes, for example, in the territory covered by the Hoc Tap plan. But the willingness and ability of such a government to exert itself or to attempt to execute an all-out National Pacification Plan would be marginal. It would probably be incapable of galvanizing the people to the heightened level of unity and sacrifice necessary to carry forward the counterinsurgency program to final success. Instead, it would look increasingly to the United States to take the major responsibility for prying the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese off the backs of the South Vietnamese population. The politicians in Saigon and Hue feel today that the political hassle is their appropriate arena; the conflict with the VC belongs to the Americans.

We may, therefore, expect to find ourselves faced with a choice of (a) passively watching the development of a popular front, knowing that this may in due course require the U.S. to leave Vietnam in failure; or (b) actively assuming increased responsibility for the outcome following a time-schedule consistent with our estimate of the limited viability of any South Vietnamese government.

An examination of our total world responsibilities and the significance of Vietnam in relationship to them clearly rules out the option of accepting course (a). If we leave Vietnam with our tail between our legs, the consequences of this defeat in the rest of Asia, Africa and Latin America would be disastrous. We therefore would seem to have little choice left except to accept course (b).

Our previous views on the right course of action to follow in South Vietnam are set forth in Embtel 465.3 The discussion in this present cable amounts to a recognition that Course of Action A of Embtel 465 no longer corresponds with the realities of the situation. Recent events have revealed the weakness of our ally and have convinced us of the improbability of attaining the level of governmental performance desired under Course A before embarking on a campaign of pressure against the DRV. We are forced back on Course of Action B with certain revised views on timing.

In the cold light of recently acquired facts, we need two to three months to get any sort of government going which has any chance of being able to maintain order in the cities and to continue the pacification effort of past levels. There is no present urge to march north among our Vietnamese friends; the leadership is exhausted and frustrated following the recent disorders and are not anxious to take on any new problems or obligations. Hence there is no need to hasten our plans to satisfy an impatience to close with the enemy. There is, however, the problem of morale, both civil and military. Both would respond favorably to a visibly sincere effort to improve government and to the successful execution of Hop Tac. Hence these courses of action must be emphasized in our present program which we will continue to prosecute in this period with maximum vigor. At the same time, the DRV needs to be put on notice of our continued vigilance and determination by means of a resumption of 34–A operations and DeSoto patrols and by modest crossborder operations into Laos.

Thus, our objective up to about December 1 should be to get going some kind of government worthy of the name while shoring up morale and holding enemy activities in check. Throughout the period, we should have the capability of executing on short notice attacks on Laotian infiltration targets and Category II and III operations under CINCPAC 37–64. We should be ready to exploit any opportunities presented by the Communists (such as the Gulf of Tonkin attacks) to initiate military pressures on DRV under favorable conditions of world opinion.

At the end of the period and provided the objective for the period had been attained, we would then be ready to begin escalating pressures on the DRV for the purpose of holding the GVN together, of raising morale and of creating conditions required for a negotiated termination of hostilities on favorable terms. Before initiating these pressures, US and allied military forces would be positioned to meet possible Chicom/DRV reaction. Escalating actions would then begin, taking the form of any desired combination of attacks on Lao infiltration routes and/or on targets of appropriate categories in DRV. In Laos, the air forces used could be Lao, VNAF or US; in the DRV, the air effort would be largely US with VNAF operating out of range of the MIG’s. The attacks should be orchestrated in such a way as to produce a mounting pressure on the will of the Hanoi high command designed to convince the latter to desist from further aid to the VC and Vietminh and to agree to cooperate in calling off the insurgencies in South Vietnam and Laos.

During this period, we can expect the GVN to do little more than assure the ground defense of the national territory, participate to a limited degree in the air action and to act as the recognized government of SVN. Even if Hanoi should comply with our wishes, there would still remain in SVN many serious political, economic and social problems which would test the ability of the best of governments. To cope with them, any GVN which we can foresee now will require US help for a long time. Thus, even with the acceptance of our recommendations herein and their successful implementation, we see no quick and sure way to discharge our obligations honorably in this part of the world. This forecast is fairly grim but the alternatives are more repugnant. We feel that we should take the offensive generally along the lines recommended herein and play for the international breaks.

Taylor

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–161–69. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Taylor.

2 At the end of August, Taylor requested a return to Washington for consultations, but the governmental crisis in South Vietnam had precluded it. On September 4, Taylor and Johnson reviewed the local situation and concluded that the time was as favorable then as could be foreseen for the Ambassador to return. (Telegram 744 from Saigon, September 4; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) The trip was announced at 6 p.m., Saigon time, on September 5.

3 Document 319.

340. Memorandum From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) 340. Memorandum From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)1

Saigon, September 6, 1964.

MACJO2

SUBJECT

Assessment of the Military Situation

1. In preparation for your trip to Washington, I thought it might be useful to give you my assessment of the military situation. In subsequent paragraphs I outline in some detail the rather substantial progress which we have already made and, more importantly, the great potential for additional progress. I also describe military problem areas. These, as you know, are many; but all are susceptible to solution assuming that political stability can be achieved, and that the Armed Forces, particularly the Army, remains intact and unified in its purpose. Under the present circumstances, however, the continued solidarity of the Armed Forces is in doubt. As all else depends on holding the Armed Forces together, I address this matter first.

The Key Military Issue:

2. It seems to me there are certain conditions which must be met in order to preserve the structure and effectiveness of the RVNAF: a. The officers of the RVNAF must be protected against purge, solely by reason of religious or political affiliation. The Commander in Chief, the officers of the Joint General Staff and the Commanders down the line, must be given some assurance that their careers and reputations will not be sacrificed for political expediency to the ambitions or interests of political or religious blocs.

b. The officers’ corps must be assured that its members will not be punished or expelled from the Armed Forces if they faithfully execute the orders of constituted authority in connection with the maintenance of law and order. They must be assured that their superiors will not accede to the arbitrary demands of pressure groups whose interest it is to destroy the discipline of the Armed Forces and to render ineffective the forces of law and order.

3. If I interpret correctly the events of the past two weeks, neither of these minimum conditions have been met. To the contrary, actions best calculated to destroy the morale, the unity, the pride and confidence of the Armed Forces have transpired in a manner which leads me to believe that a relative free hand has been given to those who aim to destroy the Armed Forces. The demands of the Buddhists for the resignation of the Commander in Chief, the Chief of Staff, Commander of II Corps, the Prefect of Saigon and the Director of National Police, to name a few, appear to be blows directed at the heart of the security forces which stand between the Viet Cong and victory. I cannot believe that it is in the interests of the nation to accede to these demands. To the contrary, I am persuaded that acceptance is a formula for political and military disaster. While aware that the insurgency cannot be overcome by military means alone, I am equally aware that without a strong military foundation no program will ever achieve victory. I am concerned that the Government of Vietnam has already moved some distance down the wrong road in dealing with its Armed Forces. I do not know whether the Armed Forces will collapse or whether, finding the present course intolerable, they will make a desperate move to regain power. Neither course is compatible with the objective we seek.

4. What follows is highly sensitive to the assumption that the provisional government can and will take extraordinary steps to restore morale and rekindle a unity of purpose within the Armed Forces.

Favorable Trends:

5. There is room for some optimism about the ability of the RVNAF to execute the military portions of the pacification program. Over the last few months there have been measurable increases in military means and improvements in operational methods; and more are in sight. Thus, the prospect is for a continuing rise in combat strength and tactical proficiency. To be sure, the VC are making gains in these same areas. However, we estimate that the rate of improvement of overall US/GVN military effectiveness will be much more rapid than that of the VC—barring, of course, great escalation of DRV support. There follow certain specifics on which this estimate is based.

6. Manpower and Morale: a. The strength of the Armed Forces has been steadily increasing since May. The Divisions of III and IV Corps have just received a large, and badly needed, infusion of replacements. There are currently some 10,000 regulars in the National Training Centers and [are] reportedly doing well. In the revitalized volunteer program, results have been close to target. Intakes of conscriptees have only been 50% of program—but that program was overly ambitious. It is estimated that the 31 December goals will be achieved in early 1965.

b. From January forward, the High Command has developed and implemented a series of policies and programs aimed at improving the morale of the fighting forces. The most important are: (1) Significant pay raises for the Regular and Regional Forces; and reasonable added emoluments for the Popular Forces.

(2) A new awards and decorations program featuring additional medals, decentralization, on-the-spot action, and good publicity of presentations.

(3) Establishment of a centralized promotion board for officers and senior NCO’s; and decentralization of promotions below grades E8 to Corps and Division Commanders.

(4) Greatly expanded dependent housing construction program (including some housing for Regional Forces dependents).

7. Strengthening of U.S. Advisory Effort: a. Additional advisors are being introduced at the level of infantry and artillery battalions and armored troops. Also, additional advisors are being placed with the VNAF and VNN. These increases should serve to enhance substantially the overall military effectiveness of the RVNAF.

b. [paragraph (5 lines of source text) not declassified]

c. One C–123 squadron and one Caribou Company are also scheduled for deployment in order to provide more effective support for the larger advisory effort throughout the country.

8. Development of a Pacification Focus: a. The Hop Toc Plan (Intensification of Pacification in the Saigon Area) has been accepted and is being implemented by the GVN. The Commander of III Corps has been designated as the coordinating authority and he is being assisted and supported by representatives of various civilian ministries. Emphasis has been given to the role of police; and their quality and numbers are being increased. Hop Toc has served as a vehicle for bringing about better coordination among the elements of the U.S. Mission in support of integrated pacification operations.

b. The GVN has ordered certain important troop redispositions which give substance to the priority accorded the Saigon area by the national plan. The 25th Infantry Division is being moved from II Corps into the provinces of Long An and Hau Nghia. This move should increase not only the troop density in this high priority area, but also improve management and direction of the pacification campaign.

c. Two additional 18 tube 105mm Howitzer Battalions have been organized and positioned with divisions supporting the pacification of priority areas.

9. Augmentation of Air Capabilities: a. The VNAF will shortly have 4 fully combat ready A–1H squadrons (and has the capability to build up a total of 6 by 1 December 1965). In addition, by the end of December, the 2 Farmgate A–1E Squadrons will be at full operational strength with a total of 50 aircraft. (Present holding is 30.) All 4 VNAF H–34 squadrons will be trained and operational by the end of the year. The efficiency of the VNAF pilots is improving, particularly in night operations. The air-ground operations system is being steadily improved by better communications, improved training, and the provision of air liaison and control teams at regimental level. Finally, procedures, designed to maximize capabilities, have been developed for mutual cooperation and support between USAF, VNAF, and Army aviation.

b. Two additional transport helicopter companies will arrive in country by 1 December and they will enhance materially the mobility of ARVN and its capability to react to VC attacks.

c. Detailed procedures for quick reaction forces and counter-ambush tactics utilizing aircraft are being developed on a sound and practical basis.

10. U.S. Special Forces are being substantially increased by additional “A” teams; and supervision will be strengthened by the introduction of additional “B” and “C” teams. The present CIDG (Strike Force) strength of approximately 19,000 is programmed to increase steadily until the goal of 30,000 is reached in July 1965. This buildup should lead to greater success in disrupting infiltration routes across the borders and within SVN. In addition, these forces will figure importantly in operations against VC base areas.

11. Increased Effectiveness of Naval Forces: a. Recent acquisition of 2 PCEs and early arrival of 4 PGMs will add considerably to the capability of the Sea Forces.

b. Thanks to expedited deliveries of 15 LCM8s, by end December the lift capability of the River Forces will have increased by 50% (from 6 to 9 Infantry Battalions). The balance (primarily patrol craft) of the additional River Assault Group, making a total of seven in country, will be on hand by July 1965.

c. The first keels of the additional 90 motorized junks will be laid next month. Beginning January, these junks will take their place in the coastal force at the rate of ten per month.

12. Intelligence agencies are exchanging information to a much greater degree and effecting better coordination at all levels down to and including province (sector). In this connection, all sectors have now established operations and intelligence centers; and most are functioning with some success.

13. The RVNAF logistic system is being partially reorganized to improve the logistic support of the paramilitary forces. The Administrative and Direct Support Logistic (A&L) Companies, until now integrated into the Regional Forces for their immediate support and that of the Popular Forces, are being incorporated directly into the ARVN logistic system, increased in strength, and extended to the subsector level by addition of logistic contact teams.

14. Communications are being further developed and are becoming more reliable. An alternate tropo scatter route is opening between Saigon and Pleiku. Southern Aid microwave circuits are now carrying military traffic. Advisors are equipped with mobile communications for field use and for greater flexibility of air-ground operations.

15. Finally, there are perceptible improvements in operational techniques and tactics throughout the fighting forces. For instance, I am encouraged by the better integration of the capabilities of the combined ground arms; by the increasing number of joint ground and naval operations; and by the effectiveness of night operations conducted by certain units. We are beginning to develop sound plans for disruption of War Zones C and D, by both ground and air operations. In this connection, our work with IR, and successful exploitation of this technique, convinces us that it represents a real potential for detecting and hitting the VC in terrain which heretofore has provided him sanctuary.

Problem Areas:

16. There are many problem areas under constant study and surveillance by my headquarters and subordinate elements. The major ones include: a. Deficiencies in leadership training and development, particularly of junior officers and noncommissioned officers. Because this is of central importance, it is given special emphasis at all advisory levels, and particularly at the National Training Centers.

b. Development of capabilities for conscription and recruitment of manpower to meet the requirements of approved plans and programs.

c. Development of a viable paramilitary concept and force structure responsive to security and political requirements. The problems here are equitable division of responsibility between the national government and the local community; the preconditions for community commitment to local defense, and insuring that the two efforts are mutually reinforcing.

d. The determination of an optimum deployment and utilization of U.S. Special Forces. A comprehensive study and analysis of this problem is underway which will undoubtedly lead to the redeployment of a number of Special Forces detachments into the areas where they may be expected to be more productive in attacks against VC bases and in the interdiction of actual VC routes, both into and within the country. We are also studying the problem of the legal status of the CIDG forces. We are not yet sure of the impact of giving the CIDG Strike Companies a legal status similar to the Regional Forces.

e. Orientation and training of military units for their pacification tasks. A principal requirement is preparation of selected units for participation in various aspects of population and resources control operations. Another is the entire area of peasant/soldier relationships.

f. Tactical deficiencies. This runs the entire gamut. We continue to work to improve the rapidity and effectiveness of reaction forces; to develop methods of detecting and punishing VC ambushes; to make ARVN conscious of the essentiality of thorough ground reconnaissance and patrolling; to exploit and increase means of acquiring combat intelligence.

g. Continued efforts to improve coordination and integration of effort between the agencies of the U.S. Mission in support of pacification.

h. Lack of authority to disrupt the VC infiltration routes and facilities in the Laotian corridor.

Status of Contingency Planning:

17. MACV planning for Special, Contingency, and Emergency actions by the U.S. and its Allies reflects more realism than at any previous time. This applies equally to Component and Supporting Commands.

a. Special OPlans 37 and 34A have been partially implemented. Planning for further operations is well ahead of anticipated authority to execute. CINCPAC is integrating all his Special Plans (33, 34, 99) for actions in SEAsia into OPlan 37 by 1 November. 34A, 37, and DeSoto actions are either limited or held in abeyance. Unilateral MACV and U.S. component planning is so well advanced that minimum reaction time to execute external combined air operations with RVNAF will be required. Combined US/RVN planning for limited surface operations in Laos has been authorized and is in process.

b. Contingency Plans for counterinsurgency (32 Ph II) and for countering DRV/ChiCom aggression (32 Ph III/IV) have been brought up to date by U.S. Component and ZI Commands. Counterpart SEATO plans are comparably up to date. U.S. unilateral plans will be more realistic when bilateral planning with the Thais is completed and when similar planning is effected wit-in the GVN.

c. The U.S. Emergency Evacuation and Security Plans (60–64, 61–62) have been thoroughly reviewed, refined, and steps taken to expedite and facilitate execution as may be directed.

d. Preliminary combined planning with GVN against DRV aggression resulted in tentative working level agreement on the nature of the threat and a concept of operations. It also surfaced a potentially serious problem in US/RVN command relationships. Continued combined planning with GVN was deferred as the.estimate of possible DRV reaction to the U.S. Golf of Tonkin actions failed to materialize.

W. C. Westmoreland2
General, United States Army

1 Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret.

2 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

341. Special National Intelligence Estimate 341. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, September 8, 1964.

SNIE 53–64

CHANCES FOR A STABLE GOVERNMENT IN SOUTH VIETNAM

The Problem

To assess the chances for the emergence of a stable non-Communist regime in South Vietnam.

Conclusion

At present the odds are against the emergence of a stable government capable of effectively prosecuting the war in South Vietnam. Yet the situation is not hopeless: if a viable regime evolves from the present confusion it may even gain strength from the release of long-pent pressures and the sobering effect of the current crisis. Of the men on the scene, General Khanh probably has the best chance of mustering sufficient support to restore a reasonably stable and workable government.

Discussion

1. The downfall of the Diem regime released powerful political forces previously suppressed or underground. Religious groups, principally the Buddhists, the students, labor, and the diverse array of intellectuals and politicians both at home and in exile moved quickly to voice their aspirations and make themselves felt. These cross currents were reflected within the military establishment, particularly among the senior officers. The struggle among these various forces can be expected to continue until an acceptable balance is struck, one group proves strong enough to dominate the others, or the fabric of central government is torn apart.

2. The convulsions of recent weeks have surfaced and exacerbated these deep-seated divisions and strains. They have intensified reciprocal suspicions between the military leadership and segments of the populace, at least in urban areas, increased disunity within the military establishment itself, and produced serious discord, including religious strife, among the civilians. The present situation is far more serious than that of November 1963, for the Viet Cong are now stronger, and in 1963 popular enthusiasm over Diem’s ouster gave his immediate successors a degree of general support and period of grace the present shaky government does not have. Furthermore, the events of the past nine months have inevitably increased sentiments of war weariness and frustration, and probably caused “neutralism” (i.e., an end to the constant struggle) to appear increasingly attractive to many. Also, the factors inherent in the US/GVN relationship have caused some rise in anti-American feeling, which probably will grow.

3. The situation is fragile and vulnerable to attack or exploitation from all sides. It affords obvious opportunities to any person or group reckless or ambitious enough to undertake a coup. There are indications of such plotting by at least two groups: disgruntled Dai Viets allied with officers who presently command key military units, and another group influenced by Colonel Pham Ngoc Thao. Among the civilian population some Buddhist and Catholic leaders appear to be trying to avoid new violence, but the spectre of religious strife has not been laid to rest. Recent Buddhist demands have alarmed the Catholics and militants of either persuasion may provoke fresh crises. While some civilian politicians wish to play a constructive role, most remain more concerned with personal power and prestige than national unity. The students seem to be calming down, but this volatile group remains vulnerable to manipulation from various quarters, including the Viet Cong and, perhaps, the French.

4. The present governmental arrangements are likely to undergo several changes during the next few weeks. The shaky solution evolved amid riot and discord—a sixty-day caretaker government headed by an ostensible triumvirate of rival generals—was patently a stopgap. Some other arrangements will be tried-perhaps in connection with the proposed National Congress. Beyond the immediate crisis over governmental arrangements, however, there is the question of whether any stable regime can emerge, capable of effectively prosecuting the war. On present evidence, chances of this outcome must be rated as less than even.

5. The situation in South Vietnam is so fluid and complex, however, that those developments which appear most likely will not necessarily occur—as, indeed, they have not on many occasions in both ancient and recent Vietnamese history. There is a chance, even if it be slight, that the experiences of the last week or so may ultimately prove salutary, that the situation had to get worse before it could get better. In the political chaos and conflict, some longstanding pressures have been released, some smoldering grievances and quarrels have been aired and possibly ameliorated, and the dangers implicit in continued drift have been made more real. It is not impossible that adroit leadership could turn these conditions to advantage in convincing influential figures of the need for national unity under available leaders, imperfect as they may be.

6. The real relationships of the persons and groups involved in the present situation are obscure.2 It is not clear how much power General Khanh actually retains or what role he will play in forthcoming weeks. In some respects, recent events have damaged him politically. At least some of his military colleagues are obviously unhappy at what they regard as his weakness in the face of Buddhist and student disorder. On the other hand, his manifest reluctance to use force against protesting civilians may lay to rest longstanding civilian suspicions that he is a neo-Diemist anxious to reverse the verdict of November 1963 and restore a Can Lao dictatorship. His courageous willingness to stand alone and unarmed amidst demonstrating crowds won him personal respect.

7. In the context of present realities Khanh probably has a better chance than any other obvious figure of providing the leadership around which a stable government could be built. His success in this venture, however, is far from assured. Even if he himself shows the necessary astuteness and willingness to tackle the task his success will depend to a great degree on the willingness of other influential figures (e.g., General Khiem, General Minh, and Tri Quang) to lend him support or, at a minimum, to refrain from working actively for his downfall. General Minh in particular probably retains enough prestige so that a government which did not have his participation, or at least his approval, would have considerably lessened chances of survival.

8. There are, of course, several possibilities other than a government in which Khanh plays the paramount role. Some new figure may arise or some already prominent personality may prove to have hidden talents or unsuspected support. However, at the moment every likely alternative candidate has individual drawbacks or enough known opposition to cast serious doubt on his ability to provide unifying leadership. Several groups or figures seem strong enough to exercise what amounts to a de facto veto in the business of creating a government. Although it is possible that some individual or faction may succeed in overthrowing the present government, none—other than Khanh—presently seems capable of holding power.

9. The longer the present unstable situation lasts, the more difficult it will be to form a government which can preserve even the appearance of unity and determination. In such circumstances, neutralist sentiment would almost certainly increase, together with the danger that a loosely organized coalition would emerge which could take advantage of frustration and war weariness to seek a neutralist solution. In the prolonged absence of firm central direction from Saigon, the morale and effectiveness of individual unit commanders in the field will decline, and there is even the danger that some might make their own accommodations with the Communist enemy. There is also a chance that some province or region will secede, and there are already rumors of separatist tendencies in Hue.

10. On the other hand, except for tensions in Hue, there is as yet little sign of the imminence of such dire developments. Furthermore, in weighing the situation in South Vietnam it is important not to focus exclusive attention on events in urban areas. During the past month, the war in the provinces has been carrying on, the army shows no signs of slackening its efforts and, indeed, has recently scored two major successes. Local officials have probably adopted the traditional Vietnamese wait and see attitude rather than taking actions which might jeopardize their own position. Prolonged discord in the cities will inevitably affect the rural pacification effort, but so far the limited momentum which the counterinsurgency effort had in the provinces has not diminished.

11. The Viet Cong obviously are not indifferent to South Vietnam’s current troubles. Hanoi and Viet Cong propaganda emphasizes that the Communists expect victory to come primarily from South Vietnamese political failures and instability. There is no evidence that the Viet Cong triggered the recent actions which led to urban upheaval, but the Communists have almost certainly been actively encouraging discord and violence (eleven of those arrested as directly responsible for the worst of recent disorders in Saigon were claimed by the police to be known VC agents). Militarily, recent weeks have been marked by an actual decline in VC attacks, though this “lull” is probably a normal phase and there are signs that the VC may now be preparing to step up their activity. Judging from past experience, it will take some time for the VC to ready themselves to take full advantage of recent developments. Also, the Communists may wish to avoid the risk of increasing the obvious VC threat to a point where it might unify anti-Communists presently engaged in internecine political strife.

12. Some of the recent agitation against Khanh’s government has had anti-American undertones. In some circles there is a belief that the US prodded Khanh into attempting to eliminate Minh as chief of state and into resuming the kind of tight controls formerly exercised by Diem. Minh himself is manifestly resentful of what he regards as US undercutting of his position (though Khanh too has been uneasy about what he considers US endeavors on Minh’s behalf). There has been a growing anti-American feeling among some Catholics who blame the US for Diem’s overthrow and resent what they consider US favoritism of the Buddhist cause. In some military quarters (e.g., General Khiem) and probably in some civilian circles as well there is resentment at what is inevitably viewed as US “meddling” in internal Vietnamese affairs.

13. Communist—and possibly also French—agents have encouraged and exploited anti-US sentiments. The idea is also being circulated that South Vietnam is really a battlefield on which two alien powers, the US and Communist China, are waging war by proxy. It is likely that anti-American sentiment will grow.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Memos, Vol. XVII. Secret. Submitted by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the U.S. Intelligence Board. Also published in Declassified Documents, 2978, 31A.

2 See Annex. [Footnote in the source text. The annex is not printed.]

342. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 342. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, September 8, 1964.

SUBJECT

Courses of action for South Vietnam

The attached memorandum (Tab A) records briefly the consensus which has been worked out with Max Taylor in recent days.2 This course of action is the best we can design for the central purpose of thickening the thin fabric of the Khanh government in the next two months. Everyone regards this as the first priority task, and the American actions are all framed with this as their primary purpose. Our consensus now runs against any plan to force substantial escalation before October, at the earliest. My own guess is that unless there is a very marked change in Saigon, we will still be cautious a month from now, although Bob McNamara is a little more aggressive than the rest of us.

This paper does not discuss long-range actions, but you should know that in the longer perspective nearly all of us are agreed that substantially increased pressure against North Vietnam will be necessary if we are not to face the prospect of a gradual but increasingly inevitable break-up of our side in South Vietnam.

I also attach at Tab B a Special National Intelligence Estimate which was approved today.3

McG.B.

Tab A

COURSES OF ACTION FOR SOUTH VIETNAM4

The Situation

1. Khanh will probably stay in control and may make some headway in the next 2–3 months in strengthening the government (GVN). The best we can expect is that he and the GVN will be able to maintain order, keep the pacification program ticking over (but not progressing markedly), and give the appearance of a valid government.

2. Khanh and the GVN leaders are temporarily too exhausted to be thinking much about moves against the North. However, they do need to be reassured that the US continues to mean business, and as Khanh goes along in his government efforts, he will probably want more visible US effort, and some GVN role in external actions.

3. The GVN over the next 2–3 months will be too weak for us to take any major deliberate risks of escalation that would involve a major role for, or threat to, South Vietnam, However, escalation arising from and directed against US action would tend to lift GVN morale at least temporarily.

4. The Communist side will probably avoid provocative action against the US, and it is uncertain how much they will step up VC activity. They do need to be shown that we and the GVN are not simply sitting back after the Gulf of Tonkin.

Courses of Action

We recommend in any event: 1. US naval patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin should be resumed immediately (about September 12). They should operate initially beyond the 12-mile limit and be clearly dissociated from 34A maritime operations. The patrols would comprise 2–3 destroyers and would have air cover from carriers; the destroyers would have their own ASW capability.

2. 34A operations by the GVN should be resumed immediately thereafter (next week). The maritime operations are by far the most important. North Vietnam is likely to publicize them, and at this point we should have the GVN ready to admit that they are taking place and to justify and legitimize them on the basis of the facts on VC infiltration by sea. 34A air drop and leaflet operations should also be resumed but are secondary in importance. We should not consider air strikes under 34A for the present.

3. Limited GVN air and ground operations into the corridor areas of Laos should be undertaken in the near future, together with Lao air strikes as soon as we can get Souvanna’s permission. These operations will have only limited effect, however.

4. We should be prepared to respond on a tit-for-tat basis against the DRV in the event of any attack on US units or any special DRV/VC action against SVN. The response for an attack on US units should be along the lines of the Gulf of Tonkin attacks, against specific and related targets. The response to special action against SVN should likewise be aimed at specific and comparable targets.

The main further question is the extent to which we should add elements to the above actions that would tend deliberately to provoke a DRV reaction, and consequent retaliation by us. Examples of actions to be considered would be running US naval patrols increasingly close to the North Vietnamese coast and/or associating them with 34A operations. We believe such deliberately provocative elements should not be added in the immediate future while the GVN is still struggling to its feet. By early October, however, we may recommend such actions depending on GVN progress and Communist reaction in the meantime, especially to US naval patrols.

The aim of the above actions, external to South Vietnam, would be to assist morale in SVN and show the Communists we still mean business, while at the same time seeking to keep the risks low and under our control at each stage.

Further actions within South Vietnam are not covered in this memorandum. We believe that there are a number of immediate impact actions we can take, such as pay raises for the police and civil administrators and spot projects in the cities and selected rural areas. These actions would be within current policy and will be refined for decision during Ambassador Taylor’s visit. We are also considering minor changes in the US air role within South Vietnam, but these would not involve decisions until November.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XVII, Memos. Secret. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 561–562, and Pentagon Papers: New York Times Edition, pp. 357–359.

2 The meetings took place September 7 at noon and September 8 at 11:05 a.m. Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge and William Bundy, Manning, Taylor, and Wheeler attended both, while McCone was present at the second. Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) The first meeting is described in United States-Vietnam Relations, 1945–1967, Book IV, pp. 25–27; and Taylor summarized both meetings briefly in Swords and Plowshares, pp. 320–321. In his diary, Taylor also notes that there was general agreement on the recommendations in telegram 768 (Document 339), but “there was a rather sharp debate over the timeliness of provoking North Vietnamese action.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69)

3 Document 341.

4 Secret. Drafted by William Bundy. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 561–562. For an earlier draft, also dated September 8, see ibid., pp. 560–561. In anticipation of Taylor’s return and in response to the deteriorating situation in Saigon, McNaughton and William Bundy had begun drafting papers on Vietnam on September 2. McNaughton’s first and second drafts, dated September 2 and 3, of a seven-point “Plan of Action for South Vietnam” are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XVII, Memos. The second draft is also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 556–559.

Bundy’s paper, “Possible Courses of Action for South Viet-Nam,” initially drafted on September 3 and revised on September 5, was similar to McNaughton’s but had only five sections: Analysis of the Present Situation, Actions To Be Taken in Any Event, Major Additional Action We Might Consider Within South Viet-Nam, Major Additional Courses of Action Outside South Viet-Nam, and Summary and Conclusions. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XVII, Memos) Both papers were pessimistic about the situation in Vietnam and presented a range of possible U.S. actions to improve it. The text printed here represents the consolidation and revision of the Bundy and McNaughton drafts in light of the discussions on September 7 and 8.

343. Memorandum of a Meeting, White House, Washington, September 9, 1964, 11 a.m. 343. Memorandum of a Meeting, White House, Washington, September 9, 1964, 11 a.m.1

Washington, September 9, 1964, 11 a.m.

PRESENT WERE

The President, Secretary Rusk (after the first half-hour), Secretary McNamara, Mr. McCone, General Wheeler, Ambassador Taylor, William Bundy, John McNaughton, Robert Manning, and McGeorge Bundy

The meeting began with the President’s review of a memorandum, “Courses of Action for South Vietnam,” dated September 8, 1964 (attached).2 Initial attention was concentrated on the four specific recommendations in this paper. The Secretary of Defense reported that these recommendations, with minor adjustments, had the approval of the Joint Chiefs,3 but he reported also that there was an important division among the Chiefs, in that the Chief of Staff of the Air Force and the Commandant of the Marine Corps believed that it was now necessary in addition to execute extensive U.S. air strikes against North Vietnam. General Wheeler explained that these two officers now felt that the situation would continue to deteriorate unless such drastic action was taken now. He said that he and the other two colleagues were persuaded by the argument of Ambassador Taylor—the man on the spot—that it was important not to overstrain the currently weakened GVN by drastic action in the immediate future. General Taylor repeated that this was indeed his view, but he emphasized that he also believed that in the long run the current in-country program would not be sufficient. He had held this view for many months, but it had been reinforced by recent events in the field.

The President pressed General Taylor as to the reasons for his current unreadiness to recommend larger action. Under this questioning General Taylor made it clear that he and General Westmoreland were in agreement on this question of timing. The President indicated that he had gained the impression in an earlier talk with Ambassador Taylor that the Government now might in fact be somewhat strengthened by recent events, in that General Khanh had eliminated some people who were good riddance.4 Ambassador Taylor agreed that this was a real possibility, at the more optimistic end of the spectrum, and that perhaps also General Khanh would now have more true support in the country as a whole. But he could not be sure of this, and on balance he thought the government was in a more uncertain condition than before.

The President asked whether the U.S. had given any encouragement to General Khanh in his August 16 effort to concentrate power in his own hands, and the Ambassador replied in the negative. We had tried to encourage Khanh to include a bill of rights and to lay a careful groundwork for any actions he might take. He had accepted the first point, but had not had time to carry out the second before his plans were overtaken by protest.

The President asked Director McCone for his opinion and the Director replied that in the judgment of his Agency the four recommended actions were appropriate, and that a sustained air attack at present would be dangerous because of the weakness of the GVN. Such an attack might also trigger major increases in Chinese Communist participation. The Agency remained very gravely concerned by the internal situation in South Vietnam, which the Director estimated a shade more pessimistically than Ambassador Taylor.

The President asked the Ambassador whether we could stop internal feuding. The Ambassador replied that it was very difficult with a group of men who turned off their hearing aids in the face of appeals to the public weal. These people simply did not have the sense of responsibility for the public interest to which we were accustomed, and regularly estimated matters in terms of their own personal gains and losses. The President then asked the Secretary of State for his judgment. Mr. Rusk said that a major decision to go North could be taken at any time—“at 5-minutes’ notice.” He did not recommend such decision now. He thought we should take the four recommended actions and play for the breaks. The split in the Communist bloc was deepening and would probably be sharpened by the forthcoming December meeting.5 As that split grew more severe, there might be real inhibitions upon adventures by Peking and Hanoi in Southeast Asia.

The President asked what could be done to strengthen the Government in South Vietnam. Ambassador Taylor replied that this was very difficult, but that one thing he would try to do would be to discourage Khanh from excluding all military men. I said that this was the common judgment of all of us, and that the Government needed what talent it could get whether military or civilian.

The President said that in his judgment the proper answer to those advocating immediate and extensive action against the North was that we should not do this until our side could defend itself in the streets of Saigon. We obviously wanted to strengthen the GVN. We believed it could be strengthened. But what specifically were we going to do in this direction?

Ambassador Taylor replied that we needed to move on in meshing our team with the GVN. This had been well started before the unrest of August. The problem was not in planning but in execution, and in the quality of the individuals in the GVN. Nevertheless we should continue to seek better individuals and continue to strengthen our cooperative effort with them.

The President accepted this as a first purpose and then asked whether we needed additional equipment as well. Ambassador Taylor said that while the additional U.S. advisers would be helpful, there was currently no equipment need beyond that which was being supplied.

Secretary McNamara emphasized the importance of politico-economic action in the urban areas, along the lines of the recent Rand report,6 to lower the level of student and Buddhist pressure and increase the political base of support for the GVN. Mr. McCone endorsed this judgment. He further expressed his opinion that Hanoi and Peking now believed that they were doing very well and that they were not having second thoughts about their basic policy (an implied disagreement with the Secretary of State). The Agency was also disturbed by the prospect that internal movement toward negotiations might be increasing, and that there was some sign also of anti-American feeling in South Vietnam. It could happen that the President would find that the purposes originally set forth in Eisenhower’s 1954 letter7 were no longer supported by the people of Vietnam themselves.

Secretary Rusk asked Ambassador Taylor if it could be said that the key leaders had looked at the dangers of recent weeks and might be sobered toward responsibility. Ambassador Taylor said there were some such factors at work. The recent events had proven that for the present, at least, General Khanh is indispensable, and on paper, at least, he now had a broader backing than before.

The President asked what would happen if our proposed efforts did not strengthen the government and if instead it got weaker and weaker. Ambassador Taylor replied that as long as the armed forces are solid, the real power is secure. It was vital to be sure of the armed forces. And he believed that these forces would be reliable as long as they had confidence that we were with them.

The President asked who might come in if Khanh went out. He said that he hoped that it would not be “Mac’s friend Mr. Oanh of Harvard,” and was pleased to hear that this assumption was right. Ambassador Taylor indicated that it might be such a man as Quat, or General Khiem, or perhaps Vu Van Maul But he emphasized that this was a very uncertain game of prediction.

Ambassador Taylor further recommended that we should make every effort to execute the sound Hop-Tac plan. This plan for clearance around Saigon would make ministers work, but work was good for the ministers.

The President asked whether the situation was better or worse than when Ambassador Taylor went out. Ambassador Taylor said he thought it was somewhat worse, but made it clear in response to a further question that this weakening was political, not military. Ambassador Taylor also emphasized his belief that sooner or later we would indeed have to act more forcefully against the North. He simply did not think now was the best time.

The President asked if anyone doubted whether it was worth all this effort. Ambassador Taylor replied that we could not afford to let Hanoi win, in terms of our overall position in the area and in the world. General Wheeler supported him most forcefully, reporting the unanimous view of the Joint Chiefs that if we should lose in South Vietnam, we would lose Southeast Asia. Country after country on the periphery would give way and look toward Communist China as the rising power of the area. Mr. McCone expressed his concurrence and so did the Secretary of State, with considerable force.

The President indicated that the reason for waiting, then, must be simply that with a weak and wobbly situation it would be unwise to attack until we could stabilize our base. Secretary McNamara added that the price of waiting was low, and the promise of gain substantial. Ambassador Taylor pointed out that General Khanh himself wants two months simply to organize his own government. The Secretary of State asked what the situation was in the countryside. Ambassador Taylor replied it was not too bad. He had constantly asked Khanh if he was keeping things quiet in the provinces and had regularly been assured of Khanh’s concern on just this point.

The President asked Ambassador Taylor to compare Khanh and Diem in the people’s affections. The Ambassador replied the people did not care for either one.

The Secretary of State asked if television could be used to give Khanh more contact with the people. Ambassador Taylor said the matter needed further study.

Secretary McNamara asked if it were clear that money was no object, and returned to the importance of carrying out the kind of program recommended in the Rand report. Ambassador Taylor replied that recommendations from Saigon were likely to be more conservative than the Rand report. Mr. Killen felt that our program had been too much a U.S. program, and too little a matter of real intent and planning by GVN officials. Mr. Killen felt that to make a government you had to make it do its own work.

Secretary Rusk said he very much hoped money would not be regarded as the ceiling, and felt that it would be worth any amount to win. He adduced the example of the costs of the anti-Communist struggle in Greece, which worked out at $50,000 a guerrilla. Secretary McNamara repeated that the Rand report said we had been penny-pinching and that we should make sure that our people in the field understood that these were not normal circumstances and that normal attitudes would not be helpful. Ambassador Taylor replied that the country team would ask for any money it needed. The President emphasized his own continuing conviction that it was necessary not to spare the horses. He pointed out that this had been his constant view and that he wondered what the Rand report was talking about. Secretary McNamara and I said in reply that the report was talking of the attitudes of second- and third-level officials in the field, and not about the efforts of people in Washington to get everybody to do whatever would be helpful.

The President reemphasized his own position and asked Ambassador Taylor directly if he felt pinched. The Ambassador replied “no.”

The President said that what disheartened him was that we had our best team out there for 60 days and had lost ground. Ambassador Taylor replied that the President might have a wrong impression. The Ambassador believed that in the field we were indeed doing better—that General Westmoreland, if present, would report real strengthening of the pacification effort, that tactics and performance were improving—that at least in half the provinces the over-all program was going well. The Ambassador believed that progress was being made at the grass roots, and that our current problem was political.

The President asked Mr. McCone why things were quiet on the enemy side after the Gulf of Tonkin. Mr. McCone replied that the enemy was waiting and watching and probably felt that the current political unrest was working in his interest.

The President asked if anyone present had a different view from the basic recommendation of the attached paper. No differing view was expressed. Secretary McNamara said that we could try other things later on. Secretary Rusk concurred. General Wheeler said that of course a clear-cut incident might require appropriate action at any time, and there was general agreement with this thought.

The President then turned to what would be said, and Mr. Manning made brief suggestions emphasizing our concern for security and stability in South Vietnam, as well as for the pacification effort. The President discussed briefly the plan for a meeting with the Leadership,8 saying that we should take every occasion we could to bring them in normally in these matters. Mr. Bundy pointed out the problem of Congressional delegations going to South Vietnam, and the President and Ambassador Taylor agreed that it would be useful for Ambassador Taylor to point out that one reason for his regular return to this country was to avoid the advantage given to enemies of the GVN government by U.S. types coming out all the time. We would emphasize to the Leadership our hope that Congress would let the government get stabilized, and that at this delicate moment when the government is fragile we should have only one spokesman on the scene—the Ambassador.

The President then approved the four courses in the attached memorandum, reemphasized that money was no object, and asked General Wheeler to explain to his colleagues in the JCS that we would be ready to do more, when we had a base. The President did not wish to enter the patient in a 10-round bout, when he was in no shape to hold out for one round. We should get him ready to face 3 or 4 rounds at least.

There was a brief discussion of a draft letter to General Khanh,9 and the President directed that a revision be prepared for his consideration.

McG.B.10

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File. Secret. Drafted by McGeorge Bundy. The meeting took place in the Cabinet Room. For the President’s account of this meeting, see Vantage Point, p. 120. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 129B.

2 Not attached to the source text, but see Tab A, supra.

3 For text of the JCS views, CM–124–64, September 9, see Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, p. 564. A copy of CM–124–64 is also in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, DeSoto Patrol.

4 According to Taylor’s diary, he had seen the President at the end of the preceding day and explained the situation in Saigon. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69) No record of this meeting has been found.

5 Reference is to the International Conference of Communist Parties to be held on December 15.

6 “U.S. Economic Assistance in Vietnam: A Proposed Reorientation,” R–430–AID, July 1964, was prepared by the Rand Corporation for the Agency for International Development. A copy is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Rand Report.

7 Foreign Relations, 1952–1954, vol. XIII, Part 2, pp. 1239–1241.

8 At 3 p.m., the participants in this meeting, with the exception of Manning, McNaughton, and William Bundy, met with congressional leaders and reviewed the situation in Vietnam. (Johnson Library, Johnson Diary and Rusk Appointment Book) In his diary, Taylor noted: “To my surprise, there was no heckling.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69) No other record of this meeting has been found. During the afternoon of September 10, Taylor also appeared before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to brief the members on the situation in Vietnam. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 46, Records of the U.S. Senate; scheduled for publication in the 1964 volume of Executive Sessions of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee)

9 A copy of this draft and a revised draft, dated September 10, are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Heads of State Correspondence. A copy of the 2-paragraph letter as signed by the President on September 10 is ibid.

10 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

344. Memorandum From the Director of the Operations Mission in Vietnam (Killen) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) 344. Memorandum From the Director of the Operations Mission in Vietnam (Killen) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)1

Saigon, September 9, 1964.

SUBJECT

Proposed Economic Program of Next GVN

1. The Forrestal-Oanh talks in the spring of this year2 envisaged a sharply increased level of expenditure by the GVN during CY 1964 and 1965 for the military, counter-insurgency, and developmental purposes. This increased level of spending would be financed by overdrafts at the Bank of Vietnam. It was agreed that excessive inflationary pressures which might be engendered thereby should be ameliorated by increases, as required by import demand, in AID-financed import levels. This policy would be pursued so long as the current emergency situation prevailed.

2. The Rand Report,3 submitted pursuant to an extended on-the-ground examination of the current politico/economic problems in Vietnam and the effectiveness of U.S. economic assistance in dealing with them, called attention to a number of needed revisions in the character of U.S. aid and made recommendations relating thereto.

3. During the past months, since the Forrestal-Oanh talks, expenditures for the cited purposes, while above the level of the previous year, have failed to meet the projected levels due to a number of factors endemic to the GVN administration. The failure of the GVN counter-insurgency effort to achieve the hoped-for success in the intervening period, plus the weakened structure of the GVN itself, heighten both the need for and the urgency of a renewed effort to make government more effective and to engender in the Vietnamese people a greater sense of confidence in the capacity of the GVN to be responsive to their economic and social needs.

4. The U.S. Government is prepared to vigorously support the efforts of the GVN to these ends. The USG is prepared to collaborate fully with the GVN in the formulation and financing of programs and activities which will readily contribute to these ends. At the same time, in order for these ends to be effectively served, such programs and/or activities must clearly appear as GVN-originated efforts, rather than as the product of U.S. conception and sponsorship. Further, the successful implementation of such programs requires a reasonable (but wholly possible) self-help effort of the GVN in certain current problems of budget management and economic policy, both of which impinge heavily on the opportunity to effectively marshal indigenous resources so essential to an accelerated input of U.S. resources.

5. The achievement of the interdependent U.S. security and political objectives in Vietnam requires vigorous and successful action by the GVN on both the “pacification” and socio/economic development fronts in both rural and urban areas. Actions are currently underway to greatly strengthen the U.S. support for pacification—in military, pare-military, and civilian activities. On-going programs in rural areas are directed towards both pacification and developmental targets, each of which seeks to associate the rural community with the GVN in action and attitude. Much less has been undertaken in urban areas with their greater potential for adverse political and social activities which thwart the ability and the determination of any GVN to carry out its normal and essential functions of government. (An exception to this generalization is the already initiated action to have the Doxiades Associates of Athens, Greece, and Washington, D.C. develop by the end of calendar 1964 an urban development plan for the Saigon metropolitan area which envisages a fully comprehensive and multi-year action plan for that community.)

6. Given the widespread unemployment and underemployment in both urban and rural areas, a major economic and political objective would be the creation of jobs, more jobs, and still more jobs. This underscores the importance of developing indigenous sources for materiel, e.g., cement, roofing, nails, lumber, glass, and all other goods for which basic raw material needs can be met from within-country sources. To have these materials provided from offshore sources would dissipate a major, if not the major, benefit that should accrue from the total effort. It is recognized that some time would be required to tool up for expanded internal production and during the interim recourse would necessarily be made to imports. But for the longer-term and maximum political benefit, local resources must be exploited soonest. This underscores again the importance of the second group of GVN actions mentioned in paragraph 7.

7. The USOM/VN therefore proposes to initiate with the GVN, during the immediate future, a series of talks looking towards agreement on a substantially expanded socio/economic action program which aims to induce a greater sense of popular confidence in both the GVN and the future of the country. An accompanying objective will be to obtain maximum possible public participation in both the planning and implementation of all components of such a program. It would envisage prompt action by the GVN on three main fronts: first, the construction of new and widely-desired social and economic facilities, e.g., low-cost housing, schools, public services, and industrial facilities; second, the removal or correction of present deterrents to popular support for, and confidence in, the GVN, e.g., excessively low government salaries; the failure of the GVN to pay promptly for goods or services provided by the private sector; the failure to make funds available promptly through Bank of Vietnam overdrafts, in the first instance, and through normal funding approval procedures, in the second; the excessive “control” actions which thwart private investment (this is particularly important where a critical need for the expanded production of building materials impedes the envisaged construction program); and the failure to utilize existing facilities in the Vietnamese private sector for functions critical to the war effort. Under this program the U.S. would provide maximum financial and technical support in any and all ways which would make effective contributions to success. The third area of GVN action would represent positive steps (in addition to those cited above) to induce greater popular support for this total approach, e.g., greater decentralization of authority to village and hamlet officials to utilize land taxes for paid public works or other useful purposes; the possible establishment of a system of student scholarships for both intermediate and university level studies; possible grants-in-aid to various politically influential groups for educational or other approved purposes; and other similarly motivated activities.

8. All these activities would be so carried out as to seek to the maximum degree a clear distinction between the benefits afforded people in GVN controlled (or nearly controlled) areas and those available (or not available) to people in areas where GVN control is not pervasive.

9. It is desirable, indeed almost imperative, that understandings on these matters be reached with the GVN soonest. The USOM proposes to utilize, in addition to its own staff, such other personnel in the joint USOM/GVN formulation of this program as may be available and competent to assist. Once the elements of agreement are reached, the general content of the program should be announced in a suitable context by the GVN as its own decision, plan and product. The U.S. role should be played in the softest key possible. The timing of the announcement should be determined against the background of political developments in Vietnam so as to maximize the popular support for and the political appeal of the program itself and its GVN sponsorship. Of particular importance in timing is the political decision as to whether we wish the current interim government to get the credit-or whatever successor government emerges.

James S. Killen4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Rand Report. Secret.

2 Forrestal transmitted a summary of his discussions with Oanh in telegram 2252 from Saigon, May 19. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 US–VIET S) A summary of the results of the talks and a memorandum of understanding are in telegrams 2296 and 2297 from Saigon, May 27. (Ibid., AID(US)VIET S)

3 See footnote 6, Document 343.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

345. National Security Action Memorandum No. 314 345. National Security Action Memorandum No. 3141

Washington, September 10, 1964.

TO

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The President has now reviewed the situation in South Vietnam with Ambassador Taylor and with other advisers and has approved the following actions:

1. U.S. naval patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin will be resumed promptly after Ambassador Taylor’s return. They will operate initially well beyond the 12-mile limit and be clearly dissociated from 34A maritime operations. The patrols will comprise two to three destroyers and would have air cover from carriers; the destroyers will have their own ASW capability.

2. 34A operations by the GVN will be resumed after completion of a first DeSoto patrol. The maritime operations are by far the most important. North Vietnam has already publicized them, and is likely to publicize them even more, and at this point we should have the GVN ready to admit that they are taking place and to justify and legitimize them on the basis of the facts of VC infiltration by sea. 34A air drop and leaflet operations should also be resumed but are secondary in importance. We should not consider air strikes under 34A for the present.

3. We should promptly discuss with the Government of Laos plans for limited GVN air and ground operations into the corridor areas of Laos, together with Lao air strikes and possible use of U.S. armed aerial reconnaissance. On the basis of these discussions a decision on action will be taken, but it should be recognized that these operations will in any case have only limited effect.

4. We should be prepared to respond as appropriate against the DRV in the event of any attack on U.S. units or any special DRV/VC action against SVN.

5. The results of these decisions will be kept under constant review, and recommendations for changes or modifications or additions will be promptly considered.

6. The President reemphasizes the importance of economic and political actions having immediate impact in South Vietnam, such as pay raises for civilian personnel and spot projects in the cities and selected rural areas. The President emphasizes again that no activity of this kind should be delayed in any way by any feeling that our resources for these purposes are restricted. We can find the money which is needed for all worthwhile projects in this field. He expects that Ambassador Taylor and the country team will take most prompt and energetic action in this field.

7. These decisions are governed by a prevailing judgment that the first order of business at present is to take actions which will help to strengthen the fabric of the Government of South Vietnam; to the extent that the situation permits, such action should precede larger decisions. If such larger decisions are required at any time by a change in the situation, they will be taken.

McGeorge Bundy

1 Source: Department of State, S/S–NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 314. Top Secret. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 565–566. The differences between the numbered paragraphs of NSAM 314 and the “Courses of Action for South Vietnam” (Tab A to Document 342) reflect the views of the TCS as indicated in CM–124–64, September 9. See footnote 3, Document 343.

XI. U.S. Efforts To Strengthen the Government of South Vietnam, September 11–October 31XI. U.S. Efforts To Strengthen the Government of South Vietnam, September 11–October 31

346. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 19, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, CINCPAC, and the Department of Defense. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 566–568.

347. Editorial Note

348. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 13, 1964—12 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. The time of transmission is presumably midnight, September 12/13, because the cable was received at 12:52 p.m., September 13.

349. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, September 13, 1964—2:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared in substance by Rusk and the White House. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to a memorandum from McGeorge Bundy to the President, September 14, this telegram was approved at a 1 p.m. meeting at the White House attended by the President, Rusk, McNamara, McCone, Wheeler, and McGeorge Bundy. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President) Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 94E.

350. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 13, 1964—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash. Repeated to the White House, the Department of Defense, CIA, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 5:26 p.m. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1971, 94F. The Department of State file copy is apparently in error in giving the time of transmission as 2 a.m.

351. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Saigon, undated.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11925. Secret; Flash. Passed by the ICS to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the White House, and the Department of State. Also passed by other means to the Embassy in Saigon. Received in the National Military Communications Center at 3:30 p.m., September 13. No time or date of transmission appears on the source text.

352. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 14, 1964—8:45 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents 1979, 95B. Taylor arrived back in Saigon at 7 a.m. on September 14.

353. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 16, 1964—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense and CINCPAC.

354. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 16, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Top Secret, Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

355. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 18, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to CIA. the Department of Defense. and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

356. Memorandum for the Record by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, September 20, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 129C.

357. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State

Washington, September 19, 1964.

Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Southeast Asia. Top Secret. The source text, which was initialed by Rostow, bears the handwritten notation “S[ecretary] saw 9/28/64.” Copies were sent to William Bundy, Forrestal, Hughes, and Thompson.

358. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 24, 1964—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Hue and CINCPAC.

359. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 24, 1964—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 13 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. A copy of this telegram was sent to the President under cover of a memorandum from McGeorge Bundy, September 24. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President)

360. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 24, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Secret: Limdis. Repeated to Hue and CINCPAC.

361. Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense

Washington, undated.

Source: Department of State, NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Mtg 9/25/64. Top Secret. Drafted by McNaughton. Another draft of this paper, which is the same except for minor wording changes, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XV111, Memos. Attached to the source text is a note to the Office of the Secretary of State stating that the paper was intended for a meeting with Rusk, McNamara, Ball, and others at 11 a.m., September 25. Also attached to the source text is a memorandum from Forrestal to McNaughton, September 24, which reviewed the same points, and a 2-page draft telegram to Vientiane instructing that the cross-border strikes be carried out as soon as possible.

362. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, September 25, 1964—5:48 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted in S/VN, cleared by AID, CIA, DOD/ISA, JCS, USIA, and FE/SEA; and approved by Forrestal. Repeated to CINCPAC.

363. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, September 25, 1964—6:17 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XVIII. Top Secret; Eyes Only. A note on the source text reads: “For delivery to the President at the LBJ Ranch tonight.”

364. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, September 26, 1964—11:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared with William Bundy.

365. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, September 28, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

366. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President

Saigon, September 30, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1000 from Saigon, which is the source text. According to another copy of telegram 1000, it was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

367. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Forrestal) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, September 30, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XV111, Memos. Secret and Personal.

368. Special National Intelligence Estimate

Washington, October 1, 1964.

Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Secret; Controlled Dissemination; Limited Distribution. Prepared by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the Directors of INR, DIA, and NSA. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 229C.

369. Minutes of a Meeting, White House

Washington, October 5, 1964, 4:15 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Bundy on October 6.

370. Editorial Note

371. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 6, 1964—9:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy files: Lot 68 F 8)

372. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, October 8, 1964—8:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared with William and McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Secretary Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. An undated draft of this cable with different wording is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXV111, Cables.

373. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 9, 1964—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

374. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 9, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Johnson. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 578–579.

375. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 10, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

376. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 12, 1964—11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Vientiane, Bangkok, Hue, and CINCPAC.

377. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 13, 1964—9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 96C.

378. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Vietnam Coordinating Committee (Forrestal) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, October 14, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Memos, Vol. XIX. Secret. Also sent to William Bundy, McNaughton, and Colby. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 107D.

379. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 15, 1964—9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

380. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 16, 1964—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

381. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 16, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

382. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Saigon, October 17, 1964—3:20 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Also sent to Goodpaster and repeated to CINCPAC for Admiral Sharp.

383. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President

Saigon, October 17, 1964—8:30 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1174 from Saigon, which is the source text.

384. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, October 18, 1964—3:47 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared in substance with McNamara, and initialed by Rusk.

385. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 20, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

386. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 22, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

387. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 25, 1964—11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

388. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, October 27, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files. Working Papers. Nov 1964, Vol. IV, JCS. Top Secret; Sensitive.

389. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President

Saigon, October 28, 1964–9 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1292 from Saigon, which is the source text.

390. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, October 31, 1964—2 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

391. Memorandum From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)

Saigon, October 31, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Coordinator’s Files: FRC 68 A 5612, Council Meetings. Top Secret.

392. Intelligence Study Prepared by Headquarters, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam

Saigon, October 31, 1964.

Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files. Confidential. A covering memorandum, dated October 31; a table of contents; and Sections II–VII, which give specifics on statistics, infiltration groups, sources, personalities, designations, and a map of the infiltration routes are not printed.

346. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 346. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 19, 1964—5 p.m.

913. Deptel 622.2 Following is a summary, coordinated with Vientiane and Bangkok, of the conclusions of the meeting of the three posts held at Saigon September 11 to review air and limited ground operations for the Lao corridor: 1. Air operations in corridor. This involves attack of 22 targets for which folders available at Vientiane and Saigon. If objective is primarily military, i.e., to inflict maximum damage to targets, to prevent VN/PL dispersal and protective measures, and impede rapid VN/PL riposte, it was agreed that a series of sharp, heavy attacks must be made in a relatively short timespan, which would involve substantial US and/or VNAF/Farmgate attacks. If objective primarily psychological, military disadvantages of attacks over longer time frame would be acceptable and chief reliance could be placed on RLAF T–23s with some Yankee team strikes against harder targets, e.g., five bridges. Estimated sortie requirements for this second option 188 T–28 sorties and 80 USAF sorties. Time required 12 days. Vientiane representatives believe Souvanna would probably go along with second option but would probably wish to have such attacks spread out over considerable period of time. Also felt Souvanna would prefer VNAF not conduct air strikes in corridor. It was general consensus that best division of targeting for immediate future would be RLAF/Yankee team mix.

Vientiane is very reluctant to see VNAF participation such strikes and would hope that by keeping GVN informed of actions being taken by RLAF and US in corridor, psychological needs of GVN could reasonably be met. Saigon will seek to do this. But if there are compelling reasons for covert VNAF participation Vientiane would be given prior info on necessity, timing and place of such strikes.

Alternatively, it was agreed that, if possible, joint Lao, Thai, and US participation in a common effort against a common enemy would be desirable but, recognizing that, even if possible, arrangements for such an effort would take some time to achieve. If such negotiations are conducted, however, RLAF/Yankee team strikes should not be precluded. Vientiane has since stated it does not consider that it would be desirable to seek to formalize such four country participation in corridor operations as to do so would raise question of degree of Souvanna Phouma’s knowledge and involvement which Vientiane feels would jeopardize success of operations.

2. Ground operations.

a. Although it was agreed that northern route 9 area offered most profitable targets, conference proceeded on assumption that Vientiane would find operations astride route 9 politically unacceptable at this time. However, Vientiane’s 448 to Dept,3 dispatched after return of conferees, now indicates that “shallow penetration raids (20 kilometers)…in rte 9 area…4 by company-sized units” would be acceptable and would not require clearance by the RLG.

b. Conference also agreed that central and southern areas offered targets and terrain consistent with capabilities of current assets.

c. Saigon concept is that operations astride rte 9 would be initiated by 8-man intelligence and reconnaissance teams infiltrated overland or by air. Exploitation of targets developed by these teams would be by Airborne Ranger companies (80–100 men), committed by parachute, helicopter or overland. Operations in other two areas would be conducted by reconnaissance and combat patrols of up to company size. In southernmost area operations would be characterized by limited but ever expanding overland ground probes; in central area combination of overland and air launch methods probably required. In each area operations would be limited to 20 kilometers penetration and not to exceed two companies at any one time. In addition to Airborne Ranger companies, assets include CIDG strike companies and ARVN Rangers.

d. Air supply for these operations can in normal foreseeable circumstances be handled exclusively within VNAF assets. This would include not only air drop and air exfiltration requirements but also air strike support and SAR operations in the event of emergency. Farmgate and/or overt US support would be called upon only in the event of unforeseen contingency which would exceed available VNAF capability. No problem was foreseen in use of US jumpmasters/observers. Saigon group stated that under these operating rules, operations could be initiated within fifteen days of decision to execute.

e. It was the view of Saigon group that authority for US advisors to accompany units is a prerequisite to successful operations. Without this US participation probability of success is judged so low that the advisability of conducting cross-border operations would be questionable. Vientiane representatives were strongly opposed to presence US advisors because of difficulty with current SAR operations in Laos and political importance of US maintaining credible stance of adhering to provisions Geneva Accords.

f. Embassy Vientiane had earlier indicated that they would insist on advanced clearance of cross-border operations. All representatives agreed that this requirement would be met by Vientiane having opportunity to comment on all plans submitted to Washington for approval. Once approval to execute is received, Vientiane would be kept informed of day-to-day operations as information addressee on operational traffic between Saigon/Washington/CINCPAC.

3. Public stance. It was the unanimous opinion of the group that it would be preferable to have no publicity with regard to operational details, and that no comment should be made in response to questions or accusations other than our unawareness of any such matters. Additionally, it was agreed that Souvanna should not be informed of any of these GVN/US actions. Use of RLAF would, of course, have to be cleared by him.

4. In summary, recommend we proceed as follows: a. Yankee team escort strike hard targets (5 bridges), RLAF remainder of 22-target list. Accordingly, Vientiane should be instructed make approach to RLG on initiation T–28 strikes (paragraph 2, Vientiane’s 448 to Department).

b. Authorize ground operations in all three areas, with timing and mode of employment of available assets as determined appropriate by COMUSMACV and CINCRVNAF, subject to provision of pare 2(19) [sic] relative depth of penetration and size of forces to be committed; pare 2(d) relative air support; and pare 2(f) relative coordination with Vientiane.

c. All actions, ground and air, to be initiated as rapidly as operationally feasible.

d. No publicity and no public acknowledgment of any operational matters, ground or air.

e. In order to give some four nation “flavor” to operations, authorize Bangkok to approach TG for authority to use Korat as base for some of US aircraft participating in foregoing Yankee team operations.

5. Request earliest Washington decision as to use of US advisors, recognizing Saigon’s serious reservations as to chances of success if their use is denied and Vientiane’s concern over adverse political impact of capture by PL/VM of US military personnel in Laos.

Note for Bangkok and Vientiane. Foregoing has been modified from original draft sent you in light your comments and Vientiane’s 448 to Dept.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, CINCPAC, and the Department of Defense. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 566–568.

2 Telegram 622, September 9, reported the decisions reached at the September 9 meeting in Washington on limited air and ground operations in Laos (see Documents 343 and 345) and asked that the meeting at Saigon on September 11 clarify their scope and timing. (Department of State. Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 Telegram 448 from Vientiane, September 13, reported that after hearing a report on the September 11 meeting the Embassy in Vientiane was persuaded that it was possible to move ahead with limited air and ground operations in the corridor. (Ibid.)

4 Ellipses in the source text.

347. Editorial Note 347. Editorial Note

Before dawn on September 13, military units led by former Minister of the Interior General Lam Van Phat and the Commander of the IV Corps, General Duong Van Duc, began to occupy strategic points in Saigon. At 10:35 a.m., U. Alexis Johnson reported that a “major military power play” was in progress. (MACJ–312 9613; Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11925) At 10:49 a.m., Johnson reported that he had ordered all Americans off the streets, that he was at the MACV command center with Westmoreland, and that Phat was announcing that he had executed a bloodless coup. (MACJ–312 9615; ibid.)

At 12:45 a.m. (11:45 p.m. Washington time), September 12, Rusk, Ball, and William Bundy began a teletype conference with Johnson to assess the situation. Johnson reported that Khanh, who was at Dalat, had asked if MACV could help with a counter plan and whether the United States would send Marines ashore if requested. Everyone in Washington and Saigon agreed that negative answers should be given to these questions. By the end of the conference, over 2 hours later, Johnson agreed to send Sullivan and General Stilwell to Dalat to find out what Khanh was doing, while he saw General “Big” Minh to see where he stood on the coup. At no time during the conference was recognition of Phat and Duc considered. (Telecon 13/0445Z; Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XVII, Memos) For other accounts of these events, see Johnson, Right Hand of Power, pages 414–415; Sullivan, Obbligato, pages 199–202; and Ky, Twenty Years, pages 49–50.

348. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 348. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 13, 1964—12 p.m.

836. CINCPAC for POLAD. I have just spent one and one-half hours with Phat and another hour and one-half with “Big” Minh. Khanh has just called from airport and asked urgently to see me now so following is briefest possible summary.

Phat very confused with vague ideas of big committee of 100 or so with an executive committee to run govt in place of PriMin for four month period end of which general elections would be held. Claims support from most military elements except I Corps, admits that Ky, Air Force, is sitting on fence. I was tough with him, made it clear thought his ideas were harebrained, and we were still supporting Khanh as PriMin of recognized govt. Talked hard about necessity avoiding clashes between ARVN forces, leaving areas in 4th uncovered for VC, etc., etc. He promised that he would do all possible avoid clashes and would not initiate any attacks.

Minh was in low sprite but made it emphatically clear that as much as he disliked Khanh, he felt Khanh was not at fault for much of what had happened. He thought Duc, Phat and company were mad in what they were attempting to do, had no support from population or anyone else, expected they would get no support and it was important US make clear it was not supporting. Said he had and would continue to do all he could to discourage them. We both agreed that finding way out was, however, extremely difficult with Duc, Phat and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] on one hand rightly fearing Khanh’s vengeance if they now backed down and other hand Khanh could not appear to be soft in disciplining army. We both agreed that we would work toward restoration status quo, although he felt best solution would be for both Khanh and Duc/Phat to leave country. More detailed accounts follow septel.2

Johnson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. The time of transmission is presumably midnight, September 12/13, because the cable was received at 12:52 p.m., September 13.

2 Telegram 840, September 14, 2 a.m., reported on the interview with Phat; telegram 841, September 14, 3 a.m., reported on the meeting with Minh. (Ibid.) The latter is published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 94F.

349. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 349. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, September 13, 1964—2:36 p.m.

654. For Ambassador from Secretary.

1. Believe strongest private representations to all key personalities should be made ASAP as USG attitude toward events of last few hours in Saigon: (a) it is imperative that there not be internecine war within South Vietnamese armed forces, whose energies and resources are needed for victory over a common enemy, the Viet Cong;

(b) the picture of petty bickering among Vietnamese leaders has created an appalling impression abroad and causes friends of South Vietnamese freedom all over the world to wonder how serious South Vietnamese are about their freedom and security and what there is for others to support; Communist capitals are already expressing their glee over most recent news from Saigon;

(c) the US has not provided massive assistance to South Vietnam, in military equipment, economic resources and personnel, in order to subsidize continuing quarrels among South Vietnamese leaders. The use of US equipment and resources to pursue quarrels is an outrageous abuse of such assistance and raises the gravest issues for the USG and people;

(d) The US has pledged its full commitment to the security and independence of South Viet Nam in the face of the massed manpower of Hanoi and Peiping. It is we who stand between the free peoples of Southeast Asia and that potential tide sweeping down from the north. But what can be the purpose of this commitment and the massive US force in position to meet it if South Vietnamese leaders themselves cannot declare a moratorium on personal rivalries and secondary differences about the details of government until such time as their country is secure;

(e) South Vietnamese leaders need not look among themselves for enemies; they all have a common enemy in the Viet Cong. Remind them of Viet Cong plans for their liquidation and of Benjamin Franklin’s remark that if they do not hang together they will surely hang separately;

(f) we believe that tactical units should return to their assigned areas and that General Minh should be permitted to continue with his task of constituting a council of representatives of major groups which can get to work on the constitution of a government which, with the support and participation of all major element can lead the country to victory. In this preparatory state we believe the Triumvirate with Prime Minister Khanh, General Minh and General Khiem should continue to direct affairs in order to avoid confusion and a reduction of effort against the Viet Cong.

(g) emphasize that Vietnamese leaders must not take the US for granted. We have tried to exercise the greatest patience because of difficulties which have been bravely faced by the Vietnamese people2 but patience and understanding are being drained away by disputes which seem to us to be intolerable in the face of our common dangers and tasks. The American people are already beginning to ask what are we supporting and why when they hear of these repeated internal differences among comrades in arms.

2. In line with above you should make it emphatically clear, wherever useful, that we do not believe a Phat/Duc Government can effectively govern the country or command the necessary popular support to carry forward the effort against the VC. US support for the GVN is based on the triumvirate and its efforts to bring about a broadly based and effective government satisfactorily reflecting the interests and concerns of all groups

3. Since Catholic sentiment may be crucial to resolution present crisis, you should exert all possible efforts ascertain degree of responsible Catholic sense of grievance and how it can be met so that government and program would have endorsement and support of key Catholic leaders such as Apostolic Delegate and Archbishop.

4. Above drafted before receiving your 836.3 Your line was right and you should draw on above to continue stressing it.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared in substance by Rusk and the White House. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to a memorandum from McGeorge Bundy to the President, September 14, this telegram was approved at a 1 p.m. meeting at the White House attended by the President, Rusk, McNamara, McCone, Wheeler, and McGeorge Bundy. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President) Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 94E.

2 For Rusk’s comments along these lines during his new conference on September 14, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 996–999.

3 Document 348.

350. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 350. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 13, 1964—2 p.m.

838. I have just had one hour meeting with Khanh who out at General Ky’s headquarters Tan Son Nhut (porch was thronged with foreign and Vietnamese newsmen), surrounded by Ky, Thieu, Kang (Marine Corps) and Colonel Thao. Also Ranger captain who had defected from Duc.

I told Khanh of my conversations with Phat and Minh and at my urging he immediately dispatched messenger to ask Minh to meet him. Told him felt Minh could and was ready to play useful intermediary role.

Khanh said that he planned to go slow with any military moves against dissidents and rather seek defections. He was encouraged by defection of Ranger captain in less than an hour of his arrival. Khanh agreed every effort must be made to avoid clashes between Vietnamese forces. Also agreed important to give face-saving way for Duc and company to retreat without feeling under compulsion to fight. Said would permit them and families leave country without reprisals and if negotiations appeared useful would offer permit dissidents have some representation on Supreme National Council or otherwise give tangible satisfaction. He said originally this morning through intermediary he had made three demands which he did not find insurmountable: 1) Colonel Thao must be dismissed,

2) The four Dalat Generals could not resume active duty, and

3) There must be a strong central government.

However, this overtaken by violent Phat radio broadcast attacking Khanh personally.

Khanh asked and I agreed recommend to Washington: 1) We make statement disapproving of coup effort,

2) Indicating our support continues to be given to triumvirate and the govt of General Khanh,

3) (This and 4) added at my suggestion) Continue to feel that program for formation national council provisional.

4) We deplore bloodshed between GVN forces.

I strongly recommend release of such statement2 and its play over VOA as it now seems clear Duc and company have little political viability. Even if outcome is fall of Khanh, Duc and company are not likely to be ones running country. I also gave full and fair warning to Phat this was our position.

Johnson

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Flash. Repeated to the White House, the Department of Defense, CIA, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 5:26 p.m. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1971, 94F. The Department of State file copy is apparently in error in giving the time of transmission as 2 a.m.

2 A statement along these lines, transmitted to Saigon in telegram 657, September 13 at 7:11 p.m., was released to the press at 6:45 p.m. Washington time. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

351. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 351. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Saigon, undated.

MACV 26.

1. General Duc just called and stated that he had understood that an individual whose name was unfamiliar to me wanted to speak to him. I told him that I did not know the individual or his whereabouts but I would talk with him. I asked if he had seen Colonel Nemethy recently and he replied in the negative. He said he was now at JGS Headquarters and had a few things to talk to General Khanh about tomorrow. I asked him the status of the situation. He was very vague in his reply. Then, in no uncertain terms, I informed him that MACV, the U.S. Mission, and the U.S. Government did not support in any way his move. I advised that he get his troops moved out of town immediately. He said he understood and thanked me. He seemed to be a shaky and insecure young man.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11925. Secret; Flash. Passed by the ICS to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the White House, and the Department of State. Also passed by other means to the Embassy in Saigon. Received in the National Military Communications Center at 3:30 p.m., September 13. No time or date of transmission appears on the source text.

352. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 352. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 14, 1964—8:45 p.m.

857. CINCPAC for POLAD. Alex Johnson and I went to Vung Tau today at Khanh’s invitation to hear his account of the events of the last 24 hours. We sent word ahead that we would also like to see General Minh whom we knew to be there. Somewhat to our surprise, we found the two of them ready to receive us as a team, the first time such a thing has happened in my experience.

Asked to interpret the meaning of the recent coup, Khanh, with Minh in agreement, explained it as primarily a power play by two ambitious officers, Duc and Phat. Although Colonel Ton, the Dai Viet commander of the Seventh Division was involved with them, Khanh does not consider that it was either pro-Dai Viet or pro-Catholic.

The coup failed primarily because it got no popular support. Phat’s broadcast was badly received by the public with whom Phat enjoys no popularity. Many junior officers in the troop units which came to Saigon did not know what the purpose was. Their troops became demoralized by the radio broadcasts directed at them by government sources and by indications of public indifference. Realizing that they were involved in a losing operation, the troops withdrew in the course of 14 September leaving the leaders to save such face as they could.

Duc tried to salvage his face in the course of the press conference reported in Embtel 848.2 Khanh says that Ky and Duc met together to discuss the situation prior to the press conference which was originally planned to be exclusively Ky’s. However, as the conference with Duc terminated at the time for the initiation of the press conference, Duc became involved and took advantage of the occasion to try to salvage his prestige. The result was the confused series of statements by Ky, Duc and Thi reported in the cited Embtel.

We asked Khanh what warning he had of the coup. Apparently some rumors had been floating about for several days including a rather specific one which reached Khanh on the evening of 12 September. He did not become aware of the troop movements toward Saigon until early the following morning and was surprised by the involvement of Duc and Phat.

He got definite word of the coup at the Dalat airfield where he was about to bring back the five Generals to Saigon in his plane. He explained that he was bringing them down just to see how they would be received, as a trial balloon to their possible assignment later to active military posts. Both Khanh and Minh agreed that the government needed their talent and described their attitude as one of cooperation and willingness to serve in any military or civilian capacity.

I asked about reports that dissatisfaction with slow promotion among junior and middle grade officers was a factor in the coup. Khanh and Minh did not directly agree that it was but conceded a need for an overhaul of the promotion system in the military services.

We asked what happens now. Khanh indicated that they intended to review the past events in cold blood and determine what to do with the errant senior officers—Duc, Phat, and Ton. He indicated that in all probability they would be required to leave the country. I expressed my view of the seriousness of their offenses and the need to impose appropriate punishment.

We then changed the subject and I reported on my trip to Washington. I transmitted President Johnson’s letter to General Khanh3 with the comment that it had been signed prior to the events of 13 September; otherwise there would probably have been some changes in the Presidential text.

I mentioned my discussions with the President, his advisors and reps of the Congress, stressing the difficulty in Washington of understanding the confused political events of August. I reported the general consensus on all sides that by far the greatest problem facing South Vietnam was the formation of the provisional government as envisaged in General Khanh’s announced plans. However, it had also been agreed that as a reminder to Hanoi of our continued vitality, we would resume the DeSoto patrols almost at once and follow them by 34–A actions which General Westmoreland would soon be discussing with the appropriate Vietnamese officers.

I then turned to a discussion of the seriousness of the events of 13 Sept and their impact upon US Governmental and public opinion, following in general the thoughts contained in Deptel 654.4 I solemnly pointed out it seemed to us Americans tragic that politics had been allowed to split the armed forces which heretofore had been regarded as the solid bulwark of legitimate government. After the disorders of August, yesterday’s coup would raise even more serious doubts in the US as to the reliability of the Vietnamese ally and would shake public confidence in our combined ability to achieve ultimate success. Under such circumstances, it would be a mistake to count indefinitely on unlimited US support in the light of the clear evidence of repeated internal differences among senior officers of the armed forces.

Khanh and Minh in chastened tones replied that no one could be sadder than they over recent events. They believed, however, that a lesson had been drawn by all participants and observers which would help in the future and that meanwhile they are resolved to push ahead with their announced program for consulting the Supreme National Council and the subsequent provisional government.

I asked whether I could help in emphasizing to senior officers and officials the risks they were running of losing US and international support by in-house feuding and bickering. Khanh suggested that I might pass the word through Gen Westmoreland’s MACV channels to the senior Generals and that Embassy representatives might talk to the Buddhists, Catholics and certain unspecified politicians. I promised to undertake these contacts with the help of appropriate US representatives.

When the meeting broke up, Khanh took off by helicopter for Saigon to hold a press conference and to attend a cabinet meeting. He intends to return to Vung Tau thereafter. As a parting shot, I reminded him that things always seemed to go better when he stays in Saigon.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents 1979, 95B. Taylor arrived back in Saigon at 7 a.m. on September 14.

2 Telegram 848, September 14, 4:40 p.m., reported on a press conference at 7:45 a.m. on September 14 at which Duc explained the reasons for the attempted coup, and Ky and Thi made individual statements on their actions. Taylor described the proceedings as “unreal” and leaving “many important questions unanswered.” (Department of State. Central Files. POL 27 VIET S)

3 See footnote 9, Document 343.

4 Document 349.

353. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 353. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 16, 1964—4 p.m.

870. CINCPAC for POLAD. This message discusses the problems of politico-military coordination which are expected to arise in Southeast Asia as the decisions of NSAM 3142 are implemented during the coming months. The recent ad hoc conference in Saigon on September 113 showed clearly that some of these problems are with us now. What appears necessary is to anticipate future requirements by formalizing a coordination procedure which can be quickly invoked as and when needed.

The political agencies involved in current and projected military activities are the Embassies in Bangkok, Vientiane and Saigon. The military agencies are MACV and the Seventh Fleet (both subordinate to CINCPAC) and the armed forces (particularly the air force) of SVN, Laos and Thailand. The overall problem is how to mount quickly effective military operations in Laos and NVN by military forces of one or more of four nations on satisfactory political terms. Obviously this will take some doing.

While the determination of the coordination machinery is a joint State-DOD responsibility, I venture to suggest as a possible solution the creation on a Noforn basis of a politico-military Southeast Asia coordination committee reporting to State/DOD with seat at Saigon. The political component would consist of the DCM’s of the Embassies of Bangkok, Vientiane and Saigon under chairmanship of Alex Johnson. (This would not exclude attendance of Ambassadors if desired.) The military component would consist of COMUSMACV-T (chairman), a senior representative of CINCPAC/Seventh Fleet, a senior military representative from Bangkok, and a military representative from Vientiane. CIA or other agency representation would be arranged as required. The coordination committee would meet on call of any of the three posts or Washington, as required, either as a single body or by components. The US Ambassador Saigon could be charged with providing administrative and logistical support This is one way to accomplish the needed coordination. There may be other and better ways. As it appears important to get early agreement on some way, it is recommended that the matter be taken up by State-DOD as a matter of urgency.

I am sending Sullivan to Bangkok and Vientiane to furnish background on this matter to Ambassadors Martin and Unger who will undoubtedly wish to comment to Washington.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense and CINCPAC.

2 Document 345.

3 See Document 346.

354. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 354. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 16, 1964—8 p.m.

876. I called on Gen Khanh at the Joint Gen Staff compound this morning Sept 16, to find out his plans with regard to the officers involved in the September 13 coup. In the course of that coup, he had indicated to Alex Johnson that he intended no reprisals against the guilty officers and would be satisfied if they left the country. Today he is having after thoughts based upon the reaction against the coup leaders in the army and within the population. Also he had had time to reflect upon the serious implications of growing indiscipline within the armed forces.

Hence Khanh’s present intention is to hold a formal inquiry to determine the culprits and the extent of their involvement. Thereafter he will decide upon the course of action to follow.

I pointed out the need to avoid a drawn-out public trial which could create new divisions and dissensions and exacerbate relationships within the armed forces and between the minorities. There seemed to be every advantage in taking quick administrative action without going through the procedure of court martial since it was possible without trial to dismiss and exile the guilty officers.

Khanh conceded that speed was important and that the punishment I indicated might be sufficient. However, he felt that it was impossible to handle lightly so important a matter. In particular, the junior and middle grade officers of the army are most critical of the conduct of their superiors and they would resent any whitewashing of the guilty. Also, Khanh said that he is being charged with having engineered the coup to strengthen his own position. He could not afford to let this charge stand and felt obliged to follow normal investigative procedures in order to nullify the accusation.

We discussed the practical problem of getting Gen Phat and Col Ton to Saigon. They are presently holed up in My Tho, the headquarters of Ton’s Seventh Division. They have thus far declined to come to Saigon on the grounds that their lives would be in jeopardy. After some discussion, it was agreed that we would offer these two officers and the Chief of Staff of the Seventh Division a ride to Saigon in a U.S. helicopter accompanied by a U.S. advisor. Khanh would telephone assurance that the officers were in no personal danger but that their conduct would be investigated in due course. At the time of writing this cable, it is not yet clear whether these officers have agreed to come to Saigon on these terms.

I mentioned that recent events had had an adverse effect upon the execution of pacification Operation Hop Tac. Things were bogging down and required the personal attention of both of us. We agreed to hold a joint NSC/U.S. Mission Council meeting at 9:30 am Friday with Hop Tac the principal subject on the agenda.

Khanh mentioned that he intended to stay in Saigon for the next day or two and I took the opportunity to stress once more the need for his spending much more time in the capital than during recent weeks, as he moves about every night to avoid sleeping in the same place. We agreed that Gen Vien, the new Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces, would be the point where we can ascertain Khanh’s whereabouts any time. Recently we have had serious difficulty in getting to him on short notice. Khanh was in the dumps today, deeply unhappy over the abortive coup which had disappointed him in the character of some of his close military associates. He complained of his isolation and of the many enemies around him. He took off in particular against Deputy Prime Minister Oanh (Jack Owen) because of his double dealings and libelous press statements. I defended Owen half-heartedly pointing out his value as an economist and technician. Khanh talks of changing all the disloyal ministers, but I get no impression he has specific replacements available. As we broke up, he said that his only consolation was that only 41 days more remained in his present tenure of office. I tried to cheer him up but this was one of his black days.2

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Top Secret, Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 On September 17, Taylor invited several Vietnamese ministers including Quat, Oanh, and Mau to the residence where he conveyed the points in telegram 654 (Document 349). The session lasted for 1 hour and 45 minutes, and Taylor concluded “disunity and lack of common sense of unity and of purpose” were all too evident among the ministers. (Telegram 887 from Saigon, September 18; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

355. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 355. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 18, 1964—7 p.m.

903. CINCPAC for POLAD. US Mission Council met for two hours with Vietnamese National Security Council morning Sept 18. Atmosphere of discussions was more frank and more concrete than previous such meetings and Khanh obviously felt much more comfortable with his current cabinet team than he had in earlier days when Hoan, Khiem and Phat were members of the group. He touched upon several internal Vietnamese problems with more bluntness than he has done on previous occasions.

Meeting addressed two fundamental agenda points. First was formality of assigning specific tasks to joint US–GVN staff committees which had been created prior to hiatus which developed over past month. These talks had been worked out in specific detail at staff level and it is expected committees will begin functioning on these matters immediately.

Second major agenda point, which consumed bulk of meeting, concerned problems associated with execution of Hop Tac plan. In this discussion, we ventilated and in some measure resolved four significant points: (a) First item was structural organization for direction of Hop Tac undertaking. Khanh himself will initially head pacification task force in his capacity as MinDef and will meet at least weekly with similar US group headed by Westmoreland. I urged Khanh that he appoint deputy for Hop Tac who will be able to give it time and attention it requires. He agreed. Civilian reps of VN ministries and US agencies will sit in this body.

(b) Associated with this question is problem of field organization for Hop Tac. Currently III Corps exercises field command responsibility but does not control Gia Dinh Province or Rung Sac special zone. Khanh will study possibility integrating these two areas under III Corps but said quite frankly that issue involved defense of capital military zone and capacity for dissatisfied elements to execute coup against capital if area immediately surrounding Saigon all placed in hands single authority.

(c) Third matter of significance discussed concerned legal authority for civil and military police to arrest suspected Viet Cong, Viet Cong sympathizers and Viet Cong agents who have committed no ostensible breach of law. It was agreed that authority for such arrests currently exists under Diem regime law but that need remains for clarifying directives to police and provincial authorities stipulating manner in which these decrees can be executed. US advisors will work with GVN authorities in developing this clarification.

(d) Finally emphasis was laid upon need for civilian ministers and ministerial authorities to accord first priority, both personnel and resources, to Hop Tac requirements. Newly appointed Inter Min Vien has been assigned general responsibility for pacification matters, relieving erstwhile Vice PriMin Hoan (whom Khanh described as attempting to use pacification cadres to execute nationwide coup). Vien, who has privately discussed Hop Tac with Alex Johnson and myself, seems excellent choice for job since he appears to recognize urgency of Hop Tac operation and to be relatively able man.

In general, I [garble—came from?] meeting with satisfactory resumption of bilateral effort which we have attempted infuse into these national security level sessions. It brought into relief the many areas where preparatory work needs to be done before the Hop Tac operation can be considered truly underway. In recognition of this fact, we agree to set October 1 as the date for the formal initiation of Hop Tac and to utilize remainder of September to bring up to date the preparatory measures which have slipped during the recent political turmoil. It is our belief that appropriate pressure forcing GVN to grapple with pragmatic issues involved in Hop Tac may not only raise level administrative competence on their part but, if they are successful, could induce that measure of confidence in their own abilities which is now so conspicuously lacking in both Saigon and the provinces.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to CIA. the Department of Defense. and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

356. Memorandum for the Record by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 356. Memorandum for the Record by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, September 20, 1964.

SUBJECT

The Gulf of Tonkin Incident, September 18

Our first information on this episode came at about 9:15 Friday morning, Washington time.2 Subsequent messages during the morning made it clear that the episode was not comparable to those of August, in that the reporting was more cautious and the evidence of actual hostile attack thin to non-existent.

At noon on Friday we reviewed in Bob McNamara’s office the possibilities for additional reply. The initial proposal of the Joint Chiefs was that we should attack the major POL installations in the Hanoi/Haiphong area, that in order to conduct these attacks we must first attack and neutralize the MIGs in the same area. Dean Rusk opposed so large an action right from the beginning, urging instead that if the episode proved to be confirmed attack on our forces, we should execute a strike but at a lower level of force. Bob McNamara elicited from General LeMay the information that strikes in the southern part of North Vietnam would not require neutralizing attacks on the MIGs. McNamara then instructed the Joint Staff to work on three alternative orders: (1) to attack the air and oil installation in the north in and around Hanoi; (2) to attack selected targets in the south; and (3) to continue patrolling, perhaps closer to the 12-mile line or even inside it.

At about 2:30 we met with the President in the Mansion-Secretary McNamara, General Wheeler, Mr. McNaughton, Tommy Thompson and myself. (Dean Rusk had a luncheon meeting which he could not break.) The President proved very skeptical about the evidence to date, and he was deeply annoyed that leaks apparently from the Pentagon were producing pressure for a public statement before we knew what we wanted to say. He pressed his own skeptical views and made it clear that he was not interested in rapid escalation on so frail evidence and with a very fragile government in South Vietnam. He authorized a brief interim statement as drafted by McNamara3 during the meeting, and he authorized preparatory orders for the strike against southern targets not defended by MIGs.

Through the afternoon, further reports made it more and more clear that there was no proof of a premeditated torpedo boat attack. The opinion hardened against any further immediate military reply. The President continued skeptical. He resisted any suggestion of a further statement. The preparatory orders were cancelled. By Friday evening, at the top of the Government, it was believed that the matter should be ended, and that we should take overnight to see what else could be learned-especially from air and sea search by daylight.

By Saturday morning it was clear that the search had proven negative. Summary reports from CINCPAC and others somewhat hardened the evidence that vessels had been in the area, but the general conclusion was that these vessels had not attempted an aggressive attack. In these circumstances, the President reviewed and authorized a statement by Secretary McNamara (attached at Tab A),4 and himself agreed to conduct a backgrounder with the White House press (attached at Tab B).5

In this meeting in the Cabinet Room between 11 and 1, the following were present: The President, Rusk, Ball, McNamara, Thompson, McNaughton, Vance, Wheeler, Rowan, Carter, Reedy, B. Smith, McG. Bundy. In this meeting the President continued to make clear his very grave doubt that there had been any hostile vessels, let alone an intent to attack. McNamara summarized the evidence, adducing not only the continuous radar contacts, both search and fire control, but two seamen’s eyewitness reports, a pilot’s report of sighting wakes from covering aircraft, and an intercept which appeared to indicate DRV report that DRV ships were under attack. The President found only the intercept persuasive (and it is significant that even this evidence was countered by a later analytical report).

The President pressed his doubts with General Carter, who asserted his own belief that it was possible that there were vessels. Secretary Rusk put the probability at 99%. Secretary Rusk also pressed on the President the importance of not seeming to doubt our naval officers on the spot. These officers were convinced that they had been facing the enemy, and an expression of doubt from Washington would be damaging. The President replied somewhat sharply that he was not planning to make a radio broadcast on the matter but that he did think it important to find out exactly what happened. He also repeated his irritation at having his hand forced by an AP report obtained from some junior military officer.

Secretary McNamara raised with the President the question of renewing de Soto patrols at an early date. George Ball raised sharply the question whether an early resumption of these patrols was wise. He pointed out that before the August patrol there had been a lapse of six months in these patrols, and that their military value was limited. He believed that if we should now lose a destroyer in such patrols there would be a very grave questioning both here and abroad as to the justification for our having taken such risks for a limited return. The President again found consideration [considerable] force in this argument.

The President asked General Wheeler to explain the military value of de Soto patrols. General Wheeler said that the patrols were desirable but not essential. They obtained electronic evidence on the defensive dispositions of the North Vietnamese. Much of this information could be obtained by aerial patrols, but surface patrol was a useful supplement. More important to General Wheeler was the general proposition that we should not allow ourselves to be denied free movement on the high seas. Secretary Rusk supported this argument strongly by saying that the “bandits” in North Vietnam needed to know that we were in the area and had no intention of being driven out. The President said he found force in these arguments and was himself quite ready to continue the patrols, with all their dangers, provided there were solid and persuasive reasons for doing so. He pointed out that at some time in the future a brutal prosecutor like Tom Dewey might be asking how we got into these troubles, and he wanted to be sure that the answers would be good. He reminded the group of the Pearl Harbor hearings, and said that he did not wish to have his people playing tennis or riding horseback when they should be available for crucial decisions. The President then instructed Secretary McNamara and General Wheeler to prepare a general argument showing the justification for further de Soto patrols, and including both military arguments and political arguments like those of Secretary Rusk. He asked that Secretary Ball serve as critic of the argument thus developed so that he could make a judgment on the matter.

The President also directed that full contingency planning be developed so that if anything should happen to the de Soto patrol, the Government would be ready for immediate and appropriate reply. The President wanted to be quite sure that we had a full and proper response ready that would make the enemy “swallow his teeth,” if he tried to start anything.

The President further directed the preparation of a message to General Taylor asking for his weekly assessment of the military situation in South Vietnam. The President pointed out that nothing would be more useful in the next six weeks than a real success on the ground, for both domestic and international reasons. (This cable was later prepared and reviewed and approved by the President, and is attached at Tab C.)6

The President’s summary view of this episode, as reported to me in a telephone conversation Sunday noon, is that it is still very unclear that there were any hostile vessels there, that it was highly destructive to have leaks before we were ready to determine what we wished to do about the matter, that we must control our tongues and arrange for tighter discipline at every level. (I told the President that I myself had not been as alert as I should have been to the need for discreetness, and it turned out that he had heard me tell Jack Valenti at a time when he did not think I needed to. The President obviously has the problem of privacy in his own immediate decision-making very much on his mind. But his main concern in this episode is with looseness in military channels, and he indicated that he had been aiming his comment mainly at Secretary McNamara for action in DOD.)

McG.B.7

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 129C.

2 At 7:43 p.m. Saigon time on Friday, September 18, the destroyers Morton and Edwards on a DeSoto patrol in the Gulf of Tonkin reported surface radar contacts. During the next 2 hours, the ships fired on closing targets and by 9:37 p.m. had ceased fire. Although the targets were observed on radar, they were not sighted visually. (Amplifying report on DeSoto sitrep, 181327Z; Johnson Library, Vietnam Country File, DeSoto Patrol)

3 For text of McNamara’s statement as released on September 19, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 999–1000.

4 No tabs were attached to the source text. The text of the statement was transmitted to Saigon in telegram 701, September 19, 2:59 p.m. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 For text of the President’s statement at his press conference on September 21, see Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Lyndon B. Johnson. 1963–64. Book II. pp. 1098–1099.

6 Telegram 702 to Saigon, September 19, 5:20 p.m. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

7 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials

357. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State 357. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, September 19, 1964.

S/P–213–64

SUBJECT

Some Ambiguities in Southeast Asia and in Our Policy Towards That Region

Leaving open the question of whether we retaliate immediately against North Viet Nam in response to the Tonkin Gulf engagement of September 18,1 should like to suggest certain ambiguities in the situation as it has developed since the earlier Tonkin Gulf incidents, which may have implications for diplomatic action. They have operational urgency, given the character of the retaliatory targets now planned in response to a Tonkin Gulf attack.

1. The military and political dispositions of Hanoi and Peiping. Evidently Hanoi and Peiping retain a capability to launch major conventional aggression in Southeast Asia. This capability has not yet been brought into play. Although recent Communist dispositions do not rule out such initiation of massive hostilities, that does not appear to be the current intent in Hanoi and Peiping. Since the earlier Tonkin Gulf incidents, Hanoi has positioned itself on a relatively high degree of air defense and ground force alert. It has accompanied these movements with policy statements which are designed to project a commitment to fight rather than abandon the war in South Viet Nam. Without initiating new military action against us or presenting us with any palpable escalation, they are pressing the war forward via infiltration and their command channels, with high hopes of producing a political situation in South Viet Nam which would take them far along the road to victory and, hopefully, deny us a credible base for action against the North. They do not rule out that we will, under desperate political circumstances in South Viet Nam, initiate military action against North Viet Nam and are evidently looking for Chinese Communist support, as well as trying to build a case before world public opinion, should our action come at a time when it appears to be an effort to retrieve a defeat virtually accomplished by a mixture of their prior military and political action. They are conscious that the timing of the U.S. election plays some role in our policy; but I doubt whether they are clear what effect it will have on our policy, both before or after November 3.2

2. Meanwhile, the Chinese Communists have made a series of military moves which suggest that they, too, envisage the possibility of substantial military action in the relatively near future. These moves, however, are geared in their political pronouncements to some version of the Korean circumstance; that is, a commitment to defend North Viet Nam from being occupied and destroyed as a Communist political unit by the United States. They have kept a certain distance from Hanoi’s commitment to pursue the war in the South. As the Chicom reaction in support of Hanoi’s air defense after the first Tonkin Gulf incidents suggest, Peiping has available a spectrum of moves in support of North Viet Nam short of engaging U.S. or allied forces. Nevertheless, there is a certain potentially important ambiguity between Hanoi’s declaratory commitment to continue the war to the South and Peiping’s declaratory commitment to defend North Viet Nam from attack by the U.S.

3. This ambiguity suggests that, should we move to systematic military pressure on the North, it will be important to make lucid the following three messages: a. That we are prepared to take serious military action against North Viet Nam if it continues to support the war in the South; but that our objective is not the destruction of the regime in Hanoi but the enforcement of compliance to the 1954 and 1962 Accords.

b. This message must be conveyed to Peiping as well as Hanoi so that Peiping is clear that the analogy to Korea is inexact; namely, that if it engages its forces against the U.S. or our allies, it will be doing so not to protect the integrity of a Communist North Viet Nam but to protect the right of North Viet Nam to conduct aggression against Laos and South Viet Nam.

c. Should the Chinese Communists engage themselves in hostilities for this purpose, that the mainland of China would be subject to attack.

4. The problem of ambiguity is heightened by the character of the targets presently planned for retaliatory action in case of a further attack on our ships in the Tonkin Gulf. These targets relate not merely to the North Vietnamese challenge to our naval forces on the high seas but to their illegal conduct of the war in South Viet Nam. This is, of course, a critically important switch in rationale. I believe that switch is fully justified; but it requires that we be prepared not only with public opinion at home and in the Free World (including opinion in Taipei, Seoul, and Saigon) but in communications with the Communists, to make clear our limited purposes and our unlimited commitment to them.

5. The virtue of our actions in the Cuba missile-crisis and the earlier Tonkin Gulf crisis was the close link between purpose, rationale, and military action. A shift in rationale and apparent purpose, unclarified and lacking a palpable military and political base for prompt follow-through, could give us the worst of both worlds: a situation where we were judged by the Communists to have unlimited purposes (including a possible desire to bring down the regime in Hanoi) and a limited commitment to pursue them.

6. Specifically, I question whether a tit-for-tat approach is wise in punishing Hanoi for its illegal conduct of war in the South. A tit-for-tat approach was highly appropriate in the first Tonkin Gulf incidents because we were reacting to a specific, limited challenge to the U.S. on the high seas. The books could be closed after our retaliation, at least until that challenge was renewed. With respect to the conduct by Hanoi of the war against South Viet Nam, aggression proceeds systematically every day. What is required with respect to Hanoi and Peiping, therefore, is not a tit-for-tat action of limited scope and duration. Measured against the prospects for victory in the South-now so hopefully measured-such limited retaliation is a relatively trivial cost to Hanoi.

7. What is required in Hanoi and Peiping is the conviction that we have decided to go ahead with a regular and systematic imposition of costs on the North on a scale and with a continuity sufficient to raise the question in Hanoi as to whether the war in the South is worth pursuing; a conviction in Peiping that our objectives are limited but deadly serious, and that Peiping’s engagement against us (or our allies) in order to permit Hanoi to continue the war against the South could involve major costs on the mainland; and a conviction in both capitals that we are prepared to deal with any degree of escalation they may mount.

8. The character of the retaliatory targets, therefore, places on us a requirement to shift our military dispositions and communications in such a way as to remove ambiguities which could be dangerous. Specifically, what is likely to maximize the chance of a settlement on our terms with respect to Viet Nam and Laos, is not the damage we may do in a tit-for-tat sequence of exchanges but a mixture of deadly serious communications and deadly serious military preparations which would obviously display two characteristics: a. A capacity to impose on North Viet Nam damage on a scale sufficient to put in question the advantages of pursuing the war in the South;

b. A capacity to put in question in Peiping the wisdom of placing mainland China in mortal jeopardy in order that Hanoi might extend its power in the direction of Saigon and Vientiane.

9. In short, the situation built up between the Tonkin Gulf incidents and the character of the retaliatory targets now chosen leads us towards a new track, directly related to Hanoi’s aggression and Peiping’s relation to it. This new track requires military signals, communications with the enemy, and diplomacy of a quite different kind than that required in the earlier Tonkin Gulf incidents. In its first phase, the essence of the track is not the damage we do but the scale and character of our military dispositions and our diplomatic communications.

1 Source: Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Southeast Asia. Top Secret. The source text, which was initialed by Rostow, bears the handwritten notation “S[ecretary] saw 9/28/64.” Copies were sent to William Bundy, Forrestal, Hughes, and Thompson.

2 The date of the U.S. Presidential election.

358. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 358. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 24, 1964—11 a.m.

937. CINCPAC for POLAD. Supplementing reports of current Rhade uprising in Darlac Province transmitted military channels,2 following is presentation of political aspects and background.

There has been longstanding friction between Montagnards and Vietnamese, springing largely from Montagnard resentment that Vietnamese have treated them as inferiors. During French era, French protected and isolated Montagnard highland areas from Vietnamese. However, with French withdrawal, Diem regime opened up highland areas to Vietnamese settlement through northern refugee centers and land development centers to relieve population pressures in central lowlands. These measures intensified Montagnard-Vietnamese friction as two peoples came into close contact. Montagnards saw Vietnamese taking over their lands, and local Vietnamese officialdom tended to ride roughshod over “inferior peoples”. In 1957–58 Montagnard autonomy movement developed, culminating in Montagnard revolt and jailing of rebel leaders in 1958.

With advent of special US military assist4nce to GVN in late 1961–62, GVN agreed to [less than 1 1ine of source text not declassified] US Special Forces programs to mobilize Montagnard manpower into CIDG units, and USSF teams were placed in CIDG strike force camps, thereby injecting noticeable US presence into highland areas. Despite Diem regime’s accord with this program, Diem and Nhu were suspicious of US activities with Montagnards, fearing that US presence and aid programs would serve even further to alienate Montagnards from Vietnamese. In this connection, US advisers with Montagnard forces were and are under strict policy guidance to do everything possible to foster improved Montagnard-Vietnamese relations and to prevent transfer of Montagnard allegiance to US.

Following Khanh’s takeover last January 30, Montagnard rebel leaders in jail were released and Montagnards were appointed to positions of authority in provincial administrations in several cases. Countering this increased Montagnard participation in local government, there has been greater Vietnamese command and control in CIDG camps. Nevertheless, certain Montagnard leaders continued to promote idea of greater autonomy for their people. Within context of political turmoil and civil disorders over past two months, resulting in serious weakening of Khanh’s authority and in his capitulation to Buddhist demands, Rhade leaders probably felt moment was ripe to make own bid for greater autonomy. In effect, purpose of current Montagnard revolt is to achieve: (1) improved GVN attitude toward Montagnards; (2) appointment of Montagnard leaders to responsible positions in GVN both at local and national levels; (3) enlarged socioeconomic programs for Montagnards; and (4) substantial if not complete autonomy. GVN authorities in II Corps held two meetings with Montagnard representatives, in May and August, to discuss Montagnard aims. Montagnards, however, apparently not satisfied with GVN efforts on their behalf following these meetings and Rhade moved to direct action.

Degree of VC or other external instigation or exploitation of Montagnard rebellion difficult to assess at this time. There is circumstantial evidence (e.g., references to “imperialist Americans” in rebel tracts) suggesting VC inspiration and exploitation of rebellion.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to Hue and CINCPAC.

2 Late in the evening of September 19 and early morning of September 20, Montagnards seized control of four CIDG camps in Darlac Province killing several Vietnamese soldiers and taking both U.S. and Vietnamese Special Forces troops hostage. Following extended negotiations in which the United States indicated that it would not support the Montagnards, the four camps and the hostages were freed on September 27 and 28. Most of the reporting on the uprising was done over MACV channels beginning on September 20. These cables are in the Washington National Records Center, HQDA Message Center. Reel 11925.

359. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 359. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 24, 1964—11 a.m.

938. CINCPAC for POLAD. For the Secretary. Re Deptel 7072 As background to the following answers to your questions it must be noted that effectiveness of present GVN is continuing downward trend. Ministers and their subordinates are very conscious of the “lame duck” character of GVN, and other elements such as labor and Montagnards, who hitherto had been quiet, have been encouraged by success of Buddhists and students to push their demands. Having established a pattern of weakness and willingness to make temporizing concessions, Khanh has had little choice but to give in. Although both labor and Montagnards have had legitimate complaints which should have been met, by doing so now Khanh contributes further to atmosphere of weakness that increasingly surrounds him.

Following are answers to your specific questions: 1) Insofar as power is being exercised in Saigon, it is being exercised by Khanh in his combined role of Prime Minister, Minister of Defense and Commander-in-Chief Armed Forces. All decisions are made by him (or they are not made) and no one else in government has emerged as a strong figure. If anyone were to seek to do so they could be certain of exciting Khanh’s already overwrought suspicions. Quat in FonOff remains relatively bright spot within his limited sphere of activity and is playing a generally constructive role. Vien, new Minister of Interior, shows some promise. He has been assigned general responsibility for the non-military aspects of pacification matters but has not yet had time to demonstrate ability to perform. Khanh still leaves technical financial matters in hands of Oanh and USOM work on budget planning and financial matters goes forward quite well. In summary, over next several weeks Khanh is still man with whom we have to deal, although with MinDef and CINC burdens now added, he is even more overwhelmed by the burdens of the job and able to apply even less attention to individual problems.

2) Although as noted above, Oanh is still continuing to function, he badly tarnished his image with Khanh by the alacrity with which he responded to Duc’s call for a meeting of the cabinet on September 13. However, there are no signs of his immediate dismissal and it is likely he will stay on during this interregnum. We should be clear that there are no signs he can play any major political role now or in the future.

Although now apparently “cleared” by Khanh of any complicity in the September 13 coup attempt, Khiem has no present role in the government beyond the nominal one as a member of the triumvirate and relations between him and Khanh are strained. It is impossible now to foresee what his role may be in a post November 1 government, but as long as he is in the country he will be an important and influential but inscrutable figure.

3) Effects thus far are minimal.

4) As noted above, labor had some justified complaints. Although a general strike was an extreme reaction and another example of national indiscipline in a time of crisis, its effect may be beneficial in preventing employers from taking excessive advantage of present situation and in some degree reestablishing Buu’s leadership which had been slipping.3 We do not at this time foresee labor putting forth major additional or extreme demands. Having made their point by the general strike they should for the time being be in a position to obtain reasonable settlements of reasonable grievances.

5) I do not foresee further serious difficulty with Buddhists, etc. during this interregnum while National Council is at work on new government provided Tri Quang and other leaders of pressure groups feel satisfied with trend of Council’s work. In period after November 1 everything will depend on whether present constituent [constitutional] machinery will be able to produce something in way of a government around which there can be a reasonable degree of national consensus. On balance renewed difficulty with some of the groups mentioned at some point seems likely. Khanh’s position has in a negative way been strengthened by fact that even though he has shown increasing weakness and inability to deal effectively with problems of the country, no one else has thus far emerged around whom there is any greater consensus. However, he has steadily lost stature as a political figure and personal zest in doing his job. He has survived only be making virtually unending concessions to every pressure group that has presented itself. There is general recognition that such a process cannot continue indefinitely and still have anything left deserving the name of a government. We are now close to that stage. As part of this problem, we must reckon with the distinct possibility of a renewed lunge against Khanh from the military before the formation of the provisional government, should they judge that Khanh is proving too compliant regarding Tri Quang and the neutralist objectives many in the military feel Tri Quang represents. After the formation of the provisional government, there is no present assurance that Khanh will remain head of government. Either he may not be chosen for the position at the end of the procedure for setting up the provisional government or, offered the position, he may decline.

6) Recent developments have demonstrated a faster rate of deterioration of governmental process than I would have predicted. Also I had not anticipated the reemergence of the Montagnard problem at this time. In combination, these recent events cast considerable doubt on the ability of the caretaker government to carry through its program as planned for establishing a provisional government. However, our only hope for an orderly transition to effective government lies in hewing to this course of action and we are putting the full mission effort behind it

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 13 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. A copy of this telegram was sent to the President under cover of a memorandum from McGeorge Bundy, September 24. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President)

2 Telegram 707, September 21, asked for Taylor’s analysis of the structure of the Vietnamese Government and posed six specific questions on the situation in Saigon. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 1 US–VIET S)

3 On September 21, the Vietnamese Confederation of Labor (CTV) called a 48-hour general strike.

360. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 360. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 24, 1964—7 p.m.

943. CINCPAC for POLAD. Previous Emb assessments have recorded Khanh’s preoccupation for some time with problem of consolidating his control over govt and military. Coup attempt of Sept 13 reflects deep dissatisfaction among certain elements of army with Khanh’s performance and trend of events since mid-August. Massive Buddhist-student reactions to promulgation of Vung Tau Charter and Khanh’s elevation to Presidency, and specific Buddhist-student objective of cleansing GVN of “Catholic-Can Lao-Dai Viet conspiracy” in military ranks must have persuaded Khanh that no action on his part which was opposed by Buddhists could succeed, and that as long as military elements to which Buddhists objected were in power, he would be caught in vice between these two forces. He therefore apparently made conscious decision to throw his lot in with Buddhists, thereby taking calculated risk that opposing forces would not be strong enough to do him in. He also probably felt that if he failed to ally himself with Buddhist elements. latter would consider him part of anti-Buddhist conspiracy.

Course of events since mid-August had convinced those elements in military, including those officers with Dai Viet and Catholic ties (who opposed and distrusted Khanh’s actions) that only drastic action could install regime to their liking. Following Khanh’s announcement on Sept 4 that Generals holding governmental positions would be removed and resumed to solely military functions, rumors and reports of coup plotting mounted. There seems to be little doubt that key Dai Viet officers (General Thieu and Colonel Ton) were in fact engaged in such plotting, as was separate group of younger officers under Colonel Pham Ngoc Thao’s guiding hand. When nothing materialized after some two weeks of rumors and reports, it was generally assumed that danger of coup had passed.

When coup attempt came on Sept 13, it failed because of inadequate prior planning and coordination, of lack of support from within military and from populace, and because of clear and unequivocal US support for Khanh govt. General Duong Van Duc, IV Corps commander and prime mover of coup attempt, had obtained support of Dai Viet Colonel Ton, commander of 7th Division, but little other support. General Lam Van Phat, MinInterior, who had been relieved from his governmental position two days before, reportedly got on bandwagon through Colonel Ton’s good offices but had little prior contact with Duc.

Duc/Phat team was uncoordinated and, despite exaggerated claims, never obtained support necessary to bring coup to successful conclusion. In fact there is considerable evidence to indicate that Duc (coup’s father) never really intended to overthrow Khanh but merely to put pressure on him in order to redress balance overweighted in Buddhists’ favor. Phat, however, went too far by announcing over radio that Khanh was traitor and was to be arrested. Other Generals—Khiem, Thieu, and others who were perhaps unhappy enough with Khanh to associate themselves with Duc’s efforts, may have hesitated to get involved with Phat’s objective of overthrowing Khanh and run likely risk of inciting Buddhists to violence. Furthermore, these Generals undoubtedly knew plan was ill prepared, and they probably had little faith in ability of unstable Duc and mercurial Phat to succeed. In any case, they could sit on fence and jump either way before it was too late.

Another group of Generals emerged to position of prominence during the coup attempt and thereafter-the younger Generals, all of whom had been promoted since November 1 and who only served to gain if coup failed. Kingpin in this group was VNAF commander Nguyen Cao Ky, who was probably loyal to Khanh throughout and opposed to further coupe, but who could not have afforded to stick with Khanh if coup looked like it would succeed. Other key figure in this group was 1st Division Commander Nguyen Chanh Thi, who was already so closely identified with Buddhist cause in Hue and with allied People’s Revolutionary Council that he could not afford to see coup succeed. “Young Turks” realized that Duc and Phat were not succeeding and could not obtain necessary support if they remained united, so they remained loyal to Khanh, but at same time indicated their willingness to negotiate with Duc (not extremist Phat). When curtain rang down on Sept 14, Young Turks were thus in position of having saved Khanh from downfall but at same time of being able press demands on Khanh which he could not refuse. Most urgent of these demands was removal or neutralization of “old-line” Generals and their supporters. Perhaps more important for future, events of Sept 13–14 appeared to have fairly well eliminated Dalat Generals from army and therefore as divisive factor, and to have measurably reduced influence of those Generals who have been Buddhist target.

It worth recording that many Vietnamese are giving currency to theory that coup attempt was phony, that Khanh planned and inspired it as means for discrediting and neutralizing old-line Generals and to undermine the charge that he was captive of Buddhists. Fact that there was no bloodshed, and that Duc appeared with Ky in press conf on Sept 14 appear to add substance to this theory, but there is still no conclusive proof of it and there are several factors which tend to disprove it.

Failure of recent coup attempt created situation in which Buddhist leadership, “Young Turks” in military, and central Vietnam political movement coalesced for moment on objective of supporting Khanh against old-line Generals. Durability of any Vietnamese political alliance is congenitally tenuous, and there is no reason to believe current alliance will be anything but transitory phenomenon. In fact, of “Young Turks” only General Thi seems to be solidly in Buddhist-PRC camp, and Thi’s opportunism casts doubt even on this constant over longer term.

Most immediate implication of these developments for GVN and for US is fact that present triumph of Buddhists, Young Turks and PRC has only intensified deep bitterness and resentment within Catholic circles and among remaining old-line military officers to point where they could be easily triggered into backlash of violence against those they blame for current state of affairs-Buddhists and their allies, General Khanh himself, or us. These emotions, incidentally, are spreading even to some Buddhists-primarily to educated, professional classes who suspect motives of Buddhist leadership. This situation is compounded by Buddhist readiness to demonstrate their ability to call their faithful into streets should occasion demand. Final component which could bring situation to flash point on any pretext is demonstrated reticence of General Khanh to enforce law and order. Thus all elements are present for major disorders which could degenerate into anarchy and chaos if not controlled.

Longer-term, but very real, implication for us is motivation of Buddhist and PRC leadership which now, with help of Young Turks on Sept 13–14, have ascendant political position. At very least, war against VC is for them secondary issue at present. Although PRC leadership repeatedly has publicly professed its devotion to “anti-Communist, anti-neutralist, anti-colonialist” struggle and their recognition of need for US help, Buddhist leadership has only been willing make similar profession in private to US officials, consistently arguing that it cannot take such position publicly. Actions both groups have strong xenophobic quality which shows some signs already of anti-Americanism. Also, political and social turbulence of last month has undoubtedly been exploited by VC, although to undetermined degree.

Big question for us is whether Buddhist and PRC leadership is actually guided, inspired, or infiltrated by Communist elements, or whether it is purely nationalist drive for govt more responsive to will of people. In addition those desperate elements described above, growing number of Vietnamese who approved of and supported Buddhist struggle against Diem regime year ago as legitimate opposition to dictatorial regime are beginning to express concern that Buddhist leadership, students, and PRC are infiltrated or at least being unwillingly manipulated by VC agitators. We have no hard evidence to support accusations that there are Communist members among Buddhists, students or PRC leaders. However, all returns are not in, and such possibility cannot be dismissed out of hand.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Secret: Limdis. Repeated to Hue and CINCPAC.

361. Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense 361. Paper Prepared in the Department of Defense1

Washington, undated.

POINTS FOR DISCUSSION 9/25/64

A. Estimate of the situation. The situation is deteriorating rapidly in South Vietnam, and the trend is not likely to change. (See Saigon 938:2 “Recent developments have demonstrated a faster rate of deterioration of governmental processes than I would have predicted. …3 These recent events cast considerable doubt on the ability of the caretaker government to carry through its program as planned for establishing a provisional government.”)

B. Areas for US action. The United States can improve the situation in South Vietnam over what it would otherwise be (a) by efforts within that country designed to strengthen the government and to enhance pacification, and (b) by efforts outside South Vietnam designed to influence favorably North Vietnam’s behavior.

C. Actions inside South Vietnam. We have no suggestions as to new efforts which should be made within South Vietnam to strengthen the government and to enhance pacification. Ambassador Taylor appears to be pursuing the optimum course-bolstering Khanh and helping to achieve a permanent government by October 27. A plan should be prepared, however-perhaps involving extension of the 60-day mandate or, on expiration of the mandate, US “negotiations” with South Vietnamese leaders-which will apply if it becomes apparent that Khanh will be unable to put together a government before the 60-day mandate of the “triumvirate” expires.

D. Actions outside South Vietnam 1. The guiding principle. The situation in Southeast Asia can be improved over what it would otherwise be if pressure is brought to bear on North Vietnam to induce her to be satisfied with a lesser degree of direction of and assistance to the VC in South Vietnam, or at least to induce her to become amenable to a more satisfactory arrangement should negotiations take place. In order to achieve these ends, North Vietnam must be made to suffer and be persuaded that US interest in a proper solution is deadly serious, that US presence in support of that end is ominous and enduring, and that she is likely to suffer even more. The pressure must be a kind which is at least acceptable to the American people and to our allies immediately involved.

2. The recommended actions. a. MAROPS. We should resume MAROPS immediately (the 13-day “resumption schedule”—involving two probes, a junk capture, two bombardments, a bridge destruction and two more bombardments—are on 12-hour readiness); and the first step toward legitimating the operations as a counter-infiltration “Coastal Security Service” (per Saigon 911),4 should be approved.

b. DeSoto Patrols. If MAROPS are postponed, deSoto patrols should resume immediately. If MAROPS are resumed, a three-day deSoto patrol should follow the 13-day MAROPS schedule with a gap of no less than two nor more than three days. The deSoto patrol should run not later than October 10. We should not announce the patrol in advance, but we should in the US lay the groundwork for a possible incident by backgrounding key people regarding the intelligence importance of the missions and the right of our ships to be there (and perhaps even the “pressure” objective?). We should of course be prepared, if an incident occurs, to retaliate appropriately.

c. Cross-border operations. We should begin a several-months’ program of cross-border operations. We should, by October 10, start ARVN ground operations in the Panhandle. The operations would be limited to the 20-kilometer-deep “middle area” (Dak Prou), US advisers should be permitted to accompany the troops, and any air support should be solely logistical (no combat air support) and by US aircraft. Authority should be given to plan for, but not to execute, operations in the other two areas (Lao Bao and Dak To). We should start air strikes immediately against infiltration targets, using Lao T–28s at the beginning (with occasional AA suppression by Yankee Team) and Yankee Team suppressive strikes (with possible VNAF participation if it can be arranged) following later.

3. Communication with Hanoi. We should seek a method to communicate with Hanoi as our program of pressures becomes effective.

1 Source: Department of State, NSC Files: Lot 70 D 265, NSC Mtg 9/25/64. Top Secret. Drafted by McNaughton. Another draft of this paper, which is the same except for minor wording changes, is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XV111, Memos. Attached to the source text is a note to the Office of the Secretary of State stating that the paper was intended for a meeting with Rusk, McNamara, Ball, and others at 11 a.m., September 25. Also attached to the source text is a memorandum from Forrestal to McNaughton, September 24, which reviewed the same points, and a 2-page draft telegram to Vientiane instructing that the cross-border strikes be carried out as soon as possible.

2 Document 359.

3 Ellipsis in the source text.

4 Telegram 911, September 19, discussed various aspects of making public maritime operations (MAROPS). (Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

362. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 362. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, September 25, 1964—5:48 p.m.

731. Saigon pass COMUSMACV. Joint State-Defense-AID-USIA-CIA message. Ref: Saigon’s 714, 887 and 920; joint State-Defense msg 2184.2

1. The following is transmitted only as a reflection of thoughts held here that might assist give impetus pacification program; but your comments would be appreciated.

2. Agree that two major problems now face GVN. One, to arrive at a firm stable government, and second, to pacify the countryside. Appears to us that actions necessary to arrive at a firm stable government must be taken primarily within Saigon. On the other hand, under current conditions it may be necessary to accomplish initial pacification in provinces with minimum GVN assistance from Saigon. Past experience shows that aggressive action by commanders in the field and Province Chiefs can bring at least temporary security to given areas with only general GVN guidance from Saigon. In light current situation US/GVN action program contained reftel 2184 more important than ever as basis for a centrally directed and coordinated US effort in support of decentralized GVN effort until firm stable GVN government a reality.

3. In reviewing current situation and attempting to arrive steps which can be taken keep pacification going in provinces, certain actions within bounds current pacification concept (Chien Thang and Hop Tac) appear worthy of consideration and might assist those commanders and Province Chiefs capable and willing to further pacification. a. Decentralize control pacification to Corps and Province Chiefs to maximum extent possible and give Corps Commander fresh mandate which furnishes him greater responsibility and authority in pacification.

b. Decentralize programs and functions to Corps and lower levels to maximum extent possible. Programs and functions such as psyops, funding, provision of PL 480 supplies and training of Regional Forces are examples.

c. Assign US political action advisor to Corps Advisory Staff for both military and civilian political agitation, organization and motivation.

d. Through US channels (e.g. USOM, MACV, CAS), provide direct support to local leaders who show leadership and willingness to develop oil spots.

4. Recognize that decentralization will pose problems, will not improve situation some areas and may be greatly resisted by GVN. Certainly we would have to maintain appearance dealing with Saigon ministries. On other hand, a certain amount of de facto decentralization may provide means for aggressive and capable leaders to improve security situation in their areas and keep pacification moving.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Exdis. Drafted in S/VN, cleared by AID, CIA, DOD/ISA, JCS, USIA, and FE/SEA; and approved by Forrestal. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 714 is printed as Document 337. Regarding telegram 887, see footnote 2, Document 354. Telegram 920, September 22, reported that Taylor would begin weekly reports on the situation in Vietnam. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–161–69) Message 2184, June 5, reported the decisions reached on pacification at the June 2 Honolulu conference. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

363. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 363. Telegram From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, September 25, 1964—6:17 p.m.

CAP 64237. 1. In 2-hour meeting this morning,2 we received additional political and military steps available to us in effort to shore up government in Saigon. Dean Rusk is asking Max Taylor urgently for any additional advice as to what we can do to help on the political side.3

2. On military side, we are consulting with Souvanna about possible Laotian air action with some U.S. fighter support in Laotian corridor.4 We are also preparing plans for your later approval on possible use of South Vietnamese rangers with U.S. advisers against infiltration corridors. We have also prepared a schedule of possible marine operations by South Vietnamese torpedo boats in the coming weeks. All these actions are subject to your review and final decision next week.

3. The only action for which we now request immediate approval is a first naval patrol by South Vietnamese PT boats going 60 miles north of the boundary line, but never closer than 12 nautical miles to shore. This would be a probe of North Vietnamese naval reaction and, if uneventful, would be followed, with your later approval, by a second probe to the 3-mile limit. Neither probe will involve any U.S. forces or personnel. Respectfully request you call me “yes” or “no” on first probe at your convenience before Saturday noon.5

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XVIII. Top Secret; Eyes Only. A note on the source text reads: “For delivery to the President at the LBJ Ranch tonight.”

2 See footnote 1, Document 361. No record of this meeting has been found.

3 See Document 364.

4 Telegram 275 to Vientiane, September 25, 8:11 a.m. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 Although no reply from the President has been found, he apparently approved, since JCS 9112 to CINCPAC, Saturday, September 26, 4:20 p.m., authorized these probes. (Ibid., Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, Tiger Operations)

364. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 364. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, September 26, 1964—11:29 p.m.

736. Personal for the Ambassador from the Secretary. We have been following closely the excellent reporting from your Mission which boiled down to the conclusion in your 9382 that the deterioration of governmental processes is proceeding faster than we anticipated. I have asked my colleagues here to scratch their heads and think of more ways of pulling the body politic together.

One thought that has occurred is the possibility of drafting a declaration of national unity to be signed by all prominent Vietnamese civil and military leaders. The purpose would be to get unanimous written agreement to a list of political objectives toward which all could pledge themselves to work. Something like this was done, I think, in the Philippines and Korea and I am asking our people here to send you the precedents.

In a separate cable we are also raising the question whether Vu Van Mau’s return from London would be helpful.3 In this connection, I wonder whether you have been able to identify any civilian or group of civilians who might provide civilian political leadership, a sort of individual or collective Pompidou.

I am also concerned about the contingency that Khanh may fall away completely. Is there any other leader or group of leaders that you can identify?

Finally, I wonder if you could spare Bill Sullivan for a two-day trip to Washington to give us a better feel for this extremely fluid situation. (I suggest Sullivan because he could probably come in and out of Washington without creating a public fuss.) I don’t want to press this on you if his presence is more urgently required in Saigon. Bob McNamara has said he will arrange the most rapid air transport for Sullivan if you could spare him.

We are very much aware of the extraordinary demands the situation is making upon you and your colleagues, and I need hardly tell you again that the President and the Executive Branch are concerned primarily about finding additional ways in which we can help.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared with William Bundy.

2 Document 359.

3 This telegram has not been identified.

365. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 365. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, September 28, 1964—7 p.m.

972. For the Secretary. Ref: Embtel 938 and Deptel 736.2 This is a US Mission message.

In continuation of the discussion contained in reftels and to furnish additional basis for your talks with Bill Sullivan, this cable resumes consideration of our basic problem, how to assure adequate political leadership (a) in this interim period to about November 1 and (b) in provisional govt thereafter while maintaining throughout an effective military posture toward VC.

Fundamental to this consideration is how we are to view Khanh who, up to now, has enjoyed our confidence and has received our unqualified public and private support. In recent times we have bailed him out at least twice: first, in late August when, except from our repeated assertion of US support, his Generals were apparently ready to oust him because of his concessions to the Buddhists; second, at the time of the September 13 abortive coup when word of encouragement from us to the coup leaders would have tipped scales. The question now is whether he is worth saving again either for the long or short

Before answering the question, it is probably worthwhile to review Khanh’s assets and liabilities as the pressures of recent events have allowed us to see them more clearly. He continues to demonstrate alert intelligence, quickness to see point and agility in moving (sometimes too quickly) to a conclusion. His native cockiness has been reduced to manageable proportions by the tribulations of the past month which have been sobering and edifying experience. He continues to display diligence, working endless hours often to his physical detriment.

Khanh has chosen to identify himself politically with loose coalition, represented on one flank by Tri Quang, and the Buddhist support which he can command, and on the other flank by the clearly anti-Communist, “Young Turk” officers who saved his skin [in] the September 13 affair. These two disparate elements supported Khanh at the time of the September 13 coup and continue to support him temporarily, but for motives which are essentially unrelated except for their common opposition to the Can Lao-Dai Viet-Diemist remnant groups.

To gain the support of these two elements, particularly Tri Quang, Khanh has paid considerable price—how great is presently difficult to determine—in alienating important groups of Vietnamese Army officers. But whatever this loss, he still has the apparent support of majority of officer corps for at least two reasons, (1) evidence of his continued support by US and (2) the absence of strong rival.

So much for Khanh’s assets. He has formidable list of offsetting liabilities. First and foremost, in the last two months he has given most discouraging demonstration of lack of fundamental qualities of leadership. He has yielded to pressure groups and, in particular, has lost precious face in giving way publicly to the Buddhists. His extended absences from Saigon suggest fear for his personal safety.

After his ill-considered and hasty effort to impose the Vung Tau Charter of August 16, he has demonstrated lack of decisive force in dealing with the genie which he released from bottle on that occasion. In particular he seems to have had no sense of clear direction after authoritarian lines of Vung Tau Charter were effectively repudiated.

He is pathologically suspicious of his oldest associates whom he thereby repels and alienates. His suspicions are now turned in uncomfortable measure against Americans who are his last refuge. We have pretty clear indications that he is surreptitiously condoning “leaks” to the press alleging that US was behind the Sept 13 coup, the general strike of the CTV3 and the Montagnard revolt.

If he has won some political support, it has been at the expense of incurring the hostility of the Dai Viets, the Can Lao and of some part of the Catholics which [while?] losing the esteem of an important element of the officer corps. These are his tangible losses—more important is the overall loss of confidence in him of much of the thinking Vietnamese public, of important elements of the armed forces and of Khanh in himself. He is alone, unhappy, afflicted by suspicions and anxious to find some way out of his job.

Mission also has tended to lose confidence in Khanh’s ability to handle the current situation and his ability to prevail in the long run. It now seems doubtful that he can pull through until the inauguration of the provisional govt.

What then should be our course of action in this interim period? I would recommend that we try to stay with Khanh. But if he seems clearly to be going down (and we doubt that he can survive another coup attempt), we should do what we can to maintain an organization with which we can work, preferably with Minh in charge. Minh has been behaving quite well of late and is personally identified with the formation of the High National Council. He is no world-beater as we all know but we need time to see what will come out of the deliberations of the Council.

It would seem that three things might happen in this interim period. First, the Council may succeed in discharging its mission, even if later than the present schedule, and an undistinguished but acceptable civilian govt may emerge which can get on with the war, cooperative adequately with us and justify our giving renewed consideration to military pressures against the North. In this case, we should be filled with pious gratitude and render the govt full support.

Next, the Council may bog down amid bickerings, political maneuvers and renewed pressures from minorities. We should do everything in our power to avoid or restore [resolve?] such situation which could dissolve into anarchy. Alternatively, it could result in backlash which would lead to complete military takeover by armed forces who will hardly stand aside long before such spectacle and in reversion to a dictatorship fully as grim as that of Diem.

In course of such events, the radicals of Hue, the Montagnards in the highland and the VC everywhere all offer potentialities for further troubles but, by the working of the law of averages, they are not all likely to realize their total possibilities.

I am afraid that the foregoing, like most recent cables from Saigon, does not present pleasant outlook. Yet we on the ground are far from ready to concede defeat. As previously reported (Embtel 938) we must hang on, keep up the war and play for political breaks. If we can get reasonably good provisional govt before the end of the year we are back in business. I suspect Khanh will not survive as head of govt but if he can be retained as MinDef and Commander-in-Chief, he may be able give effective military leadership to pacification effort. There remains the ever present problem of finding civilian head of govt. Vien, the new MinInterior, Quat or Vu Van Mau might turn the trick but we will never know until we try them. To permit experimenting, there would be some advantage if the Council comes up with PriMin rather than President as head of govt.

In summary, we recommend for the present: a. Continuing to press for satisfactory governmental solution by way of the Council.

b. Being prepared to drop Khanh if he gets into irreparable trouble.

c. Viewing Minh as a short term substitute for Khanh.

d. Continuing to fight the war and play for the breaks.

e. Continuing to prepare to take the offensive against North Vietnam in accordance with the time schedule outlined in Embtel 465.4

I would appreciate your making this cable available to the President in partial discharge of my obligation under Deptel 7075 to provide him each week with a personal evaluation of the situation.6

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 Document 359 and Document 364.

3 See footnote 3, Document 359.

4 Document 319.

5 See footnote 2, Document 359.

6 On September 28, the Central Intelligence Agency completed a paper entitled “Deterioration in South Vietnam,” which concluded:

“The deluge of adversity being reported out of South Vietnam raises the question whether we may be on the verge of some sudden calamity. We believe that certain of this reporting is overly despairing and does not take sufficient heed of offsetting considerations. Nevertheless, the signs of deterioration are so many and so clear, in our view, that the odds now favor a continuing decay of South Vietnamese will and effectiveness in coming weeks, sufficient to imperil the political base for present US policy and objectives in South Vietnam.”

A copy of the paper was transmitted to McGeorge Bundy on September 28. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XV111, Memos. This paper served as the basis for SNIE 53–2–64, Document 368.

366. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President 366. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President1

Saigon, September 30, 1964—9 p.m.

Deptel 702.2 This is my first try at responding to your request for a weekly assessment of the progress of the pacification program in South Viet-Nam. I am assuming that pacification is meant in the broadest sense which embraces virtually all actions of the Vietnamese Government, the Vietnamese Armed Forces and the U.S. Mission except a limited number of long term projects which by their nature do not bear directly on the outcome of the struggle against the Viet Cong. Although most of the actions falling under pacification are a blend of many elements, for simplicity in reporting, I shall usually group my comments under the headings military, political, economic and psychological.

Military—The military activities of the week were characterized by an increase in the tempo of major Vietnamese ground operations and a drop off in the intensity of Viet Cong activity. Friendly air activity was conducted at what may be considered a normal rate but three aircraft were shot down and two crashes occurred in the course of combat operations.

For the first time, we are trying to get some feel for the quality of the thousands of friendly ground operations occurring in a week by requiring U.S. advisors to comment on the success or lack of success of those operations which they have personally observed. During the past week U.S. advisors observed 241 such operations and rated 181 of them as successful in the sense that the observers considered they accomplished their intended mission. Ninety-nine of these involved contact with the Viet Cong and of these 99, the advisors considered that 72 were successful.

The most important activity of the Vietnamese Armed Forces during the week was not directed at the Viet Cong but at the rebellion of certain Rhade CIDG strike forces in Darlac and Quang Duc Provinces. As reported in cable traffic elsewhere, this rebellion was put down without bloodshed on September 27 and for the moment we have the impression that this immediate problem is behind us.

In spite of the many evidences of political weakness in the Vietnamese Government, there is still little indication of loss of military effectiveness of the units of the armed forces. During the week, U.S. advisors rated two regiments and four battalions as being combat ineffective but gave passing marks to the remainder of the ground forces. However, the ineffectiveness of the national and provincial governments was reflected in a sharp drop in the recruiting and conscription rate. It looks as if the September total of volunteers will approximate 1,700 in contrast to a 4,000 average of the previous three months. The conscription for September will remain about 1,600 in contrast to 4,400 in August. The conscription goal for this month had been set at 10,440. Because of its importance, the manpower situation has been placed on the agenda to be discussed by the U.S. Mission with the National Security Council at its meeting next week.

Political—In addition to the Montagnard rebellion, the past week witnessed other new and serious challenges to the Khanh government. These included a large labor strike and demonstration in Saigon and serious civil disturbances in Binh Dinh Province where the military and political situation is clearly deteriorating. By week’s end, only the rebellion had been satisfactorily settled and, additionally, the formation of local people’s salvation councils continued to spread out from Hue down the central lowlands coast, reaching Phan Thiet by week’s end. These developments reinforced the growing impression that General Khanh has largely [let?] governmental authority and responsibility for maintaining law and order pass by default to any interest group which will press its demands. Another disturbing aspect of this further disintegration of governmental authority has been the inclination of Khanh and his senior advisors to underestimate the seriousness of the challenges and therefore the urgent need for sound solutions. A third disturbing aspect of these developments is the clear evidence that Khanh is encouraging the Montagnard rebellion and even of being behind the September 13 coup attempt.

An encouraging note of the past week was the formation and public presentation of the High National Council, charged with forming the new provincial [provisional] government, which was accompanied by a constructive speech by General Minh as chairman of the Provisional Leadership Committee (Triumvirate). Following its public debut, the Council immediately elected its officers and established an agenda for its first substantive session of September 28.

In implementation of paragraph 6 of NSAM-314,3 the United States Operations Mission (USOM) is developing plans covering a wide range of potential GVN-sponsored work projects designed to create quick employment in urban areas. Likewise the director, Mr. Killen, has been exploring with the GVN the prospects for and financial implications of a 25 percent across-the-board salary increase for civil servants, with a special adjustment for low-paid school teachers. We feel these short-term stimuli should be applied as soon as ready to keep life in the interim government; proposals of long-range will be held back for use in encouraging the provisional government which we hope will emerge from the current deliberations of the High National Council.

Psychological—One sees on all sides increasing signs of discouragement caused by the lack of effective government and strong leadership, and by the continuing civil disturbances. The morale of civil servants in Saigon and in the provinces is being adversely affected in the present situation and government operations at both levels are being increasingly marked by indecision and indifference. There is a growing tendency to blame the U.S. for the troubles of South Viet-Nam, a phenomenon which is likely to increase as troubles continue and the Viet Cong exploit them.4

“There is not much comfort here, and Bill Sullivan, who is in town this week, confirms the particularly serious point made at the end of Max’s telegram to you—namely that there are increasing signs that the Vietnamese are blaming us for their troubles.” (Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President) No record of Sullivan’s discussions in Washington has been found.

For the broader and deeper treatment of the current situation, I should like to invite your attention to Embtel 972.5

Taylor6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1000 from Saigon, which is the source text. According to another copy of telegram 1000, it was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 See footnote 6, Document 356.

3 Document 345.

4 On October 1, McGeorge Bundy sent a copy of telegram 1000 to the President under cover of a short memorandum in which he stated:

5 Document 365.

6 Telegram 1000 bears this typed signature.

367. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Forrestal) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 367. Memorandum From the Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Forrestal) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, September 30, 1964.

I have been a little disturbed at the recent spate of gloomy reports from Embassy Saigon, particularly their prognosis for General Khanh. While I don’t dispute the essential accuracy of the reporting, I am worried about the effect it is going to have in the intelligence community here in Washington. There is a SNIE in preparation2 which, in my judgment, gives an unbalanced picture of the situation. I am going to try to defer formalization of the draft SNIE until Bill Sullivan has had a chance to confer on it.

I had a talk with Lou Conein this morning. As you may know, he has been sent home from Saigon at the request of Max Taylor. He tells me that personal relations between Max and General Khanh are definitely not good and really have not been since early August. He cites a number of conversations he has had with both of them; but I will not bore you with the details. In any event, I want to check this out with Bill Sullivan. The difficulty seems to be essentially one of personality more than anything else. Differences in age and rank seem to have made easy communication between the two men difficult, and I would doubt there is much we can do to correct the situation at the moment.

Under these circumstances, however, I think it is important that we be very careful in our public characterization of the political situation in Saigon—particularly we should avoid doing or saying anything which could impel Khanh to decide to drop out of the picture before the end of October, at which time I figure he may have decided to go anyway. I should like a chance to discuss this with you further when you get a minute.

In order to restore some balance, at least for you, I attach a briefing paper3 done by Tom Corcoran over here, which we have used in briefing other Assistant Secretaries of the Department. Although it may be a touch optimistic, I think it sets a better tone.

On the subject of actions outside Vietnam, I hope you will look at the JCS memorandum 835–64.4 This is a remarkable step forward under the circumstances, and I am willing to subscribe to the whole thing, subject only to the assurance that the timing of the execution is kept firmly in the White House and State control. The memorandum is of course addressed to Bob McNamara, and he will, I hope, promptly bring the proposals up to the highest levels for decision. As you know, we’ve only gone out to the field on the Laos air action. We need a decision on the ground action.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XV111, Memos. Secret and Personal.

2 Reference is to a September 30 draft of SNIE 53–2–64. (Department of State, Ball Papers: Lot 74 D 272, Vietnam Intelligence Estimates) See Document 368.

3 Not printed.

4 Dated September 30, ICSM 835–64 provided the plans for implementation of air and ground operations into the Laos corridor specified in NSAM 314 (Document 345). (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, Prairie Fire, 1964–1967)

368. Special National Intelligence Estimate 368. Special National Intelligence Estimate1

Washington, October 1, 1964.

SNIE 53–2–64

THE SITUATION IN SOUTH VIETNAM

The Problem

To examine the situation as it has developed since early September, and to assess its implications for the US.

Conclusions

A. Since our estimate of 8 September 19642 the situation in South Vietnam has continued to deteriorate. A coup by disgruntled South Vietnam military figures could occur at any time. In any case, we believe that the conditions favor a further decay of GVN will and effectiveness. The likely pattern of this decay will be increasing defeatism, paralysis of leadership, friction with Americans, exploration of possible lines of political accommodation with the other side, and a general petering out of the war effort. It is possible that the civilian government promised for the end of October could improve GVN esprit and effectiveness, but on the basis of present indications, this is unlikely.

B. We do not believe that the Viet Cong will make any early effort to seize power by force of arms; indeed, we doubt that they have the capability for such a takeover. They will continue to exploit and encourage the trend toward anarchy, looking for the emergence of a neutralist coalition government which they can dominate.

Discussion

The GVN

1. Continued Political Deterioration. Political conditions in South Vietnam have continued to deteriorate since our estimate of early September. Despite efforts by Prime Minister Nguyen Khanh to stabilize the situation, he has been faced with an attempted coup, rioting and demonstrations in the northern provinces, a massive labor strike in Saigon, and an armed revolt by Montagnard elements among the Special Forces. Khanh’s authority, already weakened by the Buddhist-student crisis in August, has been further diminished, and the degree of his support within the military establishment is increasingly in question. Most of the non-Communist power elements appear to be marking time, pending their assessment of the civilian government which Khanh has promised will be formed by the end of October.

2. The Picture in Saigon. South Vietnam is almost leaderless at the present time. General Khanh has retained his position by making concessions to various interest groups—political, religious, students, military, and labor—which have pressed their demands upon him. In turn, these groups still seem bent on pursuing self interest and factional quarrels almost to the point of anarchy. A lack of sense of purpose and an absence of direction from above have seriously affected morale and created passiveness and apathy within the civil law enforcement agencies. Government ministries in Saigon are close to a standstill, with only the most routine operations going on. Cabinet ministers, as well as second-level bureaucrats, freely express their pessimism, and even though US and GVN officials are again meeting on pacification and other joint planning, these meetings are not being followed by action from the Vietnamese side.

3. GVN Military Morale and Effectiveness. The continuing disarray of the Saigon government, power struggles within the military leadership, and the activities of self-seeking politicians and religious leaders have adversely affected morale within the military establishment. However, the existing level of effectiveness of combat operations does not seem to have been seriously affected as yet. Nevertheless, continuing political instability would almost certainly aggravate such long-standing deficiencies in the Vietnamese military effort as inadequate motivation, initiative, and aggressiveness. A continuing lack of firm direction, and further squabbling among senior officers in particular, could depress the morale of the troops and junior officers to the critical point. Although the GVN armed forces have long had a high rate of desertion by individuals, there have been no important unit desertions or defections. If military morale continues to decline, however, desertion and defections within both the military and paramilitary services may occur on a larger scale, perhaps even by organized units.

4. Signs of Defeatism in GVN Leadership. High-ranking ARVN officers have confessed to US officers deep discouragement at the lack of leadership and direction. The J–3 of the Joint General Staff has indicated that he feels little reason even to discuss further pacification planning; various high-ranking field commanders have expressed similar pessimism; and General Khanh himself has shown signs of being overwhelmed by his responsibilities.

5. The Situation in the Countryside. The near paralysis of government initiative in Saigon appears to be spreading rapidly to outlying areas. Although the southern areas still appear relatively unaffected by the crises of the past several weeks, governmental authority has declined seriously in the northern coastal provinces where provincial and police officials are apparently receiving little guidance from Saigon. In such urban centers as Hue, Danang, Qui Nhon, and Nha Trang, Vietnamese commanders have repeatedly failed to intervene in civil disturbances and rioting on the grounds they lacked precise orders; in some instances, actual authority has passed by default to extremist “vigilante” groups, such as the “People’s Salvation (or Revolutionary) Council” (PRC). The nature of the provincial bureaucracy is such that it can rock along for considerable time, carrying out existing programs despite political deterioration in Saigon. Nevertheless, continued confusion and inaction in Saigon, or another coup, could rapidly produce a critical deterioration in government in the countryside. A slippage in morale and in programs among provincial administrations, at least in the central provinces, has already begun.

6. The People’s Revolutionary Council (PRC). The PRC has established local councils in many coastal cities and may seek to form a chapter in Saigon, where two PRC leaders have recently been named to the new 17-man High National Council. The aims of the PRC are not clear, but the local councils seem vulnerable to Viet Cong penetration, and the fact that they have assumed government powers in some provincial cities tends to undermine Saigon’s control and to damage the morale of civil servants.

7. The Montagnard Problem. The Rhade revolt of 20 September and the continuing possibility of further and more general uprisings by the Montagnards pose an immediate and very serious problem for the GVN. The Montagnards have a violent dislike for and distrust of the lowland Vietnamese, and have sought autonomy for years. The Vietnamese on their part look down on the Montagnards; until recently, the GVN has usually acted in a manner which has widened rather then lessened the breach between the two. The problem has been further compounded by constant and rather intensive Viet Cong political and psychological agitation among the Montagnards, playing on their aspirations and their dislike of the ethnic Vietnamese. Resentment over the killing of some 70 Vietnamese by tribesmen during their revolt will make it extremely difficult for the GVN to offer settlement terms acceptable to the Montagnards. Thus, there will probably be continuing disorders in the Highland areas, diminishing cooperation with the GVN, and increasing Viet Cong influence.

8. Offsetting Considerations. Although the signs of deterioration are many and clear, there are offsetting considerations that reduce the likelihood of sudden collapse and afford some very slim hope that the trend can be arrested. The Vietnamese people have a long record of resilience in the face of adversity; the ability of the peasants and even of urban elements to continue normal patterns of life despite political disorder makes for some degree of basic stability. The routine functions of government still work fairly normally; business does go on; and the streets are not places of constant terror. Discouragement over the absence of leadership and the progress of the war has not yet led to calls for ending the fighting. Few if any of the many groups now seeking to enlarge their powers regard an accommodation with the Communists as consistent with their interests. Finally, the military instrumentalities of pacification still exist and retain significant capabilities.

9. Tensions in US–GVN Relations. In the last month or so, there has been a disturbing increase in anti-American sentiment at various levels of Vietnamese society. Recent demonstrations in Hue, Da Nang, Qui Nhon, and Nha Trang have had definite anti-American overtones. These were probably attributable in part to Viet Cong agitation and incitement, but in some measure they seem also to have reflected a genuine irritation at the Americans for various reasons having no direct connection with Viet Cong activity. For its part, the Buddhist leadership, whether anti-Communist or not, is imbued with intense nationalism which has at times manifested itself in opposition to US policies and actions. Suspicion of US motives and concern over US involvement in internal policy is growing among the top echelons of the GVN, and, most importantly, on the part of Khanh himself.

10. GVN Contacts with the Communists. The principal GVN leaders have not to our knowledge been in recent contact with the Communists, but there has been at least one instance of informal contact between a lesser governmental official and members of the “National Liberation Front,” which is a creation of Hanoi. Moreover, there are numerous potential channels of communication between the present GVN leadership and the DRV authorities, and these could very likely be used without US knowledge.

11. Coup Possibilities. Although no definite coup plans are known to be afoot at the moment, we believe that further coup attempts are likely, given the ambitions, discouragement, and bitterness prevalent among certain key South Vietnamese military and civilian figures—and the comparative ease of mounting a coup attempt in the present deteriorating scene.

12. Alternatives to Present GVN Leadership. Present plans call for the establishment of a new, broadly-based, and predominantly civilian government by the end of October. Such a government might do better than the present one, but the odds are against its having the cohesion and effectiveness necessary to arrest the current decline. No visible alternative seems any more promising. Indeed, we cannot presently see any likely source of real leadership; no Magsaysay has yet appeared. None of the military personalities and factions seems capable of commanding a sufficiently broad spectrum of support. Of nonmilitary figures, the Buddhist leader Tri Quang is the strongest political personality and has demonstrated talents for leadership and organization. But he apparently desires to avoid such responsibility, and a Tri Quang government would face strong opposition from militant Catholics, some of the military, and certain other groups. Not least, it would be a difficult government for the US to work with, and some of its major policies would almost certainly not be consonant with US interests.

The Viet Cong

13. Viet Cong Policy. There are numerous signs that Viet Cong agents have played a role in helping sustain the level of civil disorder which has recently prevailed in the cities of South Vietnam; they have also affected the tone and direction taken by some recent protest demonstrations. Their hand was evident in the recent riots in the capital of Binh Dinh Province, and they may have already penetrated the PRC. Viet Cong propaganda throughout September has increasingly called upon the people to take advantage of the government’s confusion by pressing on all fronts. This capitalizing on unrest is an old policy; what is new is the rich opportunity presented by the collapsing of GVN authority. The Viet Cong have apparently decided that heightened efforts on their part will reduce the country to near anarchy and the government to impotence, bringing an early victory in the form of a negotiated truce and a “neutralist” government dominated by their National Liberation Front. Although these heightened efforts may include some battalion-sized, or larger attacks, we do not believe that the Viet Cong are trying to force a military decision at this stage. Rather, they will continue stressing small-scale terrorist activity aimed at furthering the breakdown of administration and the decline of faith in the government.

14. Viet Cong Capabilities in the Cities. Viet Cong strength in the cities has almost certainly increased substantially in recent months We base this conclusion on our general reading of the present situation rather than on specific knowledge of current Viet Cong assets. In the closing days of the Diem regime, Vietnamese police and security agencies had a fairly good reading on the nature and extent of the Viet Cong apparatus in the capital area, and it did not constitute a serious threat at that time. Immediately following the November 1963 coup, however, Colonel Tran Ba Thanh became Deputy Director of National Police. There are strong grounds for believing that Tranh may be a Communist agent; in any event he released some key Viet Cong prisoners, destroyed Viet Cong dossiers in police archives, and placed at least one known Viet Cong agent in a key position within the police structure. Although Thanh was ousted when Khanh seized power, the Saigon police and security services have not recovered their anti-Communist capabilities. The fact that Communist agitation still remains under careful cover, however, suggests that the Viet Cong intend still to husband these assets and not risk them in a premature takeover attempt.

1 Source: Department of State, INR-NIE Files. Secret; Controlled Dissemination; Limited Distribution. Prepared by the Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by the Directors of INR, DIA, and NSA. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 229C.

2 SNIE 53–64, “Chances for a Stable Government in South Vietnam,” dated 8 September 1964, Secret. [Footnote in the source text. SNIE 53–64 is printed as Document 341.]

369. Minutes of a Meeting, White House 369. Minutes of a Meeting, White House1

Washington, October 5, 1964, 4:15 p.m.

PRESENT WERE

The President, Secretary of State, Secretary of Defense, McGeorge Bundy and, for the last two items, John McCone

1. It was agreed that no decision would be taken at present on sending the Secretary of State to South Vietnam. The Secretary argued that at present such a visit would be misunderstood, lead to criticism, and have no positive results. It might be wise to reconsider the question later. Specifically, the Secretary suggested that after the British election2 it might be useful for him to go to the UK and then come home by way of the Far East.

2. It was agreed that we would not at present respond affirmatively to Souvanna Phouma’s request for interdiction operations along Route 7. We should point out to him that such operations now would put the onus of escalation upon us. We should not, however, foreclose the possibility of a different decision in the event of renewed hostile activity by the Pathet Lao and the Viet Minh.

3. The President approved the next scheduled marine operation under the 34–A program, a patrol proceeding to a distance of three miles from the North Vietnamese coast line.

4. The President agreed to a program of Laotian bombing in the communications corridors of Southern Laos, using the T–28 force now available. The Secretary of Defense pointed out that there was implied in this program a limited use of U.S. fighters, at some stage, for suppressive strikes, but Presidential approval for this part of the program was neither asked nor given.

5. The Secretary of State proposed the formation of a national committee for the Alliance for Progress, and the President agreed.

McG. B.3

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret; Sensitive. Drafted by Bundy on October 6.

2 October 15.

3 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

370. Editorial Note 370. Editorial Note

On October 5, Under Secretary Ball sent copies of a lengthy memorandum on Vietnam to Secretaries Rusk and McNamara and McGeorge Bundy. The memorandum posited four options for U.S. policy:

1. Continue the present course of action;

2. Take over the war;

3. Mount an air offensive against the North;

4. Work for a political settlement.

For text of the memorandum, see Atlantic Monthly, July 1972, pages 36–49; for Ball’s recollection of the drafting and discussion of the memorandum, see The Past Has Another Pattern, pages 380–384. According to William Bundy, Ball was tasked by the President to prepare the memorandum at a meeting on October 3 (Bundy Files, Bundy Manuscript, page 17–9), but no record of a meeting on that day appears in either Johnson’s Daily Diary or Rusk’s Appointment Book. (Johnson Library)

Later in the month, following discussions with John McNaughton and Michael Forrestal, William Bundy drafted his own memorandum on Vietnam. Circulated to Rusk, McNamara, Ball, and McGeorge Bundy under cover of an October 19 memorandum, this 42-page paper did not attempt to meet all Ball’s arguments, but in Bundy’s words contained “all the apparent heresies” he could think of. (Department of State, Bundy Files, October 1964) After surveying the situation in Vietnam and the likely developments under the existing U.S. policy, the paper presented the following five options: A. Continue present policies indefinitely;

B. Maintain systematic military pressures against North Vietnam;

C. Continue present programs, but wink at intra-Vietnam negotiations;

D. Continue present programs, but take a negotiating initiative;

E. Continue present programs, but add actions to convey a believable threat of force, then negotiate.

Discussion of these papers did not occur in a formal sense until November 7, when they became part of the work of the NSC Working Group. See Document 403.

371. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 371. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 6, 1964—9:30 a.m.

1035. Deptel 7312 Reftel raises the cogent question of how to get a maximum of pacification effort in South Viet-Nam with a minimum contribution from the central government in Saigon. This cable acknowledges the existence of this problem, comments on the proposals of reftel, and indicates the actions which the U.S. Mission considers feasible and desirable to implement at this time.

It is true that the pacification activities in the provinces have thus far shown a surprising degree of independence of the political turmoil in Saigon. This independence has been in large measure because of the already decentralized nature of the pacification program and of the leadership occasionally displayed by certain military and provincial officials. The question raised by reftel is whether we should increase this decentralization and encourage greater initiative on part of local commanders to press forward in clearing and holding action to bring at least temporary security to broader areas.

With regard to increased decentralization, as indicated above there is already a high degree of decentralization particularly in most aspects of the PL-480 and psyops programs. With respect to the training of regional forces, this matter is progressing satisfactorily under present arrangements and hence no change seems required. It is doubtful that much further decentralization is feasible except by way of improved supervision at regional level which is discussed below.

[1 paragraph (3–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

We do not necessarily agree that, in principle, it is desirable to encourage uncontrolled initiative wherever found throughout the provinces. The shotgun application of resources in the past has been one of the defects of the pacification program. In instituting the Hop Tac plan, we resolved to concentrate our resources in the Saigon area and accept relatively little progress elsewhere for the time being. This establishment of priority does not, of course, rule out exploiting to the maximum the resources available elsewhere. However, we do think it essential to meet Hop Tac requirements fully and accept shortages as necessary in other parts of the country.

Monthly provincial reporting is now giving us a better feel of the progress of pacification throughout the provinces. For the month of August, our observers considered that pacification was not going satisfactorily in fourteen provinces in comparison to seven in July. This retrogression may be due to a number of reasons such as (a) political events in Saigon (b) refined reporting methods and (c) the concentration of effort being given the Hop Tac provinces. We are now about to propose to Khanh that he strengthen the regional level (currently coextensive with Corps) by providing each with Ministerial representatives who can be used for troubleshooting in the provinces where pacification is lagging.

Another observation is that in the long run Saigon must play an important role in the country-wide pacification. The overall problem is to establish justified requirements for Ministerial resources at the provincial level and then see that the Ministries meet these requirements on time. The Ministerial pipelines must be stocked and made to flow at a proper rate in order to meet pacification needs. This machinery is working very poorly now but it must be our objective to improve it, and get it to perform if we are to be successful in the end. During this caretaker government of Prime Minister Khanh, we should do nothing to retard the subsequent development of the governmental machinery in Saigon, after the installation of the follow-on government. Thus we do not favor the suggestion of providing U.S. aid directly to the provinces beyond present procedures.

In conclusion, the U.S. Mission is unanimous in recommending the following program: a) Give full support to Hop Tac plan, assuring it the necessary priorities to give it every chance to succeed.

b) Continue to refine U.S. provincial reporting in order to determine areas requiring remedial attention. When Hop Tac priorities permit, concentrate on selected weak areas.

c) Take up with Khanh the need to provide Ministerial representation at regional level capable of forming troubleshooting inspection visits to lagging provinces.

d) Continue at the National Security Council level to develop simplified pacification budgeting procedures without involving regional (Corps) headquarters.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 Document 362.

372. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 372. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, October 8, 1964—8:18 p.m.

795. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Ref: Embtels 983, 1036, and 1054.2

1. We concur that we must do our best to avoid any public espousal of charters or people, although we will undoubtedly be charged in any event with considerable responsibility for the selection of the form and personnel of any new government. More basically, we believe we cannot privately disclaim any preference for individuals or form of government because of our intense interest in seeing a new government having sound organization, able members and broad basis of popular support. We also want to avoid any private impression that we are dumping Khanh and that as far as we are concerned everything is up for grabs. Some US guidance also seems a necessary precaution, given the backgrounds of the Council members, some of whom look like neutralists on basis past records and a few of whom seem to have had past Communist associations.

2. As seen from here, evolving political situation in Saigon contains at least two major problems for US. Embtel 1054 strongly suggests HNC is leaning toward parliamentary form of government with all the weaknesses which were so apparent in the French Fourth Republic. The second problem, highlighted in Embtel 983, is to avoid a sharp split between the only real power in the country, the military, and the civilian HNC. This split could occur not only over the form of the new government, but also over its personnel. It seems to us, therefore, that the US must exercise privately all the influence it can bring to bear to obtain as stable a form of government as possible and one whose personnel will be acceptable not only to the HNC but also to the military. We realize, of course, that any US initiative on these matters may leak and we leave completely to your discretion the manner in which you decide to exercise influence along the lines suggested.

3. We concur with the six points outlined in Embtel 983. In an effort to stimulate further thinking on additional stabilizing devices under a parliamentary system, we offer the following thoughts on Embtel 1054, which you may use in your discretion in private conversations. All are directed at primary US interest in creation of strong, effective central government whose mandate will run at least until orderly machinery for a change is functioning A. HNC should take courageous and firm action in designating Chief of State who could nominate Prime Minister subject to HNC approval. Prime Minister should select cabinet. Important point, however, would be that Chief of State, Prime Minister and cabinet would not be subject to change until after provisional Assembly completely formed, either by designation or direct or indirect elections. HNC could, as suggested 1054, perform legislative functions of Assembly in interim.

B. Power of Assembly to change government should be limited to a vote of no confidence by highest acceptable majority (ideally three-fourths) and result in the dissolution of the Assembly and new elections. Perhaps government could be given minimum period of office (one year) during which vote of no confidence could not be taken. As balance to this position, maximum term of both government and Assembly might be limited to fixed period (four to seven years).

C. Although individual Ministers should not be subjec4 removal by Assembly except in connection vote of no confidence against government, they might be subject to censure by two-thirds vote of Assembly, giving Prime Minister choice dismissing them or making public defense before Assembly.

4. On question of personnel in new government, two criteria have to be met. The Prime Minister and Cabinet should be as decisive and disinterested people as can be found. They must also, however, be acceptable to the major power groups, of which the military is probably the most important. For this reason we concur your view Embtel 983 that arrangement with Minh as titular Chief of State with civilian Prime Minister and Khanh as Deputy Prime Minister or Defense Minister offers best possible combination. We should vigorously oppose suggestion of multiple Chief of State reported in Embtel 1054. We foresee, however, that military or Khanh may demand a higher role, particularly if form of government looks weak. Possible fallback positions, therefore, might be the creation of a dual Premiership, i.e., a civilian Prime Minister in charge of civilian affairs and Khanh as coequal in charge of military affairs and pacification or even a civilianized Khanh as Prime Minister. We tend to see Khanh as best hope at moment for bridge between military and civilian power groups. This would seem to follow from Khanh’s apparent ability to get along with military Young Turks, Buddhists and possibly other elements, such as Hue University faculty group, as well as from his military qualifications. Therefore, we believe that in private discussions with HNC members and with Khanh himself, we should make point we have high regard for his military abilities and believe he could play major role in any new government. We should not, how ever, leave impression that Khanh is inevocably [irrevocably?] our chosen instrument.

5. We agree that if HNC cannot reach agreement on the personnel and form of a stable government by deadline of October 27th, we should strongly urge all factions, both in and outside HNC, to agree to extension. Perhaps form of government could be announced first with designation personnel and investiture coming later. This might fit with formula proposed in Para B Embtel 1054.

6. We are not clear whether statement contained Embtel 1036 intended for publication. We see some danger in public statement which leaves impression that we are completely disinterested in the political shape of the new government since this could contribute to thought that we do not intend to remain to work with it. Privately, we would expect to be more specific as suggested above. If a public statement becomes clearly necessary, something along following lines might indicate appropriate US concern.

“The United States Government supports the efforts of the High National Council and the Government leadership to form an essentially civilian government capable of pursuing successfully the pacification campaign against the Viet Cong. We have no specific preference as to the form of government or as to individuals who will hold key positions. However, it is clear such a government must have the cooperation of all the patriotic non-Communist elements in the country. We believe all leaders of Vietnamese political life are in agreement on this point.”

7. Finally, there is a delicate problem, during this transition period, in our relations with General Khanh and his military supporters. The present truth is that they hold such power as exists in South Vietnam. Their acceptance of new governmental arrangements is a prerequisite to any successful constitution of a new government. Our problem is that we must not abandon one horse before there is another horse which can run the course. I would suggest, therefore, that you have full and frank discussions with General Khanh about how he sees the development of the situation so that what we ourselves do is consonant with the consensus among military and civilian leadership which it is now our highest purpose to build. If the Council’s effort fails, we shall continue to have to live with and support Khanh. As indicated above we think that a successful High National Council effort should include Khanh in a responsible position, at the very minimum as Minister of Defense. But the important thing is that during this period we not find ourselves in a position where there is no one with whom we can work.

With warm personal regards,

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared with William and McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Secretary Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD. An undated draft of this cable with different wording is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXV111, Cables.

2 Telegram 983, September 29, transmitted preliminary views on what the Embassy would like to see emerge from the sessions of the High National Council. Telegram 1036, October 6, transmitted the text of a statement that the Embassy would give if asked whether the United States insisted on having Khanh continue as Head of Government. Telegram 1054, October 7, reported the trends in the High National Council on the form that the new Vietnamese Government might take. (All in Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

373. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 373. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 9, 1964—10 a.m.

1064. CINCPAC for POLAD. I saw Khanh today, October 8, primarily to sound him out with regard to his views of the activities of the High National Council. He claims to be pretty much in the dark and reported having visited Minh yesterday to see if the latter could provide him with information. He seems to have got as little from Minh as I did on October 6 (Embtel 1049).2

I asked Khanh how he expected to detach himself from the government on October 27 as he has often expressed hope to do. He agreed it is quite clear that the High National Council cannot form a National Assembly by that time which can, in turn, select a new head of state and/or head of government. Khanh feels, however, that at least by implication the Council has power to name these officials on a provisional basis pending convocation of the National Assembly. He gave no indication that he expected to be extended beyond October 27 although there are many rumors of his growing reluctance to step down. With me, he has always stressed his anticipation of a return to a happy military life.

Khanh made a vague reference to the danger of neutralism growing out of the Council. I asked whether he had misgivings about any of the members. In reply, he expressed uncertainty about the intentions of Dr. Quyen and [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] who represent the National Salvation Movement of Hue. He is unhappy because Minh invited them to membership on the Council in the first place and thus gave tacit recognition to their movement as a legitimate political activity.

I took up the matter mentioned in Embtel 10353 of placing Ministerial representatives as troubleshooters at regional (Corps) levels of [for] pacification. Khanh said that he had given this some thought but preferred to take no action now for two reasons. First, he wishes to acquire experience through the operation of the III Corps Headquarters which has Ministerial representatives for the Hop Tac operation. Next, he pointed out that the new government may wish to replace the Corps commanders in their non-military functions by civilian governmental delegates. I asked whether he expected the province chiefs also to be replaced by civilians but he replied this would be impossible because of the need to centralize military and civil operations at the province level to prevent fragmentation of the pacification effort at the grass roots. I agreed.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 1049, October 7, reported that Minh had little information on the events inside the Council. He had also asked if the United States was still backing Khanh. (Ibid.)

3 Document 371.

374. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 374. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 9, 1964—7 p.m.

1068. Deptel 7832 Organizing session was held October 8 and terms of reference agreed ad referendum to Ambassadors Unger and Martin. Agreed text will be transmitted Department.3

Group also discussed all operations of common interest mentioned in Saigon’s 10174 with particular emphasis on rules of engagement for US aircraft three countries and SAR operations, particularly problems of SAR for OPLAN 34A crews that may be downed in Laos. [5 lines of source text not declassified]

Very useful discussion of problem of SAR for OPLAN 34A crews clarified situation for Vientiane which will undertake definitive comments on Saigon’s 10305 to Dept as basis for Washington decision.

[1 paragraph (2–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

There was also discussion on sharpening existing coordination and responsiveness of all intelligence assets to Viet Cong movements through Lao corridor. Specifically, a military targeting sub-committee was formed to extend and improve the target list and reaction time.

In view of stand down on ground cross border operations and good possibility that ARVN will be unable to afford detachment any significant ground combat capability for corridor in foreseeable future, air strikes are sole remaining dependable alternative.

Fixed targets (the 22 Target List), will soon be destroyed if the RLAF performs as advertised and authorization received for Yankee Team strikes. Thus, the group discussed at length problem of acquisition additional targets in corridor and particularly problem of quick air reaction to targets of opportunity developed by ground observers. Saigon and Vientiane will further examine their assets and possibilities in this regard. [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

There was also unanimous agreement that US participation in air operations in corridor is essential if such operations are to have desired military and psychological impact, particularly since initiative for operations came from US. US failure to participate would diminish US influence over these operations (whether we wish to expand or to limit them) and their continuation could well be jeopardized if Lao are expected to do job unassisted. Although Vientiane believes Lao prepared to go ahead with strikes against first twelve targets authorized Deptel 785 to Saigon,6 their initial enthusiasm may not survive loss of a few aircraft.

Also, If Lao do not hit those four targets for which US strikes were requested and are discouraged from strikes on Mu Gia Pass, the five most important targets in the corridor will go unscathed. These omissions will grossly diminish the military benefits of these bombings. The group thus hoped that Washington would reconsider present ban on RLAF attack on Mu Gia Pass and approve soonest Yankee Team strike on other targets.

It was noted that Washington is still considering the Lao recommendations that the US provide cap over RLAF strike aircraft. The present rules of engagement for US aircraft currently permit US attack on Communist bloc aircraft attacking Laotian aircraft over Laos. Provision of a cap would hence be a relatively minor extension of existing authority. Since the Lao have requested such cap, it would have psychological value and group recommends early Washington approval. Vientiane anticipates RLAF would initiate operations October 14. Affirmative decision re cap prior to that date would be most helpful.

Vientiane does not expect RLG will initiate any publicity on strikes but will probably acknowledge RLAF operations in response to queries. Saigon and Bangkok will privately inform Khanh and Thanom prior to initiation operations. Vientiane will undertake keep Souvanna currently informed.

It is tentatively proposed that next meeting be held November 5.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Johnson. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 578–579.

2 Telegram 783, October 7, approved an organizational meeting to coordinate military-political recommendations affecting Vietnam. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S; printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 757–758)

3 Transmitted in telegram 1080 from Saigon, October 10. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XX, Cables; printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 759–760)

4 Telegram 1017, October 2, discussed cross-border operations from South Vietnam into Laos and from Laos into North Vietnam. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

5 Telegram 1030, October 3, posed several questions on how search and rescue operations in Laos should be conducted. (Ibid.. Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, Tiger Operations)

6 Dated October 7. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XIX, Cables and Memos; printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 576–577)

375. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 375. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 10, 1964—8 p.m.

1089. CINCPAC for POLAD. Ref: Embtel 1054.2 Since dispatch reftel, we have continued our consultations with High National Council (HNC) members and others.

Johnson had lengthy conversation with HNC Secretary General Tran Van Van Thursday evening.3 At outset Johnson stressed importance US attaches successful work HNC and necessity for HNC come up with realistic and workable formula for new government. Tran Van Van said that trend thinking in HNC now pointed more firmly to single chief of state (no troika or joint chief of state body). Also general view that General Minh is most realistic candidate for this position. Van said Chief of State would then select Prime Minister as head of government, who would present his program to HNC. With approval of his program by HNC, Prime Minister would select and install his government; however, HNC would retain power to remove Prime Minister or individual Ministers after consultation with Prime Minister on the basis of large majority vote (2/3 or 3/4).

Van indicated that Council generally agreed that election of Assembly (whether direct or indirect or mixture of both) was necessary but impossible accomplish this task by October 27 deadline. Van expressed his personal view that if the Council were honest it would merely state in the draft charter that the National Congress would be elected. Elections could be set from four to six months hence and a new Chief of State could be elected at the same time. Johnson questioned necessity of electing new Chief of State 1f the government installed by end of this month were functioning effectively. Van did not argue the point, merely observing that popular election of Chief of State had some merit in getting more popular support for government. Van said HNC would perform legislative functions pending installation of National Congress and alluded to Council’s “controlling” government. Johnson cautioned any tendency install parliamentary form of government which not adapted to situation in South Vietnam or for HNC attempt “control” too closely actions of Executive.

Van said Council unanimous in its view that Prime Minister must be civilian and indicated that “Council believed” Khanh did not qualify even if he resigned from military. Van then spelled out formula for creating National Security Council to be composed of Chief of State (Minh), President of the HNC (personality to be determined), Prime Minister (Pham Khac Suu), and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces (General Khanh). Johnson questioned whether it would be desirable to have President of High National Council as the interim legislative body formally a member of proposed National Security Council, which is clearly an instrument of the Executive branch. Here again this would be direct intervention of legislative into an Executive function. Van did not respond to this point. Johnson continued with great stress on necessity for military to be actively engaged in the government, committed to carrying out solution developed by HNC, thereafter for closest possible cooperation to exist between the military and the civilian sides of the government. Van agreed but expressed great concern that Khanh would try to perpetuate himself in office. Van doubted that Khanh would be willing to assume a subordinate position and would maneuver for his retention as Prime Minister, using as a primary tactic support from Tri Quang and the Buddhists. Van appealed for direct US intercession with Khanh to convince him that he must step aside in the interests of the country. Van believed that Council was powerless to block a move by Khanh and only US pressure could keep him in line. In response to Van’s direct question as to whether US would intercede in this sense with Khanh, Johnson responded along the line of Embtel 1036.4

In parting Manfull asked Van if he were serious in proposing Pham Khac Suu as Prime Minister. Van laughed and said “not really” but Suu would be good “elected Chief of State”. (This may reflect Tran Van Van’s personal ambitions to be Prime Minister or President of the HNC should Suu assume another position.)

Johnson and Sullivan met Pham Dang Lam, former Foreign Minister and currently Secretary-General of General Minh’s office, Friday noon. Lam recognized need for forming government by October 27, end of two-month period, but was worried about two obstacles: 1) HNC’s terms of reference provided that Assembly should select Chief of State, but would take two or three months to form Assembly; and 2) Minh would be “embarrassed” if HNC chose him as Chief of State and not Khanh as Prime Minister because Minh chose HNC members and would be accused of plotting against Khanh. Lam spoke of forming temporary government (as opposed to provisional government) for two or three months until Assembly formed; Assembly then would choose permanent Chief of State and Prime Minister. Johnson pointed out that formation new government with probable two or three month life or prolongation present lame-duck government would only prolong present deteriorating situation. He said two or three week extension of Khanh government beyond October 27 deadline at request of HNC seemed manageable, but US felt strongly that present period of uncertainty should be ended as quickly as possible and that government should be formed which could get back to prosecution of war. Johnson suggested that HNC might agree now on government providing for Assembly, when formed, to be able to remove Chief of State or Prime Minister by two-thirds or three-fourths vote if replacement agreed upon at same time. Such formula, Johnson pointed out, by giving Assembly right to remove government would give Assembly voice in matter but would avoid situation in which government again “up for grabs” when Assembly formed. (Implicit during this discussion was Lam’s assumption that Minh logical choice as Chief of State.)

Lam also raised question of Khanh continuing as Prime Minister and probed US attitude. Johnson followed line in Embtel 1036. Lam expressed great concern as to whether Khanh would resign on October 27 and asked what US could do to get him to resign. Johnson stressed that there were two aspects to question: 1) Whether Khanh would resign, and 2) whether there was someone to take his place. He pointed out would be irresponsible for Khanh to resign without replacement on hand; and that it was HNC’s job to provide that replacement if they wanted change of government. Lam appeared recognize that Khanh must have place in new government but expressed great skepticism he would accept subordinate position such as MinDef, DepPriMin.

Johnson suggested that if HNC wanted to learn Khanh’s intentions, or to have Khanh in government, it would be up to HNC and in fact essential it invite him in for consultation. Johnson strongly urged that HNC sit down with Minh and Khanh to work out what happens on October 27, reiterating that initiative up to HNC in this regard. Lam seemed to agree in principle, but expressed doubt that such consultation would work out in practice. He said, “Perhaps you Americans will have to help.” Johnson’s response to this was unenthusiastic.

Friday evening, Johnson and Sullivan met with Pham Khac Suu, HNC Chairman, and Tran Van Van, HNC Secretary-General. During conversation it was clear Suu was only shadow of his former self and capable of playing no more than figurehead role in his country’s future. He spoke very little, expressed no ideas more complex than platitudes, but occasionally confirmed Tran Van Van’s statements. Tran Van Van predicted HNC would vote and promulgate provisional charter next Monday or Tuesday (12th or 13th). Van referred to their concern with respect to Khanh, indicating once again that HNC considering establishment of National Security Council (Chief of State, Prime Minister, Chief of JGS, and President of HNC) to find place for Khanh. National Security Council would also permit close liaison between civilian government and military forces which Van recognized as vital.

Johnson and Sullivan urged that HNC take initiative to consult with Khanh and Minh on finding governmental solution before October 27. They also stressed necessity for civilian government maintaining closest possible relations with military, and for HNC to develop well-planned information program for selling its decision to people.

In talk with EmbOff October 9, Father [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] indicated that he, along with other religious leaders, had been called to Vung Tau by PriMin Khanh October 6. Purpose of trip was attempt Khanh’s part enlist religious support for post-October 27 governmental line-up with Pham Khac Suu as Chief of State, Khanh (without uniform) as PriMin. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] said that his group had no really strong opposition to such a line-up, but for moment he had refrained from registering full support. [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] is neither staunchly pro nor violently con-Khanh. On basis his performance week of August 23, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] considers him weak, but on other hand he feels certain Khanh not anti-Catholic. When EmbOff declared that selection Chief of State and Prime Minister was internal matter, [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] protested that US should play more dominant role in formation new Vietnamese Government, added that Vietnamese had had such limited experience in self-government, firm guidance was needed. “US should have been more firm with all our leaders including Diem.”

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 See footnote 2, Document 372.

3 October 8.

4 See footnote 2, Document 372.

376. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 376. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 12, 1964—11 p.m.

1108. CINCPAC for POLAD. We held a working reception for High National Council yesterday evening. Following members of Council attended: Pham Khac Suu, Ngo Gia Hy, Nguyen Dinh Luyen, Le Van Thu, Nguyen Van Luc, Tran Quang Vinh, Tran Van Van, Ho Van Nhut, Le Khac Quyen, Nguyen Van Huyen, Tran Van Que, and Mai Tho Truyen. Atmosphere throughout was warm, relaxed but serious and responsive in our general discussions.

After initial greetings and private conversations, I made short statement to the group on the historical significance task assigned to the Council, the importance US attaches to successful completion of the Council’s work, and the difficulty of reconciling in a realistic manner the current surge for greater democracy in midst of war. I stressed inter alia: 1) the necessity for strong, stable government suited to a wartime situation; 2) the importance of assuring that the government would endure for a considerable period of time and not have its life span limited either by specific provisions of Provisional Charter or through caprice of the National Assembly when installed; 3) necessity for close cooperation between civilians and the military; 4) fact that US has no preconceived notions as to the particular forms of government or personalities; and 5) our constant availability for consultation should the Council wish to obtain authoritative statement of US views. After brief response from Pham Khac Suu, Council members invited our questions concerning status their work. In ensuing discussion, which was open and much more frank than anticipated, following general impressions drawn from remarks those present: 1) There is considerable area of agreement on the form of government preferred by the Council; namely a single Chief of State who would be designated by the Council; Chief of State with some form of Council approval would appoint a Prime Minister having broad executive powers. Prime Minister designate would then present himself and his program to the Council and after receiving Council endorsement would form his government. Council (and later National Assembly perhaps with Council acting as Senate) would retain power to change government through vote of no confidence but only by substantial majority (2/3 or 3/4) and in conjunction with parallel vote on government which would replace out-going government. (Council members refer to this as Bonn formula.)

2) General agreement exists that new National Assembly cannot be installed by October 27 deadline and should be deferred for 3–4 months beyond that date. Assembly would basically be an elected one but precise method of elections not yet determined.

3) Council had given considerable thought to incorporating safeguard in draft charter so that stability and tenure of provisional government could be maintained and government (and work of the Council) could not be overturned by whim of new Assembly once it is installed.

4) While Council members carefully skirted issue of personalities, they were obviously concerned as to General Khanh’s intentions. Many interpreted Khanh’s letter (Embtel 1092)2 as ultimatum and evidence Khanh maneuvering to stay in power regardless of work of Council. All appeared to agree that close cooperation between civilians and military absolutely essential for governmental stability and on need for early consultation with the military concerning Council’s provisional charter. (Suu and Van indicated privately that they would attempt to have separate discussions with Minh and Khanh today.)

5) Council seemed to be shooting for a deadline of October 20 to complete their work and to have some elements of new government actually installed by October 27 deadline. (In individual conversations some members indicated Council could complete draft of charter by tomorrow if all went well.)

In general the group was more impressive, dedicated, and cohesive in their views than we had anticipated. While it remains to be seen whether this sense of purpose can be maintained in their forthcoming discussions with the military on the composition of the government, they appeared to be approaching their task with a real sense of responsibility and urgency. We will follow up on results their meetings with Minh and Khanh. Telegram follows3 on views expressed by Council members in individual discussions.4

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to Vientiane, Bangkok, Hue, and CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 1092, October 11, transmitted a translation of Khanh’s letter to Minh and the High National Council asking to be replaced as Prime Minister so he could return to the military. (Ibid.)

3 Telegram 1122 from Saigon, October 13. (Ibid.)

4 In his diary for October 11, Taylor noted: “The outstanding impression was the fear of the Council members of the military and in particular of General Khanh.” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69)

377. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 377. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 13, 1964—9 a.m.

1109. CINCPAC for POLAD. On October 12, Alex Johnson and I took up a number of questions with General Khanh on a visit to his headquarters at Cap St. Jacques. After disposing of a number of secondary matters reported in other cables,2 we opened a discussion of the new govt.

I reported to him our meeting with the Council at my residence on Oct 11 (see Embtel 1108).3 He showed a lively interest in the matter saying that he was still out of touch with the Council, and asked how the work was proceeding.

I summarized the general nature of our discussion with the Council members and stressed their uneasiness over the attitude of the military. I reported that his recent letter to them guaranteeing the support of the army for a govt which received “the approval of all the people” had caused them some concern.4 Did this suggest the military leaders were about to pounce upon the dissatisfaction of some minority as a reason to oppose a govt which the Council might propose? Because of their obvious apprehensions, I thought they were greatly in need of a heart-to-heart talk with Generals Khanh and Minh.

General Khanh answered at once that his position was perfectly clear. He had no personal ambition for any public office and would take any assignment which he was offered. He agreed to the need of a frank discussion with the Council and indicated that, while up to now they had not conferred with him, he had an appointment with them on the morning of Oct 13. He will first meet with General Minh and will then join the Council.

Khanh expressed surprise that they intended to publish a charter this week. Recalling his unfortunate experience in surfacing the Vung Tau Charter against our advice without laying adequate political and public groundwork, he expressed hope Council would not repeat same mistake. He said he thus far had no idea of what they intended to come up with in way of charter.

There followed the discussion of governmental formulas under consideration. I told Khanh that apparently the Council had in mind a govt with a Chief of State and a Prime Minister. He replied that he would definitely oppose any parliamentary system which would be subject to the instability of the French Fourth Republic. Alex Johnson pointed out that it was possible to have a parliamentary system with built-in restraints such as the German system which would not have the disadvantages that General Khanh seemed to fear. We ended by agreeing that there are a number of formulas which might satisfy either a Presidential system, a system on the French “De Gaulle-Pompidou” pattern or one on the German pattern.

I then made the point that agreement would probably not be difficult on the matter of the governmental formula. The hard debate would center about the personalities to occupy the principal posts in the new provisional govt. Khanh asked if the members of the Council had shown any desire to discuss personalities, and I replied in the negative. He then asked what Alex Johnson and I thought.

I took the opportunity by the forelock and replied it seemed to me to be a problem of properly relating three key individuals-General Khanh, General Minh and a presently unidentified civilian who could qualify as Prime Minister. Operating on the premise that it is preferable to have a civilian Prime Minister, then it becomes a question of how best to use the talents of Khanh and Minh. There are at least two ways to do so. The first is to leave Minh as Chief of State generally with his present functions and make Khanh the chief military figure of the govt, perhaps as both Minister of Defense and Commander-in-Chief. The second solution would reverse the roles although in this case the position of Minister of Defense might go to Minh and the position of Commander-in-Chief to some other General. I said I would favor the first solution unless indeed the overall formula for the govt followed the De Gaulle pattern, in which case I would prefer General Khanh as the Chief of State.

General Khanh did not hesitate to say that he preferred the first solution in which he could be the military leader and leave Minh in his present role as Chief of State. He explained his preference by saying that the army would never accept Minh again as their military leader. They know too much about him and no longer respect him. He, Khanh, would be very happy to fulfill a purely military role which would allow him to unify the army once more. He feels deeply the need of purifying the army after the experience of the Sept 13 coup and feels that he is the man to do it. He repeated his conviction that the army must be got out of politics and kept out of politics. No military man should enter the govt unless he has first resigned his commission.

General Khanh went on to say that, of course, his willingness to serve in the govt would depend on its composition. He would have to know who would be the civilian Prime Minister and decide whether he is a man under whom he would be willing to serve. Also, he would have to know the program of the govt, professing that this was more important than the personality of the Prime Minister. We pointed out that he would probably have to be content with a statement of principles at outset as it would take time to elaborate a program.

In the course of the discussion, we raised the matter of assuring the duration of the leadership chosen at the outset by the High National Council. Johnson and I emphasized the points which we made with the Council, namely that it would be most unfortunate if the leadership chosen now were changed a few months later by the new National Assembly. Khanh got the point and seemed to agree entirely.

In summary, we found Khanh in one of his best moods, seeming to talk frankly and without reservations. If he is out to sabotage any govt in which he is not the chief, he dissembled very ably. He has promised to inform us by Wednesday the outcome of his discussions with Minh and the Council.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 96C.

2 telegram 1102 from Saigon, October 12, reported on the brief discussion of air operations in the Lao corridor. (Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) No other cables on the discussion with Khanh have been found.

3 Document 376.

4 See footnote 2, Document 376.

378. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Vietnam Coordinating Committee (Forrestal) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 378. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Vietnam Coordinating Committee (Forrestal) to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, October 14, 1964.

SUBJECT

General Khanh

At the risk of getting out on a limb, I thought I would put on paper some personal thoughts about General Khanh and his place on the Saigon political scene. Some reporting from the field has suggested that General Khanh demonstrated indecision during the August and September difficulties, that he never has been much of a politician, that he has shown inability to mobilize significant popular support, and that he is pretty well finished. The implication of such an assessment would be that we must search for alternate leadership in Vietnam.

I am not at all sure that such an assessment and conclusion are justified. On the contrary, I think it may very well be that General Khanh is turning into one of the shrewder modern Vietnamese political figures. Sufficient time has now passed since the events in August, beginning with the ill-fated promulgation of the Vung Tau Charter to suggest that Khanh may be playing a deeper and longer term political game more successfully than we have suspected. Consider what his refusal to act during the public disturbances in August has accomplished. There is evidence that Tri Quang, the militant Buddhist leader, has become more and more moderate and apparently concerned over the adverse political reaction in the coastal cities to the rioting, which he himself probably encouraged. There is beginning to be evidence that Thich Tam Chau is making capital out of publicly espousing a moderate line in the Buddhist community and may be regaining control over the Buddhist organization (particularly insofar as the students and newspapers in Saigon are concerned).

Dr. Quyen is in Saigon on the High National Council. In the meantime, the People’s National Salvation Committees which he spawned from Hue and other northern cities show signs of falling apart. In some of the central provinces officials are cracking down on the unruly elements which showed their heads last August, apparently in response to orders from Khanh

Finally, the coup attempt of September 13th was such a comic failure that one begins to suspect whether the Can Lao/Dai Viet “remnants” didn’t fall into a carefully prepared trap. In any event, the vestiges of influence they had left, including General Khiem, have been removed.

It is possible to argue that all this has happened without any action on Khanh’s part and merely confirms his inability to make decisions. This proposition does not strike me as being the most likely explanation. We know that when Khanh was Commander of the Second Corps, he was considered to be among the most decisive of corps commanders, as well as the most politically effective. We have recently learned that Khanh was not the prime mover of the January coup from which he emerged as Prime Minister. On the contrary, the leader now appears to have been General Khiem. This may account for the apparent lack of effective action by Khanh during the period when he was supposed to be in charge of the government. In fact, he may not have been, certainly not of the civilian side.

At present Khanh may be continuing his waiting game in an effort to create a political situation which will enable him to return to power in answer to a draft, under conditions where he owes as little as possible to any single supporter, including the U.S.

He has done an effective job of telling Ambassador Taylor he has no ambitions to remain as Prime Minister. He has already acted in such a way as to make some of the members of the High National Council suspect that his public demonstrations of his intent to resign on October 27th are merely designed to encourage a popular demand (which Khanh himself might stimulate) for his return to power.

In short, I don’t think Khanh is going to pull a Coolidge. He might well return as the country’s principal leader with Vu Van Mau, who is now said to be his closest political advisor, as a civilian front.

The main question in my mind is where this leaves General Minh, and I suspect that this is the main question in Khanh’s mind as well.

Whether or not this analysis turns out to be correct, I think there is enough in it to suggest that we should not get too fixed on the proposition that the man we once embraced as the most effective leader in Vietnam is going to opt for early retirement from political life.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Memos, Vol. XIX. Secret. Also sent to William Bundy, McNaughton, and Colby. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 107D.

379. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 379. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 15, 1964—9 a.m.

1137. CINCPAC for POLAD. Today (October 14) I called on Minh in the morning and Khanh in the afternoon to hear their accounts of meeting with the High National Council yesterday.

Minh reported that the visit went off amicably and that he was able to assure members of his complete support.

Minh explained that the new charter may not be ready today but should be very shortly. His version of the probable course of future events is as follows:

The charter will be announced with the explanation that the triumvirate remains responsible for the general conduct of the government until convocation of the National Assembly. During this interval, the Council will serve as the legislative branch of the new government but the problem remains how to constitute the executive for this interim period.

Since the triumvirate remains in existence, in Minh’s mind there is no question but that he will remain as Chief of State. As a way to constitute a cabinet and choose an interim Prime Minister, he visualizes a small team (“equipe”) of leaders getting together, forming a trial government with an aspirant Prime Minister and producing a governmental program. This team would then present itself with its program to the triumvirate (less Khiem) and the Council and ask for acceptance as the interim government. If approved, it would be in business; otherwise some other team would have to try.

I then tried to draw him out on the subject of personalities. According to Minh’s statements, it is quite clear there is such a team in formation now, probably headed by the Prefect of Saigon, Tran Van Huong, who under this plan would hope to become Prime Minister. The other members whom Minh regards as being on the team are not clear. Minh referred to them as being some from the Council and some on the outside. I gathered that Vu Van Mau may be on the list as Prime Minister and Nguyen Luu Vien, the present Minister of the Interior, will have some key position.

As to the role for him and Khanh to play, Minh agrees that the ideal solution would be for him to remain as Chief of State and Khanh to be the principal military figure of the government. He expressed some doubts however that Khanh would accept this relatively subordinate role.

I asked Minh upon leaving whether he expected an orderly transition from the present government on October 27. He hesitated a moment and then said that he anticipated no disturbance. As previously reported, we hear rumors that pro-Khanh government demonstrations are possible.

In the afternoon, I went to see Khanh to compare his story of events with Minh’s. He said that he, too, had had a pleasant meeting with the Council and felt that he had assuaged their fears of military intervention.

He added that the Council had urged him to remain in the government as Chief of State or Chief of Government. He refused to entertain the proposition saying he could not send his Generals “back to the barracks” and exclude them from political activities if he did not do likewise.

We then went over his understanding of what the Council was about to do and it differs considerably from other interpretations. He understands that the High National Council after promulgating its charter (presumably today) will name the Chief of State who will be of the Gaullist type with extensive powers. The Chief of State will choose an aspirant Prime Minister who will put together a cabinet and a program for presentation to the Council acting as substitute for the National Assembly. The Council will accept or reject the government and its program; in the latter case, someone else will have to try again.

Khanh verified that the Council will act as the legislative branch until the convocation of the National Assembly some months later. Apparently safeguards to assure stability are in the plan and the new National Assembly will accept the existing government unless it can be overturned by a two-thirds vote. The Chief of State 1s independent of the government and is not subject to removal by the Assembly except for some extreme offense such as treason. He, on the other hand, can dissolve the National Assembly if the latter overturns the government too frequently.

The Chief of State also presides over the cabinet and, according to Khanh, is the real source of policy direction, in fact, a De Gaulle.

I tried to find out whether Khanh knew anything about Minh’s “team” headed by the Prefect of Saigon. He would only concede that he had heard the Prefect mentioned as a possible candidate for Prime Minister.

Khanh confessed to surprise as I did at this new concept of the government. He said that his only suggestion to the Council had been to give a more “honorable” position to the army by having it depend directly from the Chief of State. Thus, he would remove the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces from the control of the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defense, the latter becoming strictly an executive and administrative official.

I told Khanh that such a government would be criticized as establishing a dictatorship as rigid as that of the rejected Vung Tau Charter. Khanh conceded that point but seemed to enjoy the idea. Asked about personalities in key positions, he would only say that he does not intend to accept the position of Chief of State, but would be happy to be Commander-in-Chief. I am not at all so sure of his sincerity because from an early date he has shown an interest in the De Gaulle-Pompidou formula, with Khanh in the role of De Gaulle.

I am afraid that the foregoing cable presents a confusing melange of views on the formation of the government. We should receive a copy of the charter shortly which I hope will be explicit enough to clarify what is intended. Although we have stressed the importance of breaking news of the charter to the public after adequate public relation preparations, I am afraid this one is likely to appear with as little preparation as the ill-fated Vung Tau Charter.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

380. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 380. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 16, 1964—1 p.m.

1148. CINCPAC for POLAD. Confrontation which has been developing between Khanh plus Young Turk officers on the one hand and Minh plus High National Council on the other hand, has sharpened considerably in past few days.

Although sparring for position has been characterized by usual Vietnamese indirection and obscurities, picture we have pieced together from numerous contacts appears as follows: 1) The HNC has completed a draft charter and has sent copies to Khanh and Minh. Khanh has confidentially sent Ambassador Taylor a photocopy of what he claims to be charter he has received from HNC. According this document, Chief of State given extraordinary powers to considerable detriment of Prime Minister. Moreover, Chief of State assumes title of Supreme Commander of Armed Forces and appoints all senior military officers.

2) Khanh met with HNC Oct 15, told them their charter “unacceptable” to armed forces and demanded revisions. Although he seems to have offered them several options, his primary suggestion reportedly is based on Republic of China pattern which gives special “position of honor” to armed forces. Khanh has told Ambassador Taylor that he feels armed forces should in effect be a “fourth branch” of government, coordinated with executive, legislative and judicial. This proposal confirmed by sources in HNC.

3) Tran Van Van, and others among our contacts in HNC (who are unaware we have received photocopy of charter from Khanh) insist that draft charter gives only titular authority to Chief of State, reserving basic power, on Bonn government model, to Prime Minister.

They accuse Khanh of threatening them with coup d’etat by armed forces and insist he is reneging on previous intentions withdraw armed forces from politics. While they recognize the problems presented by personalities in current positions of power, they have not been willing to meet these problems head on. Further, appears that group within HNC, Suu, Van, Thu, Nhut, also interested in seeing final arrangements emerge which would permit their group to install Prime Minister and government compatible with their ideas and amenable their direction. They view Khanh as main obstacle in their path and Minh as their principal ally at the moment.

4) Minh attended part of Khanh’s session with HNC Oct 15 but said nothing until Khanh departed. After Khanh’s departure, Minh in effect counseled HNC to ignore Khanh’s suggestions and proceed on basis current draft. One feature of that draft would be to continue triumvirate in capacity Chief of State until Assembly convenes and selects permanent Chief of State, which obviously unworkable.

5) HNC met in rump session evening Oct 15 to consider Khanh proposals. Since Khanh going Pleiku for session on Montagnard affairs Oct 16 and 17, they have scheduled next meeting with him for Sunday, Oct 18.

6) Although Khanh and Minh have had several private bilateral meetings, there is no sense of understanding between them. Khanh is still trying to get Minh out of public office and Minh is trying to get Khanh back to a purely military command position subordinate to government. Johnson and Sullivan met with Vu Van Mau and Pham Dang Lam October 15 to urge them make more active efforts reconciliation between two Generals. It was clear from this meeting that even these two old friends had not been actively in contact in this effort.

7) Some rather vague moves are afoot to propose all-civilian slate as way out of current impasse. Various names are being mentioned for both Chief of State and Prime Minister roles. Among these are Pham Khac Suu for Chief of State (impossible if Chief of State anything but ceremonial), Ho Van Nhut, Nguyen Luu Vien, and Tran Van Huong (Prefect of Saigon) for Prime Minister. All these gropings [groupings?] seem, even by their sponsors, to be considered unrealistic unless and until Khanh and Minh reach some modus vivendi.

Our action to date, pressed upon all personalities we have met, has concentrated upon obtaining general agreement that draft charter should not be published at this time, that remaining twelve days before October 27 should be spent in effort reconcile differences among principal factions and personalities, and that if necessary even more time should be taken.

We are also strongly pressing point that we wish to be consulted, want no surprises, and we expect current protagonists to reconcile their differences in a mature fashion.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

381. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 381. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 16, 1964—7 p.m.

1150. CINCPAC for POLAD. This morning (October 16) before the opening of the combined session of the NSC and the U.S. Mission Council, I talked to Khanh briefly with regard to his meeting with the High National Council yesterday. He confirmed what we had heard through other sources.

He has informed the High National Council that the draft charter in its present form is not satisfactory to the armed forces and, if promulgated, is likely to generate a coup. Khanh considers that under the charter the Chief of State is vastly more powerful. than the Prime Minister and does not resemble the position presently held by Minh; because of its primacy the post must be filled by a civilian. In fact, all military officers presently in the government must “return to the barracks”. Furthermore, the armed forces cannot be submerged as planned under the charter but must be given the special status reported in Embtel 11372 whereby they depend directly from the Chief of State and are independent of the rest of the government.

Khanh was particularly eloquent in attacking the provision of the charter whereby the old triumvirate would assume the powers of the Chief of State until the latter can be selected by a National Assembly. This provision would mean that a divided, discordant committee would attempt to direct the government for a period of months while elections were being held and arrangements completed for the National Assembly.

I asked Khanh how we can end the apparent impasse. Would he still be satisfied with the formula which he had apparently accepted in a recent conversation with me at Cap St. Jacques; namely, that Minh would remain as nominal Chief of State and he, Khanh, would assume the offices of Minister of Defense and Commander-in-Chief while a strong civilian with full powers would run the government as Prime Minister? Khanh said that this formula was still acceptable to him.

Following the meeting of the NSC/Mission Council, I went to see Minh and found him plunged in gloom. He described Khanh as having behaved very badly the previous day in threatening the Council with a military coup if he does not have his way. He verified the nature of Khanh’s demands essentially as Khanh had described them, but argues strongly that Khanh is wrong in his evaluation of the importance of the powers attributed in charter to Chief of State. In his view, under the charter, the Chief of State would “reign and not govern”. He also insists that under the terms of the decision of the Military Revolutionary Council of September 8 the triumvirate is obliged to remain in place until “the national institutions set forth in the provisional charter have been set up.”

I asked Minh the same question as I had Khanh, namely, would he accept the formula of a strong civilian Prime Minister with him as nominal Chief of State and Khanh the number one military officer? Minh said he would but did not believe that Khanh would go along.

Minh described the Council as being discouraged and disgusted. He suggested that we Americans should contact key members and encourage them. We are trying to set up an appointment with the four recognized leaders for a meeting tomorrow, October 17.3 We will sound out their willingness to adjust the charter to the governmental formula described above, provided Minh and Khanh will really line up for it.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 379.

3 At the meeting on the afternoon of October 17, Taylor stressed to the four leaders the need for accommodating Khanh, emphasizing in particular the powers of the Chief of State, the elimination of the triumvirate, the personalities in the new government, and the length of their tenure. Taylor described the session as useful, but noted that he would have to maintain pressure on the Council to fulfill its mandate. (Telegram 1175 from Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

382. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 382. Telegram From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Saigon, October 17, 1964—3:20 p.m.

MAC 5532. 1. Your JCS 4804–64, DTG 161746Z Oct,2 received Saigon during visit of CINCPAC. This reply jointly drafted following exchange of views.

2. We agreed with the JCS that “present programs will not of themselves suffice to reverse the unfavorable trend in South Vietnam.” On the other hand an expanded U.S. military effort will not alone reverse the trend.

3. Unless there are reasonable prospects of a fairly effective government in South Vietnam in the immediate offing, then no amount of offensive action by the U.S. either in or outside South Vietnam has any chance by itself of reversing the deterioration now underway. On the other hand VNAF, Farmgate, and U.S. air strikes against infiltration associated targets in the Panhandle of Laos and in DRV are in order under any circumstances. Also to keep the general atmosphere clear on the fact of U.S. military dominance in the area, the DeSoto patrol should be continued with full preparation for retaliation. At least the prospect of a reasonably effective government in South Vietnam is prerequisite to mounting major overt U.S. military action against the DRV except in retaliation for attack on U.S. forces.

4. Time is running out; however, the situation is not yet desperate and in our opinion we can and must wait at least until December before we will know with any certainty whether a government will emerge from the current effort. Although we do not expect that all problems will be solved by December, we do believe that it will be clear to us on the ground whether or not some sound beginnings have been made which offer reasonable prospects of further development and eventual success.

5. If a government seems to be pulling itself together then stepped up U.S. military action would give impetus to this favorable trend and should be undertaken.

6. This matter has been discussed with Ambassador Taylor who generally concurs with this reply. His detailed views are contained in his message of 16 October to the President,3 info you.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Eyes Only. Also sent to Goodpaster and repeated to CINCPAC for Admiral Sharp.

2 This cable asked for Westmoreland’s views on whether “some dramatic military action” would assist in creating a stable government and whether a stable government was a prerequisite or merely desirable for launching overt military action against North Vietnam. (Ibid.)

3 Presumably this is JPS 303, 161030Z; see Document 388.

383. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President 383. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President1

Saigon, October 17, 1964—8:30 p.m.

Knowing your intense interest in seeing more flags in SVN, I am sure you will want to know that free-world aid personnel in Viet-Nam, in addition to Americans, has now reached the one thousand mark, representing 11 countries. Much material aid has also been received, but I believe this tangible presence of third-country teams complies with your desire to have this aid “as large and visible as possible in terms of men on the scene”.

Third-country personnel are serving all over Viet-Nam, from outposts in southern Delta to Hue in the north. Many, and particularly the Australians, are accepting the same hazards as the Americans, serving as advisors in combat with units down to company level.

The work of our Embassies abroad and the special missions of Ambassador Lodge2 have played a key role in this favorable development. We have reason to hope, from their reports, that we may expect a continuing augmentation of this aid. Details concerning these contributions are being reported routinely and the Embassy is sending to the Department of State a report which will give a breakdown of each contributing nation’s efforts.3

We have attempted to assure that this free-world commitment has been given maximum publicity here and abroad, and we believe the third country presence in SVN is becoming well known and gaining recognition. I am having our information people work with their Vietnamese colleagues to give appropriate publicity to the fact that we have passed the thousand mark.

Taylor4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Transmitted as telegram 1174 from Saigon, which is the source text.

2 Regarding Lodge’s trip to Europe in August, see Document 301.

3 Not found.

4 Telegram 1174 bears this typed signature.

384. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 384. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, October 18, 1964—3:47 p.m.

859. From Secretary for Ambassador. Bob McNamara and I have following reactions to political moves you have reported during last week.

A struggle seems to be developing between Minh and HNC on one hand and Khanh and Young Turk military on the other. Between these two groups it seems to us our best interests are served if Khanh comes out on top. We have little confidence that Minh can serve as effective chief executive especially in light of weakness his support and strength of his Young Turk opposition. Problem, therefore, is how to get government with Khanh in a leading role, ideally as chief executive unless some strong civilian shows up who is not now apparent. At least Khanh should remain as leader Army with co-equal position to civilians in a government whose mandate will run for at least 18 months.

It seems important to make effort find acceptable civilian leadership which can work with Khanh and military. Our only thought from this end is that Vu Van Mau might form center of such civilian leadership. He might serve as chief of civilian side of government with Khanh as chief of military side. Whether or not this is in realm of possible, we believe it should be made clear that US does not support Minh as powerful chief executive.

This is consensus here and we would much appreciate your comment.2

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared in substance with McNamara, and initialed by Rusk.

2 On October 19, Taylor replied that he had reached the same conclusions. He was optimistic that U.S. officials had convinced the Council to reduce the powers of the Chief of State, leaving real power to be exercised by the Prime Minister and the Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, and speculated that an acceptable arrangement could be worked out if a satisfactory civilian Prime Minister could be found and if he and Khanh could then work out a role for the armed forces. Taylor did not think Vu Van Mau would “pan out,” but felt former Foreign Minister Quat might be possible. (Telegram 1183 from Saigon; ibid.)

385. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 385. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 20, 1964—5 p.m.

1199. CINCPAC for POLAD. After a series of consultations today with General Khanh, Generals Minh and Thu, I have the impression that the business of putting together a new government has reached the following point:

Khanh, Minh and the Secretariat of the High National Council, Suu, Chu, Luc, Van and Huyen, had a reasonably satisfactory meeting of minds yesterday. Khanh concedes that they have deflated the powers of the Chief of State to a point acceptable to him. He did not give the impression, however, of having studied in detail the provisions of the charter as it now stands and had some difficulty showing in chart form the relationships of the principal elements. He claims not to have seen the charter with its latest modifications.

One outcome of yesterday’s meeting was the signing of a document by Minh and Khanh authorizing the dissolution of the triumvirate and the passage of its powers to the High National Council. This document is now in the hands of the Council.

Minh, supported by Thu, gave me a somewhat different version of the state of affairs. They consider they are now on the home stretch and even hope to promulgate the charter today. In their minds, there is no doubt as to the relationship of the principal elements of the new government. There is the Chief of State with nominal powers whom they may prefer to call the President; a civilian Prime Minister with a normal cabinet including a civilian Minister of the Armed Forces; a Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces subordinated to the Minister of Defense. Off to one side is the National Security Council presided over by the Chief of State as President with the Prime Minister as Vice President and the Minister of the Armed Forces and the Commander-in-Chief as additional members. This council will have only the power to make recommendations either to the National Assembly for such matters as a declaration of war or a state of emergency or to the government on matters of defense policy.

According to Minh and Thu, these provisions essentially as described above were in the draft charter shown to Khanh yesterday and to which he agreed. They conceded some last minute changes are being made but consider them insignificant.

Nonetheless, based on Khanh’s statement that he had not yet seen the final papers, I urged them to have one more go-round with Khanh before publishing the charter. This they are strangely reluctant to do, probably because of the disagreeable tone of most of their conferences with Khanh. They charge him bitterly with being unwilling to work on a team and even with frequent violations of his word. They would not have him in the government if they could find some way to get rid of him.

We then got around to talking about personalities in the government.

I pointed out they had the double problem of finding two civilians who could work with Khanh, one a Prime Minister and the other a Minister of the Armed Forces. They said that Khanh was plugging for his uncle, Minister of Interior Nguyen Luu Vien, as Minister of the Armed Forces and asked what I thought of him. I replied that my impressions based upon limited observation had been favorable but the fact that he is Khanh’s uncle will cause some criticism.

I then pressed them for their plan for filling the position of Prime Minister. To my surprise, they said that Khanh, Minh and the Council representatives had reached an informal agreement on a name last night, but they were not at liberty to communicate it to me yet. They assured me the person involved is highly respected and should satisfy all parties.

I stressed the need for careful public and press preparations for announcing the new charter and later the key figures of the government. Unfortunately, as is so often the case, they are now in an enormous hurry to promulgate the charter2 and satisfy those who have been pressing for evidence of progress. They did not promise to have a full scale press conference and a thorough public explanation of the contents of the charter.

The foregoing would seem to mean that we may be getting somewhere in the formation of a new government generally along lines satisfactory to us. I still have my fingers crossed about Khanh. He was too non-committal this morning to give me the feeling that everything is really settled in his mind.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

2 The text of the Provisional Charter, which as Taylor feared was promulgated later during the day on October 20, was transmitted in telegram 1204 from Saigon, October 20. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XX, Cables)

386. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 386. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 22, 1964—5 p.m.

1219. Embtel 1210; Deptel 880.2 I called on Khanh today to find out his feeling about the charter and related matters. I led off with the same point as with Minh yesterday (Embtel 1210), to effect that we Americans had no candidates for the key positions in the govt but we did not wish to be surprised. Effective USG/GVN cooperation was indispensable to our common success and we did not wish to be presented with the fait accompli of a governmental slate containing key individuals with whom we would not work. Khanh agreed and stated that certainly the key positions should be discussed with us in advance.

I asked Khanh if he is satisfied with the charter. He stated that he had not studied it in detail and really had no qualified opinion. He repeated his complaint that he had never been consulted officially and never saw the final draft. He did concede that the meeting had taken place with Minh and Council representatives reported in Embtel 1199,3 but does not consider this constituted official consultation. When I asked him specifically about his views of the powers of the Chief of State and the position of the armed forces under the charter, he admitted he was satisfied on both counts. He also believes that the National Security Council arrangement is a good one although he would have preferred to have included the Minister of Interior in this membership. I gathered from his responses that he would not oppose the charter but probably would not display much public enthusiasm for it. However, he has agreed to take part in the press conference tomorrow at which the charter will be explained to the public.

We then discussed some of the leading candidates for the key positions in the govt. Khanh says that he favors Minh as Chief of State providing that he will retire from the army. Suu is a second possibility although, since Minh controls the majority of the Council, Minh should have no difficulty being selected provided he puts aside his uniform. One of the reasons that Khanh favors Minh, I gather, is that the assignment of Minh would occasion considerable embarrassment if he returned with his seniority to active duty in the army.

Khanh gave me every reason to believe that he is entirely satisfied for the moment to assume the position of Commander-in-Chief. He considers that he could not be Minister of Defense since he is a former President and head of state and by tradition barred from accepting any cabinet post. This is an odd position for him to take since if persisted in, it would appear to exclude Khanh from any future governmental post other than Chief of State.

I asked Khanh if he thought they could find a Minister of Defense with whom he could work harmoniously in his new assignment as Commander-in-Chief. He seemed unconcerned on this score and mentioned General Don as one individual who, in a civilian role, could fill the job.

With regard to the choice of Prime Minister and to other actions of the High National Council. Khanh gives the impression of assuming a laissez faire attitude. He agrees that the principal candidates appear to be Saigon Mayor Huong and his uncle, Minister of Interior Vien. He considers Huong a good man but of uncertain health. Uncle Vien would, of course, be a satisfactory choice to Khanh, but he tried to impress me with his detachment from these high personnel matters.

I urged on him need for taking a more active role in helping to get the strongest possible governmental line-up. The most promising slate appeared to me to be Minh as Chief of State, Vien as PriMin and Khanh as Commander-in-Chief. Khanh did not disagree with slate but showed no apparent feeling of responsibility to do anything about getting it adopted.

I then asked about the Dalat Generals whose new assignments were published in the morning papers. Khanh conceded that they were back in town, in fact working for him in the General Staff Hqs. where we were meeting. He verified their assignments as reported in Embtel 1210 but added that the announced assignments were largely “theoretical”, that in reality they were doing special studies for him at this time. [6–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

[2 paragraphs (11–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Incidentally, the morning paper also carried the news of the promotion of the Young Turks—Ky, Cang, Khanh, Thi. Presumably these promotions are to placate the Turks for the return of the Dalat Generals.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Telegram 1210 from Saigon, October 21, reported a conversation between Minh and Taylor on that day during which Taylor stated that the United States had no preferred candidates, but did not want to be surprised by the new leadership, and Minh related that the Dalat Generals had resumed to Saigon with new assignments. (Ibid.) Telegram 880 to Saigon, of the same date, asked for clarification of Khanh’s role in the new government and for specific recommendations on the position the United States should take with regard to it. (Ibid.)

3 Document 385.

387. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 387. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 25, 1964—11 p.m.

1259. I called on Pham Khac Suu at my request at 9:30 this evening accompanied by Johnson and Manfull. Tran Van Van also present at my request.

I told them very bluntly and with some deliberate anger that we could not countenance the Council’s action of last evening in which important decisions taken without advising US in advance.2 This despite our previous understanding that US did not want to be surprised by actions taken by Council. Suu immediately replied he would resign tomorrow if we wished. I dismissed this but told Suu directly that he could not count on support of the US unless he and the Council presented to us well in advance, and we were satisfied with, their nominations for Prime Minister, Minister of Defense, other key Ministers, and CINC Armed Forces.

In response to my questions Suu said he “was consulting” Council re Prime Minister candidates. He said his current preference was for Ho Van Nhut.

Both he and Van professed ignorance concerning what now being discussed among Generals at Vung Tau (which probably accurate). In response to further question he said he would be satisfied with Khanh as Commander in Chief.

With respect to Minh, Suu merely turned to Van in response to my question as to what they had in mind as a position for him. Van replied that they were thinking of creating a new position of “Supreme Counsellor” to the Chief of State for Minh. While admitting this not previewed in charter Van opined that Chief of State possessed power to create this position.

I underlined essentiality of US aid and support to SVN and necessity our being currently informed if we are to work effectively together. While we could overlook failure to consult in past, we could not accept it for the future.

I specifically requested that Suu and Van convey the full sense and flavor of my remarks to the full Council so that the Council was aware of the seriousness of the situation as we viewed it.

Suu throughout stressed importance he attached to US aid and support.

In parting Johnson reiterated to Van importance conveying full sense of démarche to Council.

It clear even in this brief exchange that Suu not on top of situation and being coached by [garble—Tran Van Van?]. He turned repeatedly to Van for prompting or direct replies to questions.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 At that time, the High National Council had chosen Suu rather than Minh as Chief of State.

388. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 388. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, October 27, 1964.

JCSM–902–64

SUBJECT

Courses of Action, Southeast Asia

1. In view of the recent estimate of the deteriorating situation in South Vietnam, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that strong military actions are required now in order to prevent the collapse of the US position in Southeast Asia. The agreed judgments expressed by the intelligence community in SNIE 53–2–642 have implications which are particularly grave when note is taken that such judgments in the past have consistently been characterized by restraint and moderation. The promulgation of this judgment by the intelligence community requires prompt and responsive recognition by the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

2. Ambassador Taylor, by message JPS 303, DTG 161030Z October 1964,3 advised the President concerning the worsening situation in Southeast Asia. He has drawn attention to the increased rate of infiltration into South Vietnam and stated that with the advent of the dry season this problem will assume a magnitude and urgency that will require immediate attention.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recognize that the lack of stability in the central government, the low state of morale of the leadership, and the poorly trained civil service in the Republic of Vietnam (RVN) militate against early success and that the solutions, primarily political, to these problems are also critical to the eventual termination of the insurgency.

4. The struggle in South Vietnam is a combination of political and military action and there is an interaction between the two that permits a political success to be exploited militarily and vice versa. Accordingly, a program of military and supporting political actions with respect to the RVN has been developed on the basis that US withdrawal from the RVN or Southeast Asia is not an acceptable course of action. This program envisages the requirement now for accelerated and forceful actions both inside and outside of the RVN to support a strategy of: a. Depriving the Viet Cong (VC) of out of country assistance by applying continuously increasing military pressures on the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRY) to the extent necessary to cause the DRV to cease support and direction of the insurgency.

b. Depriving the VC of assistance within the RVN by expanding the counterinsurgency effort—military, economic and political—within the RVN.

c. Continuing to seek a viable effective government in the RVN based on the broadest possible consensus.

d. Maintaining a military readiness posture in Southeast Asia that: (1) Demonstrates the US will and capability to escalate the action if required.

(2) Deters a major communist aggression in the area.

5. The proposed courses of action now recommended in support of the above strategy include both new actions and certain actions previously recommended by the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The recommended courses of action are appended as follows: a. Actions within the RVN, Appendix A.

b. Actions outside the RVN, Appendix B.

6. The military actions in Appendices A and B are arranged in a general ascending order of severity. The military course of action which would contribute most to defeating insurgencies in Southeast Asia remains the destruction of the DRV will and capabilities as necessary to compel the DRV to cease providing support to those insurgencies. Consequently, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the first six courses of action in Appendix A and the first eight courses of action in Appendix B should be implemented concurrently, now. While many of the remaining actions can also be taken concurrently, the lists are arranged so that any of the actions may be selected, implemented, and controlled, as required, to produce the desired effect while analyzing and estimating the communist reaction. The Joint Chiefs of Staff advocate adoption of the program of military and political courses of action as a means of applying increased pressures at all available points. In the event our objectives are achieved during the course of the program, it could, of course, be curtailed or terminated; however, the entire program of courses of action may be required in an effort to destroy the DRV will and capability to support the insurgency in the RVN and in Laos.

7. The Joint Chiefs of Staff, having noted the latest Special National Intelligence Estimate, SNIE 10–3–64, dated 9 October 1964,4 believe that there is not a high risk of introduction of Chinese communist ground force combat units unless major US/RVN ground units had moved to occupy areas of the DRV or communist. held territory of Northern Laos, or possibly, the Chinese communists had committed their air and had subsequently suffered attacks on their bases. Further, the Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that because of the present favorable balance of power it is within the capability of US force to deal with large-scale aggression.

8. In summary: a. The Joint Chiefs of Staff request authority to implement now the first six courses of action in Appendix A and the first eight courses of action in Appendix B. Further, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that courses of action 7 in Appendix A and 11 through 16 in Appendix B be implemented as required to achieve US objectives in Southeast Asia.

b. The Chief of Staff, US Army, and the Chief of Naval Operations request authority to implement, as an extension of increasing pressures on the DRV, courses of action 9 and 10 of Appendix B, after appropriate implementation of the first eight courses of action.

c. The Chief of Staff, US Air Force, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps believe the judgment reflected in SNIE 53–2–64 forces the conclusion that, if indeed, time has not run out, it is fast doing so. Unless we move now to alter the present evolution of events, there is great likelihood of a VC victory. They see no useful alternative to initiating action against the DRV now through a planned and selective program of air strikes. Accordingly, they recommend that courses of action 9 and 10 (as revised) in Appendix B be implemented now, and that course of action 10 be revised to read: “Selective air strikes against DRV to include air strikes on infiltration routes.”

They believe that the initial effort should be focused on targets of military significance and should be mounted in response to the next significant VC action in South Vietnam (SVN). In this regard, they consider that a battalion size VC attack in SVN or an act of VC terrorism against US personnel should be construed as significant. Additionally, Ambassador Taylor has reported infiltration by northern born conscripts, and that the Government of Vietnam (GVN) claims they come in organized units. He states “By any objective standard their presence in SVN constitutes an invasion by hostile forces into the territory of an ally of the US.” Action to verify this GVN claim should be undertaken as a matter of priority. If verified, it is considered a significant incident within the above context.

9. The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, supports the requests and recommendations contained in subparagraphs 8 a and 8 b, above.

10. In view of the grave implications outlined above, the Joint Chiefs of Staff request that these views be provided to the President at the earliest feasible time.5

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler
Chairman
Joint Chiefs of Staff6

Appendix A

ACTIONS WITHIN RVN

Action Forces Comments

1. Influence the RVN to apply increasing pressure on the VC. Continue the pacification program with emphasis on the Hop Tac program to establish the security of Saigon and its surroundings. RVNAF and civil authorities Province Chiefs and military commanders who exhibit strong initiative in accomplishing pacification tasks should be given support even though their areas may lie outside the Hop Tac region.

2. Initiating a vigorous civil affairs effort in RVN. US/RVNAF To establish and maintain the authority and the effectiveness of the government in Saigon throughout the territory south of the 1 7th parallel by increasing the ARVN civil affairs effort at lower levels. US Medical Civic Action Program should be continued at present level. Subsector advisory teams should be used during clearing operations to increase emphasis on proper employment of civil affairs teams. USOM planned augmentation of public safety (i.e., police) advisory effort at province level should be expedited. This improved capability should be used to improve the effectiveness of ARVN Civil Affairs Teams which should include police representatives where feasible, to initiate population identification and movement control, to survey indigenous capabilities, and supervise security and police operations.

3. Tighter control of personnel and materiel to include: RVNAR and civil authorities

a. Identification, search, seizure and detention procedures to include direct action against the VC leadership in RVN.

b. Establishment of areas and check points for control of population movement.

c. Systematic search of all vehicles and hand-carried containers at the above mentioned check points to insure that no contraband is carried therein.

d. Establishment of strict curfew in selected areas with a clear-cut understanding of substantial penalties for violations.

4. Encourage the RVN to recruit from the local PF individuals who will volunteer to serve as uniformed district and village policemen. The police organization should be structured as a local force responsive to orders from the District Chief. Civil authorities

5. Support, as required, the operations being developed to eliminate the supply to the VC through Mekong-Bassac Rivers and associated waterways. US/RVNAF and civil authorities No additional US personnel required.

6. Employ US fixed wing aircraft to accomplish air strikes within the RVN. US Day and night operations are required.

7. Deploy forces to implement appropriate CINCPAC OPLANs. US To assist actively in fighting the insurgency in RVN or to defeat communist aggression as necessary.

Appendix B

ACTIONS OUTSIDE THE RVN

Action Forces Comments

1. Resume DeSoto Patrols. US

2. Intensify 34A operations with emphasis on MAROPs and initiate air operations against selected targets. RVNAF

3. Maintain forward deployments of US combat units in Southeast Asia. US

4. Permit RVN forces to pursue and destroy VC forces which cross into Cambodia. US/RVNAF To prevent the use of “safe haven” areas in Cambodia by the VC.

5. Appropriate retaliatory actions to DRV/VC initiations. S/RVNAF NSAM 314 states that we should be prepared to respond as appropriate against the DRV/VC in event of any attack on US units or any special DRV/VC action against South Vietnam. CINCPAC is ready to retaliate.

6. Low-level reconnaissance probes of the DRV. US To gather intelligence and to demonstrate US resolve in the area.

7. Resume and expand cross border operations to interdict the flow of communist personnel and materiel moving through the Laos Panhandle area. US/Farmgate/RVNAF Air strikes and armed route reconnaissance and raid type of joint operations, including airborne, as a show of force and to demonstrate capabilities for destruction of supplies, equipment and military installations in the Laos Panhandle.

8. Attack LOC in DRV in conjunction with air strike operations on nearby targets in RVN and Laos. US/Farmgate/VNAF To destroy border targets such as Mu Gia Pass.

9. Deploy concurrently with or prior to initiating US air strikes against the DRV, necessary additional US forces within the concept of OPLAN 37–64. 1 Army Bde to Thailand;
1 MEB (RLT/MAG) to Danang;
2 F–100 Sqdns to Thailand

10. Air strikes against infiltration associated targets in the DRV. US/Farmgate/VNAF

11. Aerial mining of DRV ports: US/VNAF Notify, through diplomatic channels, other countries to stay clear of mined ports.

a. Haiphong approaches (three (3) fields) Haiphong, as the single principal port, handles 85% of all important DRV imports and 70% of all exports. Ocean-going ships number an average of 40 per month. Stopping or appreciably reducing import shipping would cut seriously into the DRV economy and would force diversion of traffic to alternate transportation routes.

b. Cam Pha (one (1) field), Hon Gay (three (3) fields) Reduction of export shipping by mining Cam Pha and Hon Gay would produce a long-range deteriorating effect on the DRV economy and would restrict the free use of alternate ports following the mining of Haiphong.

12. Naval quarantine/blockade of the DRV (also applies to Cambodia). US/RVNAF

13. Attack, with increasing severity, targets in DRV. US/VNAF To further increase pressure on the DRV to attempt to cause the DRV to make a political decision to cease support of the insurgencies in Laos and the RVN.

14. All-out air attack on the DRV. US Strike the 94 targets contained in JCSM 729–64 with the objective of destroying the will and capability of the DRV to support insurgencies in SEA.

15. Amphibious/airborne operations on the coastal areas in DRV. US/RVNAF Either in conjunction with item 14 or as an additional pressure to achieve the US objective, conduct amphibious/airborne operations to seize one or more lodgements in the littoral of DRV. The lodgement(s) to be of sufficient magnitude to pose a plausible threat to the DRV and yet limited in area to optimize the capability of the employed force to defend against infiltration and attacks by numerically larger ground forces. These lodgements to be held until the US objective is achieved or the magnitude of overall military operations is significantly increased.

16. Commit US and allied ground forces into Southeast Asia as required. US/Allied

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files. Working Papers. Nov 1964, Vol. IV, JCS. Top Secret; Sensitive.

2 Document 368.

3 Not found.

4 A copy of this paper, entitled “Probable Communist Reactions to Certain Possible US/GVN Courses of Action,” is in Department of State. Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272 Vietnam Intelligence Estimates.

5 In a memorandum to Wheeler, October 29, McNamara noted that he was sending a copy of JCSM–902–64 to Taylor for comments. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OASD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 926, Box 1) Taylor was advised along these lines in DEF 1342, October 29. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S; printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, p. 586)

6 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

389. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President 389. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President1

Saigon, October 28, 1964–9 a.m.

Embtel 1205.2 Two months ago today Khanh undertook the commitment to give up his position as Prime Minister and to install a civilian government on a pattern to be designed by the High National Council. He made good on his promise yesterday by submitting his resignation and that of the cabinet to the newly designated Chief of State, Pham Khac Suu.

The box score of progress in moving toward civilian government includes the promulgation of a reasonably satisfactory charter which has received generally favorable acceptance, the selection of Suu as Chief of State, and the conversion of the High National Council into the legislative element of the government pending the organization of a National Assembly. We are not too happy over the choice of Suu who was slipped in ahead of Minh at the last minute by pressure on the High National Council by a delegation composed of Buddhist, Catholic, Hoa Hao, and Cao Dai leaders. Suu is a respected man of high principles, but old beyond his years and clearly lacking in physical stamina. However, he may be in for only a short time, as he has stated his unwillingness to continue unless given a popular mandate at the time of the formation of the National Assembly. In any case, after making the initial appointments of the Prime Minister and Chief of State, he will have a nominal role so that I do not view his selection as cause for great concern.

I have had two meetings thus far with Suu, the first3 to convey our displeasure at not being consulted by the Council with regard to the final choice of Chief of State and our expectation to be consulted in the future before final agreement on a government slate. I have taken the position that we are not pushing individual candidates but that we have a thoroughly legitimate right to insist upon a strong and stable government which can utilize U.S. aid with maximum effect.

This morning, Suu showed that he got the point by calling me in to discuss the possible composition of the government.4 He seemed quite receptive to all my comments and again indicated his intention to consult frequently with us. The danger we saw several days ago of a clash between Khanh and the armed forces on the one hand and the High National Council on the other seems allayed for the time being. Khanh now appears sincere in his intention to return to the armed forces and to assist in their purification from past political contamination. He called in 40 Generals last Saturday and, I hear, gave a ringing plea for unity within the armed forces.5 He appears quite ready to cooperate with Suu in the formation of the new government. However, he and the armed forces will henceforth be on the side lines watching intently the performance of the new civilian government. If it appears to falter, the Generals may be expected to make a new grasp for political power.

Military activity this week was at about normal levels, offering nothing special to report. The quality of South Vietnamese military actions was quite good; out of 77 contacts with the VC observed by U.S. advisors, the latter rated 68 as having been successful.

The pacification program around Saigon, Hop Tac, is still moving very slowly. Inadequate military and police forces remain an obstacle which we hope to overcome progressively. All indications are that a long, hard process of mobilization and organization lies ahead.

Our hopes for the future rest heavily upon the new government which is being formed. In reviewing the disappointments of recent months, we should not forget that there has never been a stable government, and at times, no government at all in South Viet-Nam since Diem was overthrown last November. Without a government to work with, we have been seriously hampered in carrying out the military and economic programs which we have promoted. No one can really say how far we would be today if we had had a reasonably effective government in Saigon during the past year. Such a government will not appear over-night, but we all hope that the modest advance toward restoring government which has been made in the last two months will develop into an effective organization with which we can mesh our U.S. efforts.

Taylor6

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1292 from Saigon, which is the source text.

2 Telegram 1205, October 20, transmitted Taylor’s report to the President for the previous week. (Ibid.)

3 See Document 387.

4 The second meeting with Suu took place during the morning of October 27. Taylor transmitted his account of it in telegram 1278 from Saigon, October 27. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15–1 VIET S)

5 Taylor transmitted Khanh’s account to him of this October 24 meeting in telegram 1277 from Saigon, October 27. (Ibid., POL 15 VIET S) A similar account was transmitted in TDCS 314/84655–64 from Saigon, October 25. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XX, Cables; published in Declassified Documents, 1976, 23A)

6 Telegram 1292 bears this typed signature.

390. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 390. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, October 31, 1964—2 p.m.

1351. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 1340.2 I called on Khanh this morning (October 31) prior to the reception of the Diplomatic Corps by Chief of State Suu. I had with me the provisional slate of Ministers reported in reftel.

General Khanh, who had spent the last two days in Dalat, was unaware of the discussions which PriMin-designate Huong has been conducting with possible Ministers. Hence, he was interested in seeing the tentative slate which I showed him. He said that he did not know about half of the Ministerial candidates but that he was satisfied with the key men, Huong, Vien, Hach and Than. Without stressing the point, he indicated that he would have preferred Quat to Tran Van Do as Minister of Foreign Affairs.

I expressed some concern about having Huong as Minister of National Defense in addition to PriMin. This does not bother Khanh who says that he will see that Huong gets plenty of help (no doubt about that) in conducting the work of the Ministry of National Defense. He anticipates the need of a Dep Minister to reinforce Huong in this area.

I explained my feeling of a need for a War Cabinet consisting of the Heads of National Defense, Interior, FonAffs, Public Works, Information and Rural Affairs, preferably chaired by Dep PriMin Vien. Khanh also favors such an arrangement and promised to push it. He also assured me that the weekly NSC/US Mission Council meetings will be continued. In general, he expects that Huong will work with the Americans about as he has.

I took the opportunity to mention the need which Gen Westmoreland feels to meet on a regular basis with Khanh about once a week. Khanh who is aware of the accumulation of important military matters which has built up over the past weeks readily agreed. At one point, I expressed surprise over General Ky’s recent visit to Suu during which the press reports that Ky promised his support to the new govt. I asked if Ky considers himself the spokesman for the so-called Young Turks and in a position to offer or withhold support for the govt. Khanh replied rather lamely that the army had fallen into such bad habits in the last year that it would be difficult to get the Generals quickly out of the habit of making pronouncements and dabbling in politics. He recognizes that it is one of his principal jobs to get them to mend their ways.

In summary, I would say that Khanh and the senior officers whom he represents accept the proposed govt but with little real enthusiasm. I think that they can be counted upon to give it a reasonable try but may grow quickly impatient if it proves to be ineffective.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 1340, October 30, transmitted a list of the officials whom Huong wished to include in his cabinet. (Ibid., POL 15–1 VIET S) Taylor commented that the Ministerial candidates possessed a reputation for honesty and competence.

391. Memorandum From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) 391. Memorandum From the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)1

Saigon, October 31, 1964.

SUBJECT

U.S. Posture Toward the Emerging GVN

1. Over the last two weeks, considerable thought has been given to an effective modus operandi between the new GVN and the U.S. Mission. I firmly believe, U.S. policy permitting, that we should be tougher and more exacting about GVN performance. Unless we have a new and more hard-headed approach, success will probably be elusive. The point is that the Vietnamese officialdom are convinced that the U.S. is irrevocably committed, for political and strategic reasons, to a policy of assisting the GVN; and that, consequently, massive aid will continue to be forthcoming without quid pro quo. As a result, the GVN takes U.S. assistance and U.S. representatives for granted-as is demonstrated by repeated failure to consult with us prior to making political and military decisions of major impact on governmental operations and pacification. This behavior might be acceptable if the VN were operating effectively or, at the very minimum, gave evidence of a real desire to do what was required to win the war. The fact is, however, that the conduct of the government is characterized by inefficiency, corruption, disinterest and lack of motivation. The GVN is not winning the war; and thus, the U.S. would appear to have no other alternative than to lay things on the line.

2. It would therefore seem in order to enunciate to GVN leadership that U.S. support at current or expanded levels is contingent upon demonstrated GVN performance and/or specific reforms, plus assurance that the U.S. Mission will be consulted on all significant matters. For such a policy to succeed there must be disciplined acceptance thereof within the entire U.S. official community, in Washington and South Vietnam; there must be no further mention of “blank checks”; and there must be Washington agreement to relinquish greater control and manipulation of programs to the U.S. Mission. The remainder of the paper assumes that there is agreement on these basic propositions.

3. Lists of criteria to be met and/or deficiencies to be corrected by the new GVN are easy to prepare. The four basics you propose2 are fundamental; but they are so broadly stated as to be difficult to measure without further definition. We had refined these criteria, from a military standpoint, in Inclosure #1 (which bears a resemblance to my earlier submission, Inclosure #1a).3

4. To focus further in on the military sphere, we have compiled, at Inclosure #2, a list of specific deficiencies which, collectively, constitute the reasons why the pacification campaign is not advancing. While all deficiencies are not of equal importance, the extent of the list points up the obvious fact that dramatic improvement is not likely to be forthcoming immediately. By the same token, it is not likely that the new government will be able to meet the four basic criteria except over a period of time and then only in degree. Stated otherwise, the measurement of GVN performance will probably have to be based more on evaluation of its intent, attitude and effort than on the attainment of specific benchmarks.

5. Whatever the basis for assessment of GVN performance, the U.S. Mission should be in a position to exert leverage to call forth the kind of effort, attitude or action considered necessary. We probably have more sanctions available within the Mission as a whole than we realize. There are conspicuously effective sanctions available to USOM. While none are dramatic individually, there are quite a few available to my command. In the course of normal business with the GVN, at all levels, there are many occasions when it could be made clear that conditions attach to something the GVN might need or want from us. For example, the Commander, 2d Air Division, is in position to inform his counterpart that VNAF A1H squadrons must meet certain performance standards before he could support a jet replacement program. Our Corps and Division Advisors are in a position to insure that Army Aviation support is withheld from operations which are ill conceived, inefficiently organized or launched without adequate intelligence. Other advisors could be empowered to make clear that requests for increases in personnel or equipment would not be forwarded, with favorable recommendation, to Saigon unless and until administrative overhead were cut to an acceptable figure. As an illustrative type sanction, in the military area, see Inclosure #3. While the level at which application of sanctions should be authorized needs careful consideration, the real point is that many echelons within the U.S. Mission could combine to implement a new look in U.S. assistance-an evident tightening of the screws, an establishment of preconditions for assistance.

6. As the foregoing makes clear, we should be cautious about raising the level of U.S. commitments until the new GVN has demon” strafed reasonable stability, determination and the ability. These qualities are not likely to be discernible for several weeks. Nonetheless, the following are preliminary thoughts on the suggested categories of widened aid which have direct military implications: a. Support for a Larger Military/Paramilitary/Police Structure (see Inclosure #4).

If there is a demonstrable requirement for more security forces, we must be prepared to support same.

b. Route 9 Development Project.

The staff has done a preliminary study of this grandiose concept. It is feasible from a construction standpoint but will require employment of a U.S. Corps, in addition to what our Asian allies can provide.

c. Token Jet Interceptor Force for VNAF.

You are up-to-date on our views as a result of the most recent briefing on this subject.

d. Joint Planning for External Operations (see Inclosure #5).

e. Improvement to the City and Port of Saigon.

The recommendations contained in the report of the Joint Strategic Construction Committee are believed to be the best approach to adopt.

W. C. Westmoreland
General, United States Army

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 84, Saigon Embassy Coordinator’s Files: FRC 68 A 5612, Council Meetings. Top Secret.

2 Not further identified.

3 None of the enclosures is printed.

392. Intelligence Study Prepared by Headquarters, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam 392. Intelligence Study Prepared by Headquarters, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam1

Saigon, October 31, 1964.

INFILTRATION STUDY

VIET CONG FORCES

REPUBLIC OF VIETNAM

Section I—General

1. Purpose

This study has been prepared to allow assessment of the extent of infiltration of personnel into the Republic of Vietnam (RVN) by the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRY) and to provide reference data for further research into the development of Viet Cong (VC) order of battle. It replaces the USMACV Infiltration Study, published on 20 Apr 642 which may be destroyed.

2. Scope

a. The data presented here were extracted, in the main, from interrogation of prisoner of war (IPW) reports of 187 VC who were captured or who defected in the RVN during the past five years. Of these 187 prisoners, 164 are actual infiltrators and have provided information on their own, and in many cases, several other infiltration groups. Prisoner information is considered to be generally valid and it constitutes the primary definitive source material upon which to base an assessment of VC infiltration. Captured documents have provided a limited amount of information concerning infiltration. Exceptionally, a large group of documents captured in the vicinity of Ca Lu, Quang Tri Province, in June 1960, provided the first substantial evidence of infiltration. These documents consisted of records of rations issued over an eight-month period to VC personnel infiltrating their way further South.

b. This study is comprised primarily of identifier data. These are: (1) Designations of infiltration groups, designations of the units to which the infiltration groups were assigned, designations of the units of the People’s Army of Vietnam (PAVN) which provided the personnel for infiltration. Researchers are advised that the PAVN unit(s) listed may not have been the only contributor(s) for a specific infiltration group. The PW, in some cases, knows only the unit in which he previously served. Further, reported PAVN units are listed whether or not they agree with current PAVN order of battle holdings.

(2) Time and place of pre-infiltration training.

(3) Time of infiltration.

(4) Infiltration route.

(5) Subsequent moves and assignments in the RVN.

(6) Key personalities.

(7) Source of information.

3. Background

a. In 1955, following the Geneva Agreements of 1954 which ended the French Indo-China War, Vietnam was partitioned at the 17th parallel. In accordance with those agreements, the opposing sides were required to relocate their military forces—to return them, so to speak, to their own side of the imaginary fence.

b. Although, according to French sources, the DRV did relocate some 100,000 persons, including some 40,000 military personnel of ethnic South and Central Vietnamese and Montagnard origin, it later become evident that, even while signing the agreements, the representatives and the government of the DRV had at no time considered abiding by the agreements. Several thousand political agitators and activists and at least three experienced rifle battalions were left in the south with orders to remain dormant.

c. In 1956, the US-backed president of the RVN—Ngo Dinh Diem—blocked the referendum called for by the Geneva Agreements which was to decide the form of government that would rule over a reunited Vietnam.

d. The Communists, who saw their hopes for a legal takeover of the whole country vanish by this maneuver, ordered their dormant “stay behinds” to commence propaganda activities to put pressure on the new and inexperienced government of the RVN. It is possible that the DRV even hoped to overthrow the government without having to resort to military activity.

e. In 1957, the renascent Communist propaganda teams started to back up their arguments with weapons and instituted a program of proselytizing RVN armed forces officers and men to the VC cause. During this same period the standard Communist tactic of infiltrating and subverting legal political parties in the RVN was undoubtedly going on.

f. In 1958 and 1959, the now “armed mission teams”, having achieved a degree of popular support in the rural areas through pressure, argument, terror and subversion, began, here and there, to organize guerrilla groups drawing on the local populace for personnel and instructing them in the manufacture and use of primitive weapons. The guerrilla teams, in turn, expanded the local campaigns of propaganda, terrorism and harassment to lend weight to the VC argument for national unity. The guerrilla teams were also tasked with the mission of reestablishing the former Viet Kinh (now called Viet Cong) secret bases located in almost inaccessible mountainous and jungle-covered areas in the RVN.

g. In 1959, several units were sent from the DRV into Laos to clear areas in Southern Laos, contiguous to the Vietnamese border, of various Laotian military elements. This was followed by the sending of elements of the 70th Transportation Group, PAVN, to establish relay stations connecting Southern DRV with the northern area of the RVN. To date this unit, directly subordinate to Hanoi, remains in control of the infiltration of both men and material from the DRV, through Laos, to the tri-border area of Laos, Thua Thien and Quang Nam Provinces in the RVN. Starting with some 400 men in 1959, it presently consists of some 2,000 men and porters responsible for about 20 “Communication/Liaison/Transport” stations along what the VC call the Main Corridor.

h. By February 1960 the Communists’ preliminary steps for a “War of Liberation” had been achieved and the stage was set for the infiltration of retrained veterans of the French Indo-China War and for increasing the ranks of the “stay behind” political activists—group 1, consisting of 400 men, departed the Xuan Mai Training Center near Hanoi on 20 Feb 60, destined for the newly established VC base area called Do Xa in the jungle covered fastness of Western Quang Ngai Province. This group eventually become the 70th Battalion which today continues to operate in Quang Tin Province. Group 1 was but the first of many similar groups that have followed the same jungle paths to the south to form or be integrated into various military, political, economic or agricultural units which comprise the covert apparatus—what the French termed the “parallel hierarchy”—which aims to gain control of the RVN.

i. In September 1960, the 3rd Congress of the Lao Dong (Workers’ or Communist) Party of the DRV openly announced the objective of “Liberating South Vietnam through a peoples revolutionary struggle.”

j. In late 1960, the DRV announced the formation of the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam (NFLSVN), an organ accurately described by its title of front—ostensibly to group all national, professional, political, student, and other groups to lead them toward the new era of liberty and freedom—Communist style. DRV Defense Minister Vo Nguyen Giap called for the “building of revolutionary armed forces” in the RVN to implement the policy of “people’s war—people’s army”.

k. Early in 1961, Hanoi announced the creation of the National Army for South Vietnam. Over 4,500 men already had been infiltrated into the RVN to form the nucleus of this army.

1. In 1961, the Viet Cong activated the Central Office, South Vietnam (COSVN) in Tay Ninh Province, RVN. COSVN is the supreme organ of the Lao Dong Party in the RVN and directs all VC activities in the RVN.

m. To date the DRV has continued to infiltrate military, political, propaganda, security, proselytizing, economic, financial and educational specialists into the RVN. Probably having exhausted the pool of veterans of the French Indo-China War, in 1964 the DRV started sending in young draftees of ethnic North Vietnamese origin. Information derived from IPW reports and documents indicate that over 34,000 men have thus far been infiltrated into the RVN. It is undoubtable that not all information concerning all infiltration groups and total numbers of men involved has or ever will become available to intelligence agencies. Depending on the year involved available information is estimated to be anywhere from 10% to 66% incomplete and averages about 30% for the period under consideration. Therefore the total could be as much as 45,000 for the period 1959 to date.

4. Formation and Training of Infiltration Groups

a. Through 1963, all the known military infiltrators consisted of veterans of the French Indo-China War who had served in the area now governed by the RVN. Many of these men, upon “regrouping” to the DRV, were conditionally discharged to work on various communal farm sites and in industry. Others were retained in active military units.

b. When the DRV infiltration program got into full swing in 1961, two major pre-infiltration centers were established near Hanoi—Xuan Mai and Son Tay, the home stations of the 338th and 330th Divisions (Brigades) respectively. Other centers were established at Gia Lam, Ha Dong, Vinh, Nghi Van, Hoa Binh, Vinh Linh, Xuan Than and in Hanoi. Other elements were responsible for conducting pre-infiltration training—such as the 304th, 325th, 350th and 380th Divisions and the 120th Independent Regiment.

c. A typical pre-1964 military infiltration group consists of men drawn from active duty units and/or re-called to active duty from the farms and work sites. They were directed to one of the training centers and formed into training groups. Toward the end of the normal three-month training cycle (shorter for political, economic and administrative specialists, longer for weapons specialists), the men were grouped into packets or units consisting primarily of former comrades in arms or of men from the same region in the RVN. The training cycle normally ends with a celebration attended by high ranking DRV military and civilian officials.

d. Normally, no furlough is permitted following pre-infiltration training and the infiltrators are forbidden to divulge the fact that they are destined to the RVN.

e. The group entrucks at its training center and travels via Route 1 to the vicinity to the Demilitarized Zone at the 17th parallel. Thence, in the majority of cases, further movement is by foot via Laos and the Main Corridor to the south.

f. Frequently, PWs report being members of the element conducting their pre-infiltration training. In some cases, this is true; in many cases, the man may have been a member of the unit during the French Indo-China War; but in the majority of cases, the man has had no active military duty for a number of years and has “adopted” the training unit’s designation as his own. This is particularly true of the draftees infiltrated in 1964, inasmuch as their only connection with PAVN has been as a training unit which, in their ignorance, they mistake for a regular army unit.

g. To date, there is no evidence that regular PAVN units have infiltrated the RVN. In all cases, men from a number of units are mixed with recalled veterans to form packets or draftees are formed into unit or replacement packets which will be cadred by veterans of the French Indo-China War either before infiltration or after arrival in the RVN.

5. Control of Infiltration

a. An agency known as the Unification Commissariat in the DRV, subordinate to the Central Committee of the Lao Dong Party, is reported by PWs to be directing the infiltration effort. A specific interest, supervision, and participation by the PAVN Joint General Staff and the Ministry of Defense is apparent.

b. The link between the DRV and northern RVN appears to remain under DRV control. A number of PWs have stated that this control extends from Quang Binh Province (DRV), through Laos to the tri-border area of Laos/Thua Thien and Quang Nam Provinces in the RVN. This stretch of the Main Corridor is organized and operated by the 70th Transportation Group, mentioned above. It is probable that none of the relay stations are located within RVN territory until the route reaches Southern Thua Thien or Northern Quang Nam Provinces.

c. From Quang Nam Province to the south, responsibility for the infiltration corridor comes under the jurisdiction of COSVN, with Headquarters Military Region 5 (MR 5) exercising primary control in the northern half of the country through its Transportation/Communication/Liaison Section. The functions of this section are as follows: (1) To maintain operational control of the infiltration of both personnel and supplies via the Main Corridor which generally follows the international border of the RVN with Laos and Cambodia and via the so-called Ho Chi Minh Trail which parallels the Main Corridor some 100 kilometers to the east and runs along a series of ridges to the vicinity of War Zone D in Phnoc Thanh Province.

(2) To study measures and prepare plans for the control of communications (travel) in accordance with the situation existing in each province.

(3) To establish new routes and/or close old routes in accordance with the tactical situation and the terrain.

(4) To develop procedures for issuing movement papers, to include a system of code signs, so as to minimize the chance of their being counterfeited.

(5) To keep abreast of the status of personnel and supplies that are due in from the north.

(6) To be familiar with passwords and cover designations of agencies and provinces of other Military Regions so as to avoid mistakes in the shipment of materials.

d. This control by MR 5 concerns only the Main Corridor and the Ho Chi Minh Trail, the two major North-South routes leading from the DRV. Other North-South routes and East-West feeder routes are the responsibility of the various provinces; however, the systems of control and relay stations are similar if not duplicated.

6. Organization of the Main Corridor

a. Since the beginning of 1963 the Main Corridor has been used exclusively by all infiltration groups and it is conceivable that the Ho Chi Minh Trail has been abandoned in whole or in part.

b. The Main Corridor handles two different types of movements—personnel and material (including correspondence), and is organized to handle each by different methods.

c. Infiltration of Personnel. (1) The system to handle personnel requires relatively few men. In essence, the system comprises a series of liaison or relay stations each manned by three to seven men. The stations are a day’s march apart, anywhere from 6 or 7 to 20 to 22 kilometers depending on the terrain and tactical situation.

(2) The major duties of these stations are to guide the infiltration groups from north to south. To maximize security, the guides are kept ignorant of the location of the two adjacent stations. The guides meet the incoming group about half-way between stations around mid-day. They verify the credentials of the group and then lead it to the vicinity of their station.

(3) Current security regulations stipulate that: (a) The infiltration group will bivouac no nearer than 300 meters to the relay station and preferably 1000 meters away.

(b) Only the leader of the group, if anyone, is allowed to enter the station area proper. There the credentials are checked again and the rations (rice) are drawn for the group.

(c) The members of the group are allowed to move about within a limited area to obtain firewood and drinking water.

(d) No noise is permitted and cooking fires are allowed only after sunset.

(e) During movement members will not make noise, contact local inhabitants, or walk in disorderly groups.

(f) Passive anti-aircraft defense calls for infiltrators to “freeze” if low-flying aircraft fly over head.

(4) Road crossings are conducted by special teams. (a) The group stops about 100 meters from the road—no smoking or talking is permitted.

(b) The members cross the road on special cloths rayed on the road to prevent foot prints.

(c) The group re-assembles 100 meters beyond the road and continues movement.

(5) River and bridge crossings are similar to road crossings.

(6) The guide conducts the group about half-way to the next station where a new guide will be waiting.

d. Infiltration of material (including correspondence). (1) The system to handle the movement of material requires a relatively large number of personnel, particularly coolies—about 400 to 600 men for every ten stations.

(2) The number of transport stations is approximately double that of the relay stations and they are located about one half-day’s march apart. This allows the coolies to haul the material to the next station and return to their home station within a working day.

(3) Material and correspondence is picked up or delivered at main stations along the Main Corridor by coolies under the control of the province within whose boundaries is located the recipient or sender. The Main Corridor teams are then responsible for movement between Main Stations.

f. [sic] Identified Transport Units (Military Region 5). (1) The 72nd Transport Group infiltrated to the Quang Nam/Quang Tin area in Jan 63 to augment a previously existing but unsuspected transport organization operating in that area.

(2) The Binh Son Group consists of approximately 1000 men responsible for 10 transport stations in Quang Nam.

(3) The Nam Son Group consists of approximately 700 men responsible for 9 transport stations in Quang Tin.

(4) The Tay Son Group consists of a probable, but unconfirmed 1000–1200 men responsible for an unknown number of transport stations in Kontum.

(5) Four elements identified as CO 2, CO 7, CO 8 and CO 9 are responsible for transportation in Pleiku Province.

7. Transport Elements South of Military Region 5

a. A 270th Company, which possibly is a transport security unit, is confirmed in the Quang Duc/Phnoc Long area.

b. A 280th Company, which also possibly is a transport security unit, is confirmed in the Phuoc Long/Phuoc Thanh area.

8. Summary of Infiltration

a. During the period 1959–1960 some 4500 infiltrators have been reported coming into the RVN. Available information fails to reveal the destination of the majority or the type of personnel involved. The first infiltrated major military unit (Group t) came in during early 1960 and is still active as a unit under the designation 70th Battalion subordinate to the Quang Tin Provincial Commissariat in Military Region 5. Commencing in 1959 and through 1960 the 70th Transportation Group organized and established the Main Corridor in Laos linking the DRV with the RVN. Probably the bulk of the infiltrators were destined to augment the nucleus of administrative, propaganda and logistical elements who had remained in the RVN after the French Indo-China War.

b. During 1961, some 5400 men are reported as having come in to the RVN. The bulk of these (5300) were retrained military personnel of South Vietnamese origin and were destined primarily for the northern half of the RVN (Military Regions 5, 6 and 7). Most of these groups went into the formation of main force battalions and regimental support companies.

c. During 1962, some 13,000 men are reported as having infiltrated. As in 1961, the overwhelming majority of these men were retrained veterans of the French Indo-China War of South Vietnamese origin. Almost 9,000 of these men were equally divided between Military Regions 5 and 7; almost 2,000 were sent to Military Region 8; over 1,000 went to Military Region 6. As in 1961, most of these men were used to form main force battalions and a few companies.

d. During 1963, the numbers of infiltrators dropped substantially—to about 6,200 as compared to 1962. Of these, almost 4,600 went to Military Region 5 and were used primarily to form combat support elements for existing rifle battalions—both main force and local. Of the total, some 580 were reported in civilian groups which included various specialists to augment the VC financial and economic effort following the cessation of such support by the DRV in June 1963. It became evident that the DRV was reaching the end of its available pool of veterans of the French Indo-China War—many of the PWs were, and reported other infiltrators to be, in their late 30s and early 40s.

e. During 1964, to date, about 75% of reported Infiltrators have consisted of young draftees of native North Vietnamese origin. As in previous years, of the 4,700 men reported to have infiltrated by August, over 400 have been destined to Military Region 5 to form new main force battalions to replace experienced main force battalions which have been transferred to local (provincial) control.

f. Over the period 1959 to date, reported infiltrators number slightly over 34,000 men. Of these, some 31,500 have been military personnel. Almost 50% of these (16,000) were destined for Military Region 5; approximately 20% (6,100) for Military Region 7; and the remainder were assigned to Military Regions 6, 8 and 9 in that order. The destination and assignment of over 7,000 men remains unknown.

9. Estimate of Transport/Communications/Liaison System

a. Although only portions of the system have been reliably reported and identified, the systems of relay and transport stations can be fairly well visualized as far South as Tay Ninh Province to consist of over 100 stations employing up to 6,000 men for the transport and protection of goods and the guiding of infiltration groups.

b. South of Tay Ninh Province, available information permits only a guess that the system extends as far as the tip of the Ca Mau Peninsula and the U Minh War Zone. If such is the case, the total system could well number in the vicinity of 10,000 men.

10. Conclusions

a. The indicated infiltration of over 34,000 men since 1959 demonstrates the existence of a well-planned and coordinated effort on the part of the DRV to subject the RVN to covert military invasion.

b. The existence of a well organized and functioning transport/infiltration system, the full extent of which is only beginning to be realized, will lead to a new estimate of VC logistical capabilities.

c. Although the amount of material being infiltrated remains an unknown factor, the system is limited only by the amount of goods available and the men to carry them. The Battle of Dien Bien Phu demonstrated that the VC are capable of man packing even heavy artillery pieces through unprepared jungle-covered mountainous terrain. This permits the estimate that the present organized system is well-capable of logistically supporting the VC main and local forces in heavy weapons and in ammunition.

d. It is estimated that the DRV will continue to support the VC through the infiltration of cadre, political and financial specialists and in surplus man power.

e. There is no evidence to date to indicate that regular PAVN units have infiltrated into the RVN.

1 Source: National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files. Confidential. A covering memorandum, dated October 31; a table of contents; and Sections II–VII, which give specifics on statistics, infiltration groups, sources, personalities, designations, and a map of the infiltration routes are not printed.

2 Not found

XII. Proceedings of the NSC Working Group on Vietnam, November 1–December 7XII. Proceedings of the NSC Working Group on Vietnam, November 1–December 7

393. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 1, 1964—10:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, JCS, the Secretary of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 10:07 p.m., October 31.

394. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 1, 1964—4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, JCS, the Secretary of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Johnson and Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 3:23 a.m., November 1.

395. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Washington, November 1, 1964—4:19 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, 381 Vietnam. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to COMUSMACV, Saigon, CIA, the White House, and the Department of State. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, p. 587.

396. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, November 1, 1964—6:28 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared with Rusk, McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC and the Department of Defense.

397. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, November 1, 1964—6:29 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, 1964 Files. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by William Bundy and approved by Rusk.

398. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 2, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 6:07 a.m.

399. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)

Washington, November 2, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXI, Cables. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Wheeler. Repeated to the White House and the Department of State.

400. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, November 2, 1964—7:20 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXI, Cables. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared by McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Ball. Repeated to CINCPAC.

401. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Office of the Secretary of Defense

Saigon, November 3, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to the Secretary of State, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 590–591

402. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Honolulu, November 3, 1964—5:53 p.m.

Source, Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 12009. Top Secret; Limdis. Repeated to COMUSMACV, four other Pacific commands, and readdressed to the White House and Department of State on November 4.

403. Editorial Note

404. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 6, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Kuala Lumpur, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Bangkok, London, Paris, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 10:53 a.m.

405. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 6, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, Vientiane, Bangkok, and CINCPAC. Received at 2:06 p.m.

406. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 6, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, JCS, Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

407. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, November 8, 1964—1:15 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Bundy and Forrestal and cleared in substance with Rusk.

408. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 9, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1–1 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

409. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 10, 1964—1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

410. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 14, 1964—10 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 10 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Also published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 000533.

411. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, November 14, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. IV JCS. Top Secret.

412. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, November 16, 1964.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA (Admin) Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret; Personal. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 632–633. Rostow sent a similar, but more extensive memorandum to Rusk on November 23. For text, see ibid., pp. 645–647.

413. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President

Saigon, November 17, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1536 from Saigon, which is the source text. According to another copy of telegram 1536, it was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 6:21 p.m.

414. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, November 17, 1964—6:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17–5 US–VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared with William Bundy and the White House, and initialed by Rusk.

415. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 18, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 10:10 a.m.

416. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Ehrlich) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)

Washington, November 18, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Courses of Action in Southeast Asia, Book One. Top Secret.

417. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, White House

Washington, November 19, 1964, 12:30 p.m.

Source: Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia—Vietnam, 1964 General. Top Secret. Drafted by Thomson on November 24. According to an agenda and list of participants, in addition to those mentioned in this memorandum, Humphrey, McCone, Vance, Ball, and Bromley Smith were present at the meeting. (Johnson Library National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Misc Mtgs, Vol. 1)

418. Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Working Group

Washington, November 21, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Master Files, Late Nov 1964. Top Secret. Drafted by William Bundy and McNaughton. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 656–666. The first draft of this summary, prepared on November 17 by Bundy (not found), was revised following the November 19 meeting (see supra) and dated November 21. No copy of the full text of the November 21 draft has been found, but the text printed here is the same as that draft except for changes on seven pages, made on November 26. (Memorandum from Bundy to the NSC Working Group; ibid., Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1) These changes are indicated in footnotes below and were made as a result of the discussion at the Working Group meeting on November 24 (see Document 424).

419. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)

Honolulu, November 22, 1964—7:25 p.m.

Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 12009. Top Secret.

420. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)

Washington, November 23, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive.

421. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President

Saigon, November 24, 1964—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1630 from Saigon, which is the source text.

422. Letter From the Deputy Ambassador in Vietnam (Johnson) to the Secretary of State

Saigon, November 24, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Correspondence—J. No classification marking. The source text is handwritten.

423. Memorandum From the Chairman of the National Security Council Working Group (Bundy) to the Secretary of State

Washington, November 24, 1964.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Also sent to McNamara, McCone, Wheeler, Ball, and McGeorge Bundy. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 646–650. McGeorge Bundy’s copy of this memorandum bears his handwritten notes reflecting the discussion of these issues at the meeting at 5 p.m. on November 24. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Courses of Action in SEA) For a record of the meeting, see Document 424.

424. Memorandum of the Meeting of the Executive Committee

Washington, November 24, 1964, 5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by William Bundy on November 25. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 000555. Bundy’s handwritten notes on the meeting show that items I C and E, IV C, and V A provoked the most discussion. (Department of State, Bundy Files Master Papers, Late Nov 1964)

425. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, November 25, 1964—11 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Taylor on November 24. Repeated to CINCPAC.

426. Paper Prepared by the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)

Saigon, undated.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–157–69. Top Secret. The source text is initialed by Taylor and bears his notation: “Papers used in Washington during Dec 64 trip.” Printed also in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 666–673 and published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 000557.

427. Editorial Note

428. Memorandum of the Meeting of the Executive Committee

Washington, November 27, 1964, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by William Bundy. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 674–676. Bundy’s handwritten notes on this meeting are in Department of State, Bundy Files, Master Papers, Late Nov 1964. He also describes it in some detail in his manuscript, Chapter 19, pp. 5–8. (Ibid.) Taylor notes that the meeting began at 9:30 a.m. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69), but this is inconsistent with Rusk’s Appointment Book and Bundy’s Manuscript which give 11:30 and late morning, respectively, as the time of the meeting.

429. Paper Prepared by the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor)

Washington, November 27, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII, Memos. Secret. Attached to a note from the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State, dated November 27, which stated that the questions were circulated for consideration by the members of the Executive Committee.

430. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (Cline) to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)

Washington, November 27, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File. Vietnam Country File. Vol. XXII. Memos. Top Secret.

431. Editorial Note

432. Notes on a Meeting, White House

Washington, December 1, 1964, 11:30 a.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, 12–1–64. Top Secret. The source text is handwritten notes taken by McNaughton. A similar but shorter set of handwritten notes, taken by William Bundy, is in Department of State, Bundy Files, Master Papers, Late Nov 1964. The meeting is also described in Bundy’s manuscript, Chap. 19, pp. 13–17. (Ibid.) The President had met with Rusk, McNamara, and William Bundy at 10:30 a.m. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary)

433. Paper Prepared by the Executive Committee

Washington, December 2, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 130B. The Executive Committee met at 4:30 p.m. on December 2 to revise the previous draft of this paper (see Document 431) in light of the discussion with the President on December 1. It was approved by the President on December 3 (see Document 434) and formally transmitted to Rusk, McNamara, and McCone as Tab 1 to Document 440.

434. Editorial Note

435. Instructions From the President to the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor)

Washington, December 3, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. The instructions were approved by the President on December 3 (see Document 434) and formally transmitted to Rusk, McNamara, and McCone as Tab 2 to Document 440.

436. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 3, 1964—6:51 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Vietnam Negotiating Files: Lot 69 D 412, Seaborn. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared with William Bundy and McNaughton. Also sent to Ottawa. Also printed in George C. Herring, ed., The Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War: The Negotiating Volumes of the Pentagon Papers (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1983), p. 37.

437. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom

Washington, December 4, 1964—10:18 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and initialed by Ball. Also sent to Canberra and Wellington.

438. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President

Washington, December 5, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Secret.

439. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 7, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Johnson and cleared with Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 9:18 a.m.

440. Memorandum From the President to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense (McNamara), and the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)

Washington, December 7, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 1 30B.

393. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 393. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 1, 1964—10:30 a.m.

1357. VC attack on Bien Hoa2 is a deliberate act of escalation and a change of the ground rules under which they have operated up to now. It should be met promptly by an appropriate act of reprisal against DRV target, preferably an airfield. Since both US and GVN have been victims of this attack and since ultimate objective should be convince Hanoi to cease aid to VC (and not merely to lay off US), the retaliatory action should be made by a combined US/VNAF effort. Immediate objective would be to reduce probability of similar attacks on other crowded US facilities such as Danang and Tan Son Nhut and to offset the depressive effect of this action on the new government to which this attack is an affront on its national day.

We are considering targets to recommend. Phuc Yen is clearly the most attractive but we are looking at lesser alternatives. Attack should be launched preferably within 24 hours, at latest within 48 hours.

I request authority to contact Huong and Khanh to get agreement on principle of combined reprisal.

See no need now for further statement in Washington beyond MACV No. 1, 1 Nov to NMCC.3 Also we should not move dependents at this time or take any overt action which might suggest this intention.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, JCS, the Secretary of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 10:07 p.m., October 31.

2 Shortly after midnight, October 31, Bien Hoa airfield came under a mortar attack which killed 4 U.S. servicemen, wounded 30, and destroyed or damaged 27 aircraft.

3 This cable transmitted the text of a brief statement given by Westmoreland on the attack at Bien Hoa. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319. HQDA Message Center, Reel 12011)

394. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 394. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 1, 1964—4 p.m.

1360. Embtel 1357, Deptel 976.2 Following is Embassy/MACV message:

1. We believe following principles should be applied in our retaliatory action: A. Tit should be as close to tat as possible.

B. Action should be mounted from SVN.

C. GVN should participate with U.S.

2. Tit for tat principle clearly indicates Phuc Yen airfield outside of Hanoi. However, presence of MIG’s and heavy flak defense does not permit VNAF participation. Unless Phuc Yen is hit at the same time or before any other target in NVN, any aircraft now on Phuc Yen will in all probability be dispersed to several fields complicating the problem of subsequently locating and destroying them. Next most suitable and productive target is Vit Thu Lu barracks (target 36)3 followed by other two targets in same general area—Chap Le barracks (target 39) and Xom Bang ammunition depot (target 64). Advantage of these targets is that they are individually within VNAF capabilities with or without U.S. participation. According to our intelligence, Vit Thu Lu appears to be especially and closely related to infiltration.

3. Thus the combination of maximum effect would be U.S. strike against Phuc Yen (70 sorties) with simultaneous U.S./VNAF strikes against Vit Thu Lu (about 40 sorties) and targets 39 (about 45 sorties) and 64 (about 50 sorties). If attack on Phuc Yen is not approved at this time, I recommend U.S./VNAF strike on Vit Thu Lu and would like to see targets 39 and 64 included.

4. If a favorable decision on striking Phuc Yen is reached at your noon meeting November 1, attack can be made at first light November 3 Saigon time. Vit Thu Lu and targets 39 and 64 require 24 hours between decision and strike to permit adequate VNAF pilot briefing. Foregoing assumes all U.S. strikes to be made by Second Air Division.

5. I strongly urge that any strikes approved be viewed as the inauguration of a new policy of tit for tat reprisals in retaliation for major Viet Cong depredations. I recommend that, immediately following completion of strikes, U.S. and GVN jointly announce that such retaliation will henceforth be the rule, making our statement broad enough to cover major acts of sabotage, terrorism, destruction of industrial facilities, and the interruption of arterial rail and highway communications.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, JCS, the Secretary of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Johnson and Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 3:23 a.m., November 1.

2 Telegram 1357 is supra; telegram 976, October 31, reported that the whole situation and Taylor’s recommendations would be considered at a meeting at the highest level at noon on November 1. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 Reference is to item 36 on the 94-target study list, August 24; see footnote 7, Document 331.

395. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 395. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Washington, November 1, 1964—4:19 p.m.

1451. Personal for Admiral Sharp, General Westmoreland and Ambassador Taylor from CJCS.

1. Highest level meeting to discuss courses of action related to Bien Hoa attack tentatively scheduled for 1300 hours Washington time 2 November.

2. At preliminary meeting same subject this date,2 concern was expressed that proposed US retaliatory/punitive actions could trigger North Vietnamese/ChiCom air and ground retaliatory acts. Highest authority desires to consider in conjunction with US military actions, increased security measures and precautionary moves of US air and ground units to protect US dependents, units and installations against North Vietnamese/ChiCom retaliation.

3. JCS are considering the following in connection with proposed US punitive actions against the DRV:3 a. Outshipment of US dependents prior to or simultaneous with initiation of US air strikes.

b. Movement of SLF afloat to Da Nang airbase and two Army or Marine battalions by air to Saigon area to provide local security to US personnel and installations.

c. Movement one Marine Hawk battalion from 29 Palms, California to SVN.

d. Movement of [or?] augmentation land-based and carrier-based air required to optimize execution of course of action IA CINCPAC Frag Order 3.4

e. Forward movement from CONUS or within PACOM of around, sea, and air units to WESTPAC and alert of additional units in CONUS as might be required to implement appropriate portions of CINCPAC OPLAN 32–64 and/or CINCPAC OPLAN 39–65.5

4. In addition to above, JCS are considering military utility of employing US aircraft in South Vietnam in country to augment VNAF and Farmgate.

5. Request comments of addressees ASAP.6

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, 381 Vietnam. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to COMUSMACV, Saigon, CIA, the White House, and the Department of State. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, p. 587.

2 The meeting took place at the White House at approximately 12:30 p.m. with the President, Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge and William Bundy, and Ball in attendance. (Johnson Library, Johnson Daily Diary and Rusk Appointment Book) No record of the meeting has been found.

3 On November 1, presumably before the meeting at the White House, the loins Chiefs of Staff made oral recommendations to McNamara concerning the response to Bien Hoa. They felt that Taylor’s “tit-for-tat” was unduly restrictive and limited U.S. initiative, nor did they espouse joint action with South Vietnam. They proposed instead a series of specific actions to be taken in the next 3 days which included air strikes, landing of U.S. forces, and evacuation of dependents. These recommendations were formalized in JCSM–933–64, November 4. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 69 A 7425, 381 Vietnam)

4 Transmitted in CINCPAC telegram 280210Z, October 28, CINCPAC Frag Order No. 3, “Punitive and Crippling Reprisal Actions on Targets in North Vietnam,” provided a list of responses in the event that the DeSoto patrol was attacked. Option IA listed airfields, POL, and port facilities to be attacked on the first day. (Department of State, Vietnam Working Group Files: Lot 72 D 219, DeSoto September)

5 Copies of CINCPAC Operations Plan 32–64, November 6, 1963, entitled “Defense of Mainland Southeast Asia,” and CINCPAC Operations Plan 39–65, September 5, which dealt with responses to Chinese aggression, were attached to Document 411.

6 Sharp replied in telegram 020400Z, November 2, concurring in items 3c-e and 4, noting that the action in item 3b had been started, and deferring comment on 3a to COMUSMACV and the Embassy in Saigon. Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol XXI, Cables)

396. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 396. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, November 1, 1964—6:28 p.m.

978. Saigon for MACV. State-Defense Message.

1. We have weighed carefully your recommendations Embtels 1357 and 1360,2 and supporting messages MACV 010359Z and CINCPAC 010501Z.3 There is no doubt here that this event adds considerably to cumulative factors pointing toward much harder policy in near future. At same time, we would find it hard to portray attack as major act of escalation in itself, since it differs only in degree and extent of damage from such previous incidents as Card sinking4 and recurrent attacks on US personnel and equipment playing military roles. We have also been reluctant give any appearance reacting only when US personnel affected.

2. In addition above reasons arguing against one-shot retaliatory treatment, all of us here, including JCS, are negative on a tit-for-tat policy as basis for real action against the North. Not only is it hard to define such a policy, but all our studies and war games have indicated that in the end it conveys a weak signal to Hanoi and also has maximum disadvantages in wider international sphere.

3. Accordingly we come back to basic point that attack does bring measurably nearer point of decision on systematic wider actions against North. We here are seeking convey to press and public that we take incident seriously but that it must be seen in wider context.

4. At same time we recognize morale and other factors arguing for some early action. In this connection we now need your reading of how upset GVN and key leaders are by attack. As possible early actions that would have right signal level to North, keep up morale, and with gains outweighing disadvantages. we are considering and need your comment on following: a. Releasing US aircraft as such for action against VC. This has disadvantages assuming explicit US combat role for first time and over time involving us in civilian attacks through error that could be adverse psychologically. On other hand, it could add materially your capabilities.

b. Sending in security battalions for Bien Hoa, Da Nang, and Nha Trang, or as you and MACV might recommend. This could have desirable appearance securing decks for action. On other hand we not clear how much it would really add to security or whether GVN would welcome and cooperate. Obviously it tends add to our casualties and general exposure.

5. Beyond such action, we need your recommendations, in conjunction with MACV, of preliminary or preparatory actions to secure SVN base and protection US personnel that would be required in conjunction with possible decision for wider action. This involves such factors as air defense key installations (especially Da Nang) against possible air strikes, handling of VC reactions of any character throughout SVN, and of course ground deployments to deter action in North. As you know planning has always included these factors, but we need your current judgment in light changes in overall situation and growing VC capabilities as to all measures we should now include in our planning. JCS covering same point in separate cable to MACV.5

6. There will be further high level meetings tomorrow and we would appreciate interim reply on above points for use that meeting.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared with Rusk, McNamara, and McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC and the Department of Defense.

2 Documents 393 and 394.

3 The former strongly endorsed Taylor’s recommendation, and the latter stressed that early action must be taken in retaliation for Bien Hoa and transmitted a list of targets which should be attacked. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

4 The Card, which was being used as a helicopter and aircraft ferry, was sunk in Saigon harbor on May 2.

5 Document 395.

397. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 397. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, November 1, 1964—6:29 p.m.

979. Literally eyes only Ambassador from Secretary. I want to assure you that reactions reported our longer telegram2 reflect most careful possible weighing your arguments for immediate retaliation. In this one case we are inevitably affected by election timing. Quick retaliation could easily be attacked as election device here, and this would play back to Hanoi and greatly weaken intended signal. More basically, we believe such action would in practice commit us to some form of tit-for-tat policy that could only be effective if leading rapidly to more systematic campaign of military pressures on north with all implications we have always seen in this course of action. Such a decision is not one to be lightly taken nor is it wise or perhaps even proper for administration to take it in closing two days of campaign while awaiting firm mandate from people.

I want to leave you in no doubt that highest levels feel we are reaching point where policy hardening must be acutely considered. We had been pointing to your return about mid-November to look at whole problem and possible decisions, and this attack may accelerate timing particularly if there should be additional VC moves. At same time, desirability of getting GVN fully appointed and firmly established continues to point to original schedule. We will need to keep in close touch on this and will welcome your views at any time.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, 1964 Files. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by William Bundy and approved by Rusk.

2 Document 396.

398. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 398. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 2, 1964—5 p.m.

1368. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 978.2 From Saigon end of line, the Bien Hoa attack looks quite different from the view set forth in reftel. It was unique as an attack directed specifically against US units and equipment under circumstances unrelated to the day-to-day operations in which our forces take their losses incidental to the discharge of the advisory functions within GVN units. It resembled more the Bay of Tonkin incidents with the exception (1) that the enemy were the VC (whom we hold to be the agents of the NVN) rather than the NVN themselves; (2) the event took place on land rather than on sea; and (3) US forces sustained losses and the enemy escaped unscathed. Finally, it demonstrated a new tactic, the employment of surprise attack by massed mortar fire, with such success that the US B–57 capability in this country was knocked out in about 15 minutes. Hence, we cannot view it as a VC aggression which is merely an improved version of similar past conduct. It is clear that Hanoi also views this as something special and expects something from us.

So much for the Saigon point of view.

I gather that, seen from Washington, the problem is to (1) keep up local morale; (2) get some signal to Hanoi, and (3) review preliminary and preparatory military actions. On the first point, with Saigon leaders beset by the problems of forming a government and with a double holiday with few newspapers published, public reaction has been minimal. Khanh took off for Dalat yesterday after making a press release which understates the actual damage suffered at Bien Hoa. Had he been particularly exercised, he would have contacted me on the subject—which he did not. For the moment, I believe no action needs to be considered purely for impact on local morale. However, if there is no US reaction. our prestige is going to sag both with friend and enemy.

With regard to a signal to the North, I could make no suggestion without knowing what thought we wish to convey at this time. I see no overall advantage either for morale or signalling purposes in releasing US aircraft for action against VC. We are missing few, if any, lucrative targets now with our present VNAF/Farmgate force and, by December, the number of operationally available VNAF aircraft will be roughly double the present number by virtue of completion of training of the last of the four A1H squadrons. Meanwhile, the disadvantages cited in pare 4a reftel always with us.

To place US battalions at such places as Bien Hoa, Da Nang and Nha Trang is likely to convey message that US intends to continue to limit its actions to SVN and to defensive measures—a note I hope we will not strike. I am not sure what effect the presence of such US units would have on SVN. I am sure that our troops would regard static security mission as pretty inglorious business. On balance, I would recommend against this measure under the circumstances presently in mind. My opinion might be different if we were embarked on an escalating program of pressures against DRV.

My views on preliminary and preparatory military actions are contained in pare 6 MAC 129623 which is just being dispatched.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 6:07 a.m.

2 Document 396.

3 Apparently an incorrect reference since MAC 12962 contains only two numbered paragraphs. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXI)

399. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) 399. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp)1

Washington, November 2, 1964—7 p.m.

1470. 1. At high level meeting today2 considering possible US courses of action in Southeast Asia, thought was expressed that appropriate response to Bien Hoa attack is in order but such response need not be immediate. However, another similar VC attack would require immediate action by US forces possibly on the order of 1B of CINCPAC Frag Order 3.3 Request that you ensure readiness of your forces to mount such an operation expeditiously.

2. FYI. Concern was voiced as to adequacy of security measures around air bases and other sensitive US installations. CJCS asserted that COMUSMACV has undertaken with South Vietnamese military authorities upgrading of security to extent practicable.

3. Possibility of reducing congestion on South Vietnamese airfields by relocating certain units to airfields in Thailand was discussed informally. The view was expressed that removal of part of US air elements to Thailand might occasion reactions unfavorable to us in both North Vietnam and South Vietnam. Request your comment.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXI, Cables. Top Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Drafted by Wheeler. Repeated to the White House and the Department of State.

2 The meeting took place at 1 p.m. at the White House and was attended by the President, Rusk, McNamara, McGeorge and William Bundy, and Ball. (Ibid., Johnson Daily Diary and Rusk Appointment Book) For another brief account, see infra.

3 See footnote 4, Document 395. Action 1B provided a secondary list of barracks, ports, and supply depots in North Vietnam for first day strikes.

400. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 400. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, November 2, 1964—7:20 p.m.

988. Saigon for MACV.

1. High-level meeting today reaffirmed general positions stated Deptel 9782 Initiated intensive planning operation here looking to earliest possible preparation for later decision of comprehensive scenario for wider action taking account of current circumstances and interim actions required avoid any impression USG determination changing. JCS, CIA, Defense and State will be calling for additional inputs as required. Aim is to have analysis of alternatives and relevant scenarios ready soonest.

2. While we still inclined against immediate response related solely Bien Hoa attack, we consider possibilities substantial that Hanoi may be embarking on series provocative actions to test our intentions in what they believe may be period USG uncertainty. Assume you are taking all possible measures particularly for security US airfields and other installations. If other incidents occur we would expect immediately to reopen question of quick related response.

Rusk

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXI, Cables. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared by McGeorge Bundy, and approved by Ball. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 396.

401. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Office of the Secretary of Defense 401. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Office of the Secretary of Defense1

Saigon, November 3, 1964—8 p.m.

251. CINCPAC for POLAD. Ref. DEF 1342.2 In compliance with request of DOD, I submit the following personal comments to JCSM 902–64 dated October 27, 1964.3 SNIE-53–2–644 is not available in Saigon and hence has not influenced my views. I assume that a political/psychological scenario is being prepared to support the military actions considered in the JCS study.

As indicated in Embtel 4655 and elsewhere, I am in complete agreement with the thesis that the deteriorating situation in SVN requires the application of measured military pressures on DRV to induce that government to cease to provide support to VC and to use its authority to cause VC to cease or at least to moderate their depredations. The evidence of increased infiltration cited in Embtel 11356 is one cogent reason for prompt and effective action. The Bien Hoa incident of November 1, 1964 poses an even more pressing requirement for action under the retaliatory principle confirmed in NSAM-314.7

Embtel 13578 contains the response to the Bien Hoa action which Embassy-MACV recommended. In effect, this recommendation is for retaliation bombing attacks on selected DRV targets by combined US/VNAF air forces and for a policy statement that we will act similarly in like cases in the future. If this recommendation is not accepted, I would favor intensifying 34–A operations and initiating air operations against selected targets as an interim substitute for more positive measures.

With regard to the JCS recommendations for the first five courses of action of Appendix A, they are all being implemented now but implementation has been weak in direct proportion to the ineffectiveness of the local government. This situation is not likely to change for the better in time to effect the situation in the short term. The new government in its likely composition appears to have potentialities for improvement but it will be composed largely of men without governmental experience who will have to learn their trade on the job. It will take three to four months under favorable circumstances to get it functioning well.

Item 6 is new and I would have trouble in justifying it. It amounts to a departure for no clear gain from the principle that the Vietnamese fight their own war in SVN. Added air strength in-country is not going to have a significant effect on the outcome of the counterinsurgency campaign.

Under Appendix B, I see no advantage in resuming DeSoto patrols except for essential intelligence purposes. If we are seeking an excuse for action, it is to our interest to strike Hanoi for its malefactions in SVN and not for actions in the Bay of Tonkin against the US Navy. We need to tie our actions to Hanoi support of the VC, not to the defense of purely US interests. Hence, the excuse for our actions should ideally grow out of events in SVN and Laos. Such events are available for our exploitation now in the form of infiltration activities in Laotian corridor and the DRV, the Bien Hoa incident and the increasing sabotage by the VC of the Saigon-Danang RY. With these provocations already at our disposal, there is no need to seek others in the Tonkin Gulf where the second incident developed in such a way as to reduce our ability to use subsequent episodes as a credible basis for action.

Similarly, I see nothing but disadvantage in further stirring up the Cambodian border by implementing hot pursuit. We don’t often catch the fleeing VC in the heart of SVN; I see little likelihood of doing better in Cambodia. Sihanouk does not have much in the way of ground forces but a few counter-incursions from his side could be very awkward in requiring the diversion of further ARVN to cover the frontier. We are presently short of trained SVN manpower and need to conserve it for essential purposes. The present unfriendly frontier is much preferable to one actively hostile.

With regard to low level reconnaissance probes, they are not needed as signals of intention if, as I hope, we launch forth on a bombing program, overt or covert, against the North. In the latter case, low level recce should be flown only to meet bona fide intelligence needs.

Actions 7, 8, and 10 I tend to view as a package for concurrent implementation. In the aggregate, these actions constitute an attack on a coherent target system all of which may need to be progressively destroyed if infiltration is to be checked. It is another road to reach Hanoi which should be traveled in parallel with the one which arrives by way of reprisal bombing. At some point, both would probably merge into a single pressure vector on the DRV.

As a final word, it is well to remind ourselves that “too much” in this matter of coercing Hanoi may be as bad as “too little”. At some point, we will need a relatively cooperative leadership in Hanoi willing to wind up the VC insurgency on terms satisfactory to us and our SVN allies. What we don’t want is an expanded war in SEA and an unresolved guerrilla problem in SVN.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to the Secretary of State, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 590–591

2 See footnote 5, Document 388.

3 Document 388.

4 Document 368.

5 Document 319.

6 Telegram 1135, October 14, reported that MACV J–2 had evaluated evidence which estimated infiltration at 5,000 men for the first half of 1964. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

7 Document 345.

8 Document 393.

402. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 402. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Honolulu, November 3, 1964—5:53 p.m.

040353Z. A. JCS 001470 DTG 022200Z, B. State 978 to Saigon.2

1. A basic consideration in formulating a reply to RSS [refs] is an evaluation of the significance of the Viet Cong attack on Bien Hoa. I question the evaluation expressed in pare 1 of Ref B. The VC have had the capability to strike at Bien Hoa for some time. They have the capability to make a similar attack on Danang and probably Tan Son Nhut. There are other major U.S. targets in South Vietnam which are at least as vulnerable to attack as Bien Hoa. For example, the Starcomm facility near Saigon is extremely vulnerable to mortar attack and its loss would disrupt our communications in Southeast Asia. Viet Cong have not attacked a major U.S. installation prior to this because they were fearful of U.S. retaliation. There is ample evidence to indicate that they expected retaliation for the Bien Hoa attack. This attack then was a major decision in HQ but on the course where the insurgency should follow. [sic] I believe, therefore, that the VC now realize that they have been able to launch a successful and very damaging attack on U.S. forces without retaliation. We must assume then that they will be encouraged to mount attacks on other installations in the near future. The VC may delay attacking other installations until the furor from the last attack has died down, but we must be prepared for further attack.

2. COMUSMACV will do all within his power to make air bases and other sensitive U.S. installations secure. However, they are inherently vulnerable, most of them being situated in the midst of populated areas. They can only be secure when there is rigid population control, a measure which must be carried out by the RVN and will take considerable time. Therefore, regardless of the measures we take toward improving security, the bases are vulnerable in the immediate future.

3. Since the air bases in Vietnam are congested, clearly insecure and without dispersal facilities of any kind, we should not expose any more airplanes and American personnel on these bases than are necessary for the immediate mission. Aircraft can be moved readily in and out of RVN as requirements dictate.

4. While it is highly desirable that all forces be iQ place before option 1B is executed, we can initiate a strike with less forces. For example, with one CVA on station off RVN plus the USAF forces now in place in RVN, we can execute option 1B of CINCPAC Frag Order No. 3 but with a considerably less damage level than specified. Within 18 hours all air forces required could be in place. There are several intermediate positions we can assume such as prepositioning F–105s from Kadena to Clark. This reduces air force reaction time to 4 hours after signal is received. If Thai based U.S. forces could be used, this again would improve our capability by 18 F–105s and 10 F–lOOs. The second CVA could be in place in 48 hours. Before any option, other than 1B, is executed, all forces should be in place.

[Numbered paragraph 5 (4 lines of source text) not declassified]

6. At present, there are two CVAs stationed off South Vietnam and a third one will arrive in the area on 6 November. It is not desirable to maintain this posture for very long unless we intend to launch heavy air strikes.

7. Lesser actions than option 1B of CINCPAC Frag C)rder No. 3 can be mounted at any time. For example, target no. 36, Vit Thu Lu bks; Target no. 33, Dong Hoi bks; target no. 24, Chanh Hoa bks or target no. 39, Chap Le bks could be attacked effectively with continued strikes from the forces normally in place, with or without assistance from VNAF and Farmgate.

8. If we are not to make a retaliatory attack stronger than option 1B of CINCPAC Frag Order No. 3 in the near future, we should: a. Release Bonhomme Richard to return to waters off Japan.

b. Reduce the requirements to one CVA off South Vietnam with a second stationed in the South China Sea, so as to reinforce within 48 hours.

c. Not further augment Air Force forces in South Vietnam.

d. Release Marine battalions at Okinawa to their normal state of readiness.

1 Source, Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 12009. Top Secret; Limdis. Repeated to COMUSMACV, four other Pacific commands, and readdressed to the White House and Department of State on November 4.

2 Documents 399 and 396, respectively.

403. Editorial Note 403. Editorial Note

Following the meeting with the President on November 2 (see Documents 399 and 400), William Bundy was asked to chair a working group to review U.S. policy on Vietnam. Sometimes called the NSC Working Group and at other times the Executive Committee or Excom, the group comprised officers at the Assistant Secretary level including Vice Admiral Lloyd M. Mustin, Senior Operations Officer of the JCS; Harold Ford, Senior China-Asia Officer at CIA; John T. McNaughton, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs; and McGeorge Bundy from the White House. The first meeting took place on November 3 and, based on the discussion, William Bundy drafted a Project Outline.

This outline presented nine topics for which various members of the working group were responsible. Section I, “Situation in South Vietnam,” was to be prepared by the intelligence community, while Sections II and III, “U.S. Objectives and Stakes in South Vietnam” and “Southeast Asia and the Broad Options,” were to be prepared by William Bundy assisted by CIA and JCS papers already drafted on these topics. Under Section III, Bundy presented three options: “A. Continue on present lines.

“B. Present policies plus a systematic program of military pressures against the north, meshing at some point with negotiation, but with pressure actions to be continued until we achieve our central present objectives.

“C. Present policies plus additional forceful measures and military moves, followed by negotiations in which we would seek to maintain a believable threat of still further military pressures but would not actually carry out such pressures to any marked degree during the negotiations.”

Section IV, “Alternative Forms of Negotiation,” was to be drafted by the Policy Planning Staff at the Department of State assisted by the Bureau of International Organization Affairs. Section V analyzed Option A and was put aside in the beginning. The JCS and Department of Defense were tasked with drafting an analysis of Option B (Section VI), while Section VII, an analysis of Option C, was deferred until the papers for Sections VI and VII were ready. Section VIII, “Immediate Actions in the Period Prior to Decision,” was to be done by the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs at the Department of State with the implication that it might not be included in whatever paper was finally devised. Section IX would present the conclusions and recommendations and would be done at the very end. For full text of the Project Outline, see Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, volume III, pages 588–590.

On the following day, November 3, Bundy revised the Project Outline, providing details for some of the sections, adding a new Section VIII, “Actions in Reference to Laos, Cambodia, and Thailand,” which he would prepare, and renumbering Sections VIII and IX of the first Project Outline as IX and X in the revised draft. (Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, November 1964, Vol. I; published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 002148)

In the following two weeks, the working group met frequently to consider the various drafts of individual sections and to comment on proposals raised by the participating agencies. At a meeting on November 7 at 11 a.m., it discussed the preliminary drafts and Ball’s October 5 memorandum (see Document 370). By November 17, Bundy had completed a 100-page draft which considered all aspects of the Project Outline and a 20-page summary of this larger draft. Further consideration of these documents is presented in the documentation that follows.

404. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 404. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 6, 1964—9 p.m.

1414. Following is offered as preliminary assessment of new government in context general political situation, in full recognition its policies and programs as yet only broadly outlined in PriMin Huong’s presentation before High National Council.

Promulgation of provisional charter and election of Pham Khac Suu as Chief of State and Tran Van Huong as PriMin represent major stage in political evolution which was sparked by popular reaction to Khanh’s promulgation of Vung Tau charter in mid-August and followed by dramatic deterioration in governmental authority in late August and September. We hope it also represents beginning, albeit slow and painful, of mending of SVN’s battered body politic.

Looking back over month it is indeed remarkable that decisions taken by MRC in late August to return power to civilian govt have in large measure been adhered to so far. That they have is attributable in part to negative factors: 1) widespread fear of recurrence of August mob violence; 2) temptation of Khanh and military leaders generally to let civilian govt make mess of running country to show Vietnamese people that only military are capable of directing country at this grave juncture; and 3) growing concern at rapid deterioration in security situation. Embassy also actively encouraged support for this first effort in recent Vietnamese history to arrive at a consensus on a govt by an orderly process of consultation among reasonably representative groups.

However, more positive and commendable factors can also be found: civilians whom military charged with drafting provisional charter and selecting Chief of State and PriMin accepted their heavy responsibilities and, despite frequent waverings and evidence of timidity, performed creditably under strong diverse pressures. Moreover, despite Khanh’s temptation, and indeed efforts, to discredit High National Council, in end he correctly read danger signals which these tactics produced and decided wisest course of action for present was to return to military and wait for more auspicious opportunity to retake power. Finally, religious leaders and “out” politicians, also reluctant to see recurrence of demonstrations and violence, were willing to give High National Council a chance, despite its lack of broad popular base.

Thus, on first anniversary of Diem regime’s demise, political prospects are at least faintly encouraging. However, it is premature to judge whether present situation is only breather in political turbulence or whether in fact workable political solution has been found. Following factors contribute to present clouded crystal ball: 1) Pham Khac Suu is widely respected and well regarded among Southerners as long-standing revolutionary against French and antiDiem oppositionist. However, both general popular acceptance of him as Chief of State and his effectiveness in that position likely to be tempered by fact his years of prison have left him with little dynamism and in ill health.

2) Tran Van Huong, while not enjoying the great reputation Suu does, is also respected as honest, hardworking man. Like Suu, however, he is not well man (has heart condition), and same reservations apply to him that apply to Suu in this regard. Encouraging indicator is Suu’s claim that Huong appointment was subject to wide consultation among major groups (religious, military, political) and that Huong is acceptable to all.

3) Team that Huong has collected around him is made up of men with reputations for honesty and competence. They are in large part, however, not political figures but men with professional or civil service experience, and are likely to be criticized soon by “out” politicians as technicians without stature (like Minh-Tho govt). Many politicians and qualified technicians were reluctant to accept positions in new govt which they believed would have only short life span. Another reservation is new govt’s predominantly Southern complexion—whether Northern refugees and center populace will sit still for this for long remains to be seen (criticism in this view [vein] already being heard).

4) Power balance in military establishment is confused at present. Buddhist-led violence in August and unsuccessful Sept 13 coup attempt provided Khanh with opportunity to rid himself and army of virtually [all] remaining potential competitive leadership factions, and brought to fore new military leadership group (“Young Turks”) which since mid-Sept have been generally loyal to him. However, High National Council’s ninth-inning switch to Pham Khac Suu left General Minh with no place to go except back to army and into competition with Khanh. (Minh had been mentioned most likely candidate for Chief of State in the early maneuvering within the High National Council.) This combined with Khanh’s earlier surprise move in reintegrating Dalat Generals back into army, may have created potential sources of friction within military. There are already reports that Young Turks resent return of Dalat Generals. Problem of Minh is at least temporarily postponed by his decision to take a trip abroad.

5) In drafting provisional charter and electing Chief of State, High National Council members have shown themselves vulnerable to pressures from many quarters and suffering in many cases from personal political ambition and rivalries. Whether these centrifugal tendencies can be controlled and HNC can continue momentum toward selection of national assembly remains to be seen. Close personal relations between several members of HNC and Suu and Huong are favorable factors.

6) Buddhists are in somewhat precarious state. Split between Tri Quang and Tam Chau factions has waxed and waned during month, but at month’s end both factions opposed Khanh’s retention of premiership. Since beginning of Nov, however, there have been growing number of reports that Buddhists displeased that Huong selected instead of Nhut. Most gratifying Buddhist development has been firm anti-Communist statements made publicly both by Tam Chau and Tri Quang, although there were undoubtedly internal tactical considerations which played part in issuance such statements.

7) Working relationship between Suu and Huong also a question mark. High National Council has made clear in public statements that intent was to create symbolic, ceremonial Chief of State, leave PriMin as action officer of govt. Provisional charter is unfortunately not quite so clear and leaves Chief of State with major powers which if wielded by an ambitious man, might bring him into conflict with PriMin. Essential, therefore, in the interests of smooth governmental operation that both Suu and Huong on same wave length.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Limdis. Repeated to Kuala Lumpur, Phnom Penh, Vientiane, Bangkok, London, Paris, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 10:53 a.m.

405. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 405. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 6, 1964—9 p.m.

1416. CINCPAC for POLAD. I saw Huong at 1700 today at his request. First DepPriMin Vien also present. Huong had nothing pressing to discuss and our conversation was in the nature of a progress report on his part. Huong said that his govt was now fully inslalled, he personally had assumed duties of MinDefense this morning. While he had not had benefit of a thorough briefing on military situation from General Khanh and the military, they had covered high spots this morning. Huong hopes to have detailed military briefing when Khanh returns in a few days from his two-day trip to Camau.

With some prompting from me, Huong referred to reports of Buddhist dissatisfaction with his govt and to rumors that students might demonstrate tomorrow. Huong dismissed Buddhist complaints as being their traditional maneuver to attempt to obtain Buddhist ministers who could serve as their “eyes and ears” inside the govt. He anticipated continued pressure from certain Buddhist factions but did not appear deeply concerned. With regard to the students, he indicated that he had already issued orders that the police and the military are to maintain law and order. He showed a quiet determination not to knuckle under to pressure from these quarters.

Huong said that Council of Ministers had met today to discuss short-term objectives and programs—those which could be completed by end of year. Vien said that each Ministry had been charged with preparing a statement of short-term and long-term objectives for discussion by the Council of Ministers next Wednesday, Nov 11. I mentioned that we were going through a similar exercise on US side.

Vien said govt would be in a position to discuss these objectives and programs with us the following Friday. Huong commented that goals should be realistic and people fully aware of what the govt intends to do and what will be accomplished. Huong commented that his govt was composed of men who were honest and dedicated to the good of country and would form a good team. While he did not underestimate size of the task, he believed that with US assistance substantial progress could be made.

Huong discounted importance of resignation of Chu,2 Vice President of the High National Council, noting that Chu had personally requested him to accept resignation from position on two occasions and had warmly supported his investiture by the High National Council. He characterized Chu’s action and those of Quat and Tran Van Do as last minute efforts for their own partisan political reasons to embarrass him in the formation of a govt. In this connection I noted heavy burden placed upon High National Council in months ahead and fact that the effective membership of this body had been reduced to about a dozen people. I inquired whether it would be feasible to increase membership of the Council in order spread the burden and render it more representative. Vien replied that enabling decrees establishing the Council made no provision for increasing its size. nor even for replacing individuals who resign or were incapacitated. However, it was clear that Huong and Vien saw merit in suggestion and will give it further consideration. They also picked up quickly suggestion that a new Chef de Cabinet be found to replace Pham Dang Lam in the of fice of Chief of State Suu.

Comment: It was evident that Huong and Vien share mutual confidence and trust (almost alien commodities here) and should work well in tandem. Huong is down-to-earth, to the point, and determined (at least at this stage) to steer his own course and not give in to the various pressure groups.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, Vientiane, Bangkok, and CINCPAC. Received at 2:06 p.m.

2 Chu resigned on November 5; Quat and Do chose not to serve at about the same time.

406. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 406. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 6, 1964—9 p.m.

1415. SEACORD met Saigon November 5 and discussed agenda items transmitted to Dept in Saigon’s 1290 to Dept info CINCPAC 708.2 In addition to representatives from Bangkok, Vientiane and Saigon, the meeting was attended by representatives of CINCPAC.

[1 paragraph (6 lines of source text) not declassified]

Group reviewed accomplishments of T–28 operations in corridor and post-strike photography has shown serious damage has been done to many installations. It was agreed that this was a generally commendable performance as far as it went, although it appears from post-strike photography that damage on several targets was slight. MACV and Vientiane will exchange info on target photography holdings to resolve current differences in assessments and to obviate those that might arise in the future. Additional T–28’s now scheduled for Vientiane will allow photo reconnaissance planes to accompany strike aircraft and eliminate major source of differences.

Group also supports Vientiane’s need for more T–28 strike aircraft to meet additional requirements now being refined. Requirements for additional aircraft include armed recce.

It is anticipated that the RLAF is capable of generating 200 sorties in the Panhandle during the month of November to strike interdiction targets to the degree that close support requirements permit.

From a list of 39 targets in the Laos corridor (22 USMACV recommended targets; 17 USAIRA Vientiane targets), the RLAF attacked 13 of the USMACV targets during the period 14 October–2 November. Three additional interdiction targets not on the target list were also attacked at RLAF initiative. Post-strike damage assessment indicates re-strike against 10 of these targets is necessary to achieve the desired 80–90 [%] damage. These re-strikes and initial attacks against 8 other targets on the combined list are currently planned by the RLAF during November and will fully utilize RLAF capability. AmEmbassy Vientiane reports that the RLAF has additional potential corridor targets under study.

Cross border operations: unilateral planning for cross border operations both on the US and GVN side has continued in order to minimize the time lag when operations are approved by Washington for implementation. By cable MAJ3 10906 DTG 090015Z3 MACV advised that a reevaluation of a starting date would be made when significant changes occurred in the political and military situations inside Vietnam. The cable also advised that it was unlikely that we could contemplate any significant cross border operations prior to January 1, 1965. However, under present conditions it is now estimated that cross border operations under concept set forth in Saigon telegram 9134 could begin between 1 December and 1 January in central area if authorization is received 15 days prior to execution. When authority is given to execute cross border operations, the group is still of the unanimous opinion it would be preferable to have no publicity with regard to operational details and no comment made in response to questions and accusations.

In addition to renewing recommendation for approval Yankee team strikes against fixed targets, group also discussed additional action that could be taken against increasing scale of VC infiltration through corridor. In this connection group discussed desirability increased US air participation in striking both fixed targets and targets of opportunity in Laos Panhandle. It was recognized that such increased US activity in Laos would raise political problems re US relations with Laos and US posture toward Geneva accords. Various formulae were discussed that might reduce such problems. For example, it was felt consideration could be given to modifying rules of engagement for US aircraft providing CAP and escort for RLAF to permit such aircraft to provide frequent or routine escort for T–28 missions. This would involve additional authorization for US aircraft to retaliate against hostile ground action. Vientiane and Bangkok may wish to submit further views in this regard.

There was considerable discussion of the Route 9 improvement concept and general agreement that it deserved further consideration by all three posts with the view of additional discussion at the next meeting. Saigon will transmit by septel,5 summary of concepts discussed and suggestions to provide a basis for discussion at the next meeting.

Based on a proposal by General Westmoreland, the group considered the requirement for a military coordinating committee. In view of the political-military composition of the SEACORD committee and in light of experience to date, it was determined that there is no need for a military committee. Experience has indicated that ad hoc military staff back-up to SEACORD deliberations will suffice. Accordingly proposed terms of reference of the military committee6 will be withdrawn. The group requests that the matter of a military coordinating committee will be dropped from further consideration.

In summary, recommendations are as follows: [Numbered paragraph 1 (2–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified] 2. T–28 operations in corridor.

a. MACV and Vientiane exchange info on target photography holdings to resolve current differences in target assessments and to obviate those that might arise in future. Action Saigon and Vientiane.

b. Support Vientiane’s need for more T–28 strike aircraft to meet additional requirements, including armed recce. Action Washington.

3. Cross border operations can now begin between 1 Dec-1 Jan in central area 15 days after Washington authorization. Action Washington.

4. Yankee Team strikes.

a. Renewed recommendation for approval of Yankee Team strikes against fixed targets. Action Washington.

b. Desirability increased US air participation in striking both fixed targets and targets of opportunity in Laos Panhandle. This would involve additional authorization for US aircraft to retaliate against hostile ground action. Action Vientiane and Washington.

It was agreed that the next meeting will be held December 2–3.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, JCS, Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

2 Dated October 27. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

3 Not found.

4 Document 346.

5 Telegram 1434 from Saigon, November 8. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

6 Transmitted in COMUSMACV telegram 191420Z, October 19. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 11966)

407. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 407. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, November 8, 1964—1:15 p.m.

1034. For Ambassador from Secretary. Our working group is intensively preparing alternatives for action. The present high-level tendency, not yet discussed at highest levels, is to adopt an immediate program, extending for 4–6 weeks, of a clearly tougher public and private stance accompanied by somewhat expanded actions within present policy, including reprisals against any repetition of spectacular VC action in the south along the lines of the Bien Hoa attack. Concurrently, we would propose to decide very soon that, if such an immediate program does not produce a change in Hanoi behavior, we would initiate in January a program of slowly graduated military actions against the North in conjunction with negotiating moves in which we would seek throughout to keep alive a clear threat of additional action if the Communist side does not modify its position.2 Such a course of action would be less drastic than the programs sometimes suggested in the past of full and relentless attacks on the ninety-four targets and inflexible insistence that we would negotiate only on a basis of full acceptance of our maximum objectives.

The above is for your personal information. We would particularly welcome your own planning thoughts for possible use.

As to timing, we hope to have useful papers to send to you urgently about the middle of this week. Thereafter, we are tentatively thinking in terms of you and Admiral Sharp returning here about November 19 for consultation, during which we expect to arrive at a government decision firmly laying out the immediate program and deciding on our long-range course of action.

A key element in either the immediate program or the long-range course of action will be the nature of our discussions with the GVN. Sullivan has impressed on us the seriousness of SVN doubts as to US intentions, and this may suggest your taking up whole question with Huong, Khanh, or others even before you return and we reach final decisions. More basically, we believe no course of action can succeed unless we are able to stiffen the GVN to set its house in order and take every possible measure for political stability and to push forward the pacification program. This point too might be made in the immediate future by you, to be followed by even more specific and firm discussions after the decision is taken. We would particularly appreciate your comments on these two points.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Bundy and Forrestal and cleared in substance with Rusk.

2 The Working Group met at 11 a.m. on November 7 to consider among other things a McNaughton paper, “Action for South Vietnam,” 3d draft (ibid., Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. I; printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 601–604) and a William Bundy paper, “Immediate Actions Over the Next Few Weeks,” both dated November 7. The position elaborated here is a summary of Bundy’s paper. No record of the Working Group’s meeting has been found, but it is referred to in a covering note to the McNaughton draft and in Rusk’s Appointment Book.

408. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 408. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 9, 1964—7 p.m.

1440. CINCPAC for POLAD. This is a U.S. Mission cable. Ref. A–337, October 30, 1964.2 It is apparent that the next few months will be critical to the success of the new government and to our efforts to bring about some degree of stabilization in the internal political situation of SVN. The members of this government are generally inexperienced in public life and have never worked together as a team. It is the consensus of the Mission Council that under favorable circumstances it will require three to four months to get this government to function with any degree of effectiveness. By that time an assembly may have been formed and unless its performance has been acceptable in SVN eyes the government will face the hazard of removal.

To avoid waste of effort in uncoordinated activity, it is essential for the government to establish a series of short-term objectives which are reasonably attainable and which, if attained, will provide a point of departure from which we can later undertake more ambitious projects, military and civilian, inside and outside SVN. Such subsequent projects would include combined and increased military political-economic pressure on DRV, intensification of the in-country anti-VC effort, expansion of force goals for military and police forces, and the initiation of medium-term economic, social and psychological programs.

For planning purposes, we are taking February 1, 1965 as the target date for the short-term objectives (Annex 1). However, we are in doubt as to the feasibility of even approaching these objectives without finding some means in the immediate future for sustaining morale and encouraging a despondent country grown tired of the strains of the counterinsurgency struggle. We have only one reasonably certain way to provide this stimulant—by military actions (we are thinking primarily of air strikes) against the DRV which will do damage to the sources of VC strength along the infiltration routes and to a limited degree in NVN itself. For maximum morale effect, the existence and results of these actions need to be known, at least in part, in SVN. Furthermore, some U.S. participation is required to impart sense of U.S. willingness in future to share in necessary action to stop DRV support and direction of VC. (This also important as corresponding signal to Hanoi.) It is a delicate matter, however, to execute such operations because of the danger of premature escalation at a time when the new government is inadequate to provide leadership to the country and to use its resources to contain the probable VC-DRV reaction which might result from any significant air campaign against DRV.

Our partial solution to this dilemma is to introduce into the short term military program an expansion of 34–A operations to include limited air strikes against North, an intensification of the actions against infiltration targets in the Laotian corridor, and reprisal strikes for major VC depredations as required. There are presently only 10 qualified VNAF pilots available for such covert air strikes so that their scope would necessarily be limited. Our thought is that the Laotian Air Force should continue to play the leading part in air attacks in the corridor but we would get agreement for increased U.S. participation from Souvanna in order to indicate the U.S. commitment needed to encourage the GVN, as well as perhaps the RLG. (Some thoughts on this were contained in Embtel 14153 reporting on last SEACORD meeting.)

Since the new Cabinet is already at work on short-term objectives, I propose to make suggestions at once to Huong and Vien, along the lines of Annex 1, for inclusion in their programs. I would like authority as soon as possible to discuss the short-term military program (expanded 34–A, attacks in corridor, reprisal air strikes) with Huong, Vien and Khanh to obtain their reaction. Depending on their response, it may be desirable to indicate the broadened pressure program against the North which we are willing to consider after the government has made adequate progress. Throughout this scenario, it must be recognized that the GVN may well not make what could be considered even reasonable progress, and that we may be forced even between now and February 1 to make the hard choice as to whether we should undertake the broadened pressure program against the DRV in the face of a deteriorating situation in SVN

Annex 1

Program Objectives To Be Reached by February 1, 1965

I. Governmental 1. Establish effective articulation of GVN/US agencies for optimum cooperation; action in this field to include establishment of a war cabinet to meet weekly with the U.S. Mission Council; the organization of a Ministerial Council of Economic and Financial Affairs to mesh with USOM organization; joint programming at ministerial levels in the military, economic, social, administrative and information fields.

2. Review governmental organization with a view to streamlining. Consideration to be given to a reduction or regrouping of Ministries and to the establishment of a Bureau of the Budget reporting to the Prime Minister.

3. Develop and initiate a national information plan as a means of improving communication between the GVN and its people.

II. Military 1. Bring the armed forces to authorized strength.

2. Review performances of key commanders, replacing the incompetent and stabilizing the remainder.

3. Bring all units to full combat effectiveness.

III. Police 1. Fill up the police to targeted strength.

2. Clarify the police mission and elevate its prestige.

3. Give the police a strong commander.

4. Clarify police powers of arrest, detention, and interrogation.

IV. Pacification 1. Complete the first phase of Hop Tac and be ready to pass into the second phase.

2. Review performance of province chiefs, replacing the incompetent and stabilizing the remainder.

3. Review the vital functions of corps commanders.

4. Carry out a sanitary clean-up of Saigon.

5. Initiate a program for the improvement of the port of Saigon and the Saizon River channel.

6. Institute measures to effect population and resources control with emphasis on Hop Tac area.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 1–1 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 This airgram transmitted a paper entitled “Action Program for Vietnam,” which proposed political, economic and social, military, and psychological programs which the United States might undertake with the new South Vietnamese Government. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 1–1 VIET S)

3 Document 406.

409. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 409. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 10, 1964—1 p.m.

1445. For the Secretary from Ambassador Taylor. Ref: A. Deptel 1034. B. Embtel 1440.2 Reference A was received just before dispatch of Reference B which, I believe, goes far toward meeting your request for our planning thoughts for use in the development of your papers. As I read Reference A, you would appear to be considering something like the short-term military program of Reference B for the period roughly from end November until January. At that time, we would move into an overt series of graduated military actions combined with political pressures-generally speaking, the “subsequent projects’ mentioned in the second paragraph of Reference B.

We have had a great deal of discussion here as to the minimum level of government required to justify mounting military pressures against the North. I would describe that minimum government as one capable of maintaining law and order in the urban areas, of securing vital military bases from VC attacks, and gearing its efforts with those of the USG. As Reference B indicates, we do not expect such a government for three to four months-perhaps not then if the current attempts to chip away at the Huong government continue. Question: Do we withhold all action against the DRV (except those of the morale sustaining type) until we get this minimum government? What if we never get it?

My own answer would be that it is highly desirable to have this kind of minimum government before accepting the risks inherent in any escalation program. However, if the government falters and gives good reason to believe that it will never attain the desired level of performance, I would favor going against the North anyway. The purpose of such an attack would be to give pulmotor treatment for a government in extremis and to make sure that the DRV does not get off unscathed in any final settlement.

In the final paragraph of Reference A, it is suggested that I might take up this question of direct action against the DRV with Huong, Khanh and others before I return and before the USG reaches final decision. I do not see how I could do this except in the most general terms until we know ourselves what we intend to do. I have already suggested vaguely to Khanh and Huong that we could give consideration to various new courses of action once a reliable government is established.

With regard to stiffening the GVN to set its household in order and to press for political stability and the proper execution of the pacification program, I know of no words of eloquence or of persuasion which have not been tried in the past. At the moment the problem is not so much with the government, which means well, as with major outside groups such as some Buddhists, Catholics and politicians who refuse to give it support and are trying to tear it down before it even has a chance. Quat’s refusal to serve in the government is symptomatic of this attitude. We have gone so far as to suggest that this government may represent the last chance for a common victory. I point to articles in the American press showing clearly that the American people are becoming impatient with the politicking in Saigon with enemy at the gates of the city. My Vietnamese listeners never argue back but sadly acquiesce in the validity of such judgments. Unfortunately, they do not know how to remedy the situation, except at some damage to what they feel are their personal interests, and for all too many Vietnamese this is unthinkable.

Nevertheless we cannot abandon this enterprise. In spite of their inability yet to find a way of governing themselves, there is still much on which to build in the way of an individually capable and courageous people who do not want to be run by the North. There is also a surprising amount of vitality and resiliency in the country as a whole which remain generally unaffected by the political turmoil in Saigon. Thus we must hang on, doing our best in the hope that out of this welter some real leadership will eventually emerge, and play for the breaks. Taking the initiative against the North is one way to force the breaks.

In summary, the approach which I would like to make now to the GVN is that contained in the final paragraph of Reference B. We shall be very much interested in receiving your draft papers when they are ready.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

2 Documents 407 and 408.

410. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 410. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 14, 1964—10 a.m.

1502. CINCPAC for POLAD. Ref: Deptel 1065; Embtel 1490.2 As indicated in Embtel 1490, floods in central provinces constitute a serious disaster but, to the eye, are not comparable to the 1961 flood in the Mekong Delta. I saw latter at its height and recommended that US logistic units with combat support be brought into SVN for flood relief operations. This recommendation was not accepted and proved to be unnecessary as the flood waters drained rapidly and the area was restored within a few months by GVN with USOM assistance. This experience leads me to doubt necessity for additional US logistic or combat forces by reason of the present floods. Such units would make no direct contribution to alleviate conditions of human misery which can best be made by local relief organizations backed by US supplies and transport. They could, however, expedite the restoration of the many washed out highway bridges, particularly along Route 1, and could also be of assistance in reopening the railroad although the latter has suffered more from VC sabotage than from the flood.

The question is whether this accelerated repair of communications is worth the introduction of additional US logistic forces which in all probability would require US combat troops in some numbers to provide close protection. Apart from expediting the restoration of communications, our willingness to bring in a new form of military support would undoubtedly be a source of encouragement for the Government and people of SVN. On the other hand, it could also suggest that the US is prepared to take over more of the responsibilities of GVN, and hence temper local initiative. As US troops are certain to be the target of VC harassment, we can expect increased casualties resulting from this further increase of the US presence which in numbers already threatens to exceed the ceiling estimates of a few months ago.

Weighing these pros and cons in the light of present knowledge, I would advise against these additional US forces. I would, however, recommend using this situation as a means of trying to obtain third country military engineer aid largely for bridge repair on the lines of communications damaged by the flood. An Asian third country contribution for this purpose has all of the advantages and none of the disadvantages cited above. Among the countries which might be approached are the Philippines, Korea, Australia and Taiwan, where the retired services engineering administration is reportedly a highly skilled servicemen’s organization capable of the technical work we have in mind. Given about two more days to survey the bridgebuilding requirement, we will be able to indicate the size and type of help which might be sought from third country sources.

We would appreciate knowing the Department’s reaction to this suggestion.3

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, SOC 10 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Also published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 000533.

2 Telegram 1065, November 12, asked for Taylor’s comments on the political implications of introducing U.S. military engineering and logistic forces to help alleviate conditions in the flooded central provinces. (Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8; published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 001257) Telegram 1490, November 13, reported that Taylor had taken Huong on an aerial reconnaissance of the flooded provinces and noted that relief organizations seemed to be coping well with the problem. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 10 VIET S)

3 The Department of State responded later in the day that its reaction to the suggestion of third country assistance was favorable, and urged Taylor to encourage the South Vietnamese Government to issue a call to which third countries might respond. (Telegram 1085 to Saigon; ibid.; published in Declassified Documents, Z988, 001259)

411. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 411. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, November 14, 1964.

JCSM–955–64

SUBJECT

Courses of Action in Southeast Asia

1. This memorandum has been prepared as a result of the meeting in the White House on 2 November 19642 on this subject at which an examination in detail was requested of the possible Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV)/Communist China (CHICOM) military reactions to US air strikes against North Vietnam. The examination is contained in six Appendices3 to this memorandum which include an analysis of the threat and possible enemy reactions, our response to such reactions, and the preparatory measures which we should undertake prior to mounting an attack so that we could defer a CHICOM response or, failing that, respond in a timely effective fashion to any enemy initiative. This memorandum summarizes the examination in the Appendices. The underlying objective remains that of causing the DRV to cease supporting and directing the insurgencies in RVN and Laos.

2. On 4 November 1964, the Joint Chiefs of Staff by memorandum, JCSM–933–64,4 formalized their recommendations made orally to you on 1 November 1964 in relation to the mortar attack on US forces at Bien Hoa Airfield, South Vietnam, which occurred on 1 November 1964. The specific actions recommended at that time are repeated here. Although these actions were recommended for the attack on Bien Hoa, they comprise an option equally applicable and available for immediate implementation in the event of other serious provocations in Southeast Asia. “a. Within 24–36 hours, Pacific Command (PACOM) forces take initial US military actions as follows: “(1) Conduct air strikes in Laos against target #3 (Tchepone Barracks, Northwest), #4 (Tchepone Military Area), #19 (Ban Thay Military Area), #8 (Nape Highway Bridge), and the Ban Ken Bridge on Route 7.

“(2) Conduct low-level air reconnaissance of infiltration routes and of targets in North Vietnam south of Latitude 19 degrees.

“b. Prior to air attacks on DRV, land the Marine Special Landing Force at Da Nanz and airlift Army or Marine units from Okinawa to the Saigon/Tan Son Nhut/Bien Hoa area, to provide increased security for US personnel and installations.

“c. Use aircraft engaged in airlift (subparagraph b, above) to assist in evacuation of US dependents from Saigon, to commence concurrently with the daylight air strikes against the DRV (subparagraph d, below).

“d. Assemble and prepare necessary forces so that “(1) Within 60 to 72 hours, 30 B–52s from Guam conduct a night strike on DRV target #6 (Phuc Yen Airfield).

“(2) Commencing at first light on the day following (1) above, PACOM air and naval forces conduct air strikes against DRV targets #6 (Phuc Yen Airfield) (daylight follow-up on the above night strike), #3 (Hanoi Gia Lam Airfield), #8 (Haiphong Cat Bi Airfield), #48 (Haiphong POL), and #49 (Hanoi POL).

“(3) Concurrently with subparagraph (2) above, the VNAF will strike DRV target #36 (Vit Thu Lu Barracks).

“(4) Combat Air Patrols (CAP), flak suppressive fire, strike photographic reconnaissance, and Search and Rescue (SAR) operations are conducted as appropriate.

“(5) The above actions are followed by: “(a) Armed reconnaissance on infiltration routes in Laos.

“(b) Air strikes against infiltration routes and targets in DRV.

“(c) Progressive PACOM and SAC strikes against the targets listed in the 94 Target Study.5

“e. Thai bases be used as necessary in connection with the foregoing, with authority to be obtained through appropriate channels.”

3. In addition to the deployments and actions above, there are additional actions which should be taken at the time of decision to improve capabilities to conduct the program of air strikes against the DRV. These actions include the deployment from the CONUS to the Southeast Asia area of two additional USAF tactical fighter squadrons and additional tactical reconnaissance and tanker capability, as well as bringing the attack carriers in the area to a total of three. (Appendix A hereto treats the actions in more detail.) No significant logistic or transportation deficiencies are anticipated in carrying out the attacks against the targets listed in the 94 Target Study.

4. An analysis of the enemy threat and possible enemy courses of action is contained in Appendix B. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that the DRV and the CHICOMs will make every effort through propaganda and diplomatic moves to halt US attacks directed against North Vietnam. Although the DRV will take all actions to defend itself, the DRV and CHICOMs would be unlikely to expand the conflict. The Joint Chiefs of Staff believe that Communist China would be very reluctant to become directly involved in the fighting in Southeast Asia lest this be taken by the United States as a cause for major retaliation against the Chinese mainland. However, as the severity of US attacks against the DRV increases, the CHICOMs would feel an increased compulsion to take some dramatic action to counter the impact of the US pressures. This CHICOM response may take the form of the deployment of ground forces into northern Laos, ostensibly at the invitation of the Pathet Lao, or some similar action short of direct confrontation with US forces. It is the view of the Joint Chiefs of Staff that the Chinese Communists probably would not openly engage US forces unless they felt it was necessary to prevent collapse of the communist regime in North Vietnam. Therefore, there would not be high risk of the introduction of large-scale Chinese ground/air force combat units unless major US/GVN ground units had moved to occupy areas of the DRV or communist-held territory in northern Laos, or unless the Chinese had committed their air or naval power and had subsequently suffered attacks on CHICOM air force bases in China. Nevertheless, there is always a chance that Peiping might intervene either for reasons that seem irrational to us or because they miscalculated the objectives of US moves and US resolve to remain in the area. The probability that the CHICOMs would engage US aircraft over North Vietnam would increase in proportion to the number and severity of the attacks and the closeness with which they approached the CHICOM border. Direct CHICOM military intervention would call for US military operations against mainland China.

5. An analysis of nine possible enemy courses of action and appropriate US/allied responses thereto including objectives, forces, deployments, and timing where feasible is contained in Appendix C. The salient conclusion which can be drawn from this analysis is that the United States and its allies can deal adequately with any course of action the DRV and/or CHICOMs decide to pursue.

6. Appendix D contains preparatory actions for the deployment of forces, proposed preliminary logistic authorizations, and the alerting of forces necessary to deal with large-scale communist aggression.

7. A study of the logistic capability to support US/allied military undertakings in response to enemy reactions is contained in Appendix E. Bottlenecks and shortfalls of logistics and personnel are identified in Appendix F. There are no significant logistic, transportation, or personnel problems short of those required to deal with the upper scale of action within the DRV/CHICOM capability. When approaching full implementation of CINCPAC OPLAN 32–64, Phase IV, and to a lesser extent in Phase III thereof and in CINCPAC OPLAN 39–65, deficiencies begin to occur. These require some mobilization consisting primarily of Air Force reserve transportation units and Army reserve combat service support units and the extension of terms of active duty service. However, it is improbable that the DRV or Communist China will adopt a course of action requiring full implementation of plans of this magnitude, and in view of the vast preponderance of over-all US strength, risks involved are considered to be more acceptable than the alternatives of continuing the present course or withdrawal from Southeast Asia.

8. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. The views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff herein be reflected by the Secretary of Defense in the joint State-Defense report being prepared on this subject.

b. That the views of the Joint Chiefs of Staff be forwarded to the President.6

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler7
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. IV JCS. Top Secret.

2 See Documents 399 and 400.

3 None printed. Included among the six appendices (lettered A–F) were CINCPAC Operations Plan 32–64, “Defense of Mainland Southeast Asia” (Annex A to Appendix C), and CINCPAC Operations Plan 39–65, which dealt with responses to Chinese aggression (Annex B to Appendix C).

4 See footnote 3, Document 395.

5 See footnote 7. Document 331.

6 On November 17, McNamara sent a memorandum to Wheeler stating that he had noted these views and that they would be presented to the President when the Working Group’s report was presented. (Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA Files: FRC 68 A 4023, 381 Southeast Asia)

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

412. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 412. Memorandum From the Chairman of the Policy Planning Council (Rostow) to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, November 16, 1964.

SUBJECT

Military Dispositions and Political Signals

Following on our conversation of last night2 I am concerned that too much thought is being given to the actual damage we do in the North, not enough thought to the signal we wish to send.

The signal consists of three parts: a) damage to the North is now to be inflicted because they are violating the 1954 and 1962 Accords;

b) we are ready and able to go much further than our initial act of damage

c) we are ready and able to meet any level of escalation they might mount in response, if they are so minded.

Four points follow.

1. I am convinced that we should not go forward into the next stage without a US ground force commitment of some kind: a. The withdrawal of those ground forces could be a critically important part of our diplomatic bargaining position. Ground forces can sit during a conference more easily than we can maintain a series of mounting air and naval pressures.

b. We must make clear that counter escalation by the Communists will run directly into US strength on the ground; and, therefore, the possibility of radically extending their position on the ground, at the cost of air and naval damage alone, is ruled out.

c. There is a marginal possibility that in attacking the airfield they were thinking two moves ahead; namely, they may be planning a preemptive ground force response to an expected US retaliation for the Bien Hoa attack.

2. The first critical military action against North Vietnam should be designed merely to install the principle that they will, from the present forward, be vulnerable to retaliatory attack in the north for continued violations of the 1954 and 1962 Accords. In other words, we would signal a shift from the principle involved in the Tonkin Gulf response. This means that the initial use of force in the north should be as limited and as unsanguinary as possible. It is the installation of the principle that we are initially interested in, not tit for tat.

3. But our force dispositions to accompany an initial retaliatory move against the north should send three further signals lucidly: a. that we are putting in place a capacity subsequently to step up direct [air?] and naval pressure on the north, if that should be required;

b. that we are prepared to face down any form of escalation North Vietnam might mount on the ground; and

c. that we are putting forces into place to exact retaliation directly against Communist China, if Peiping should join in an escalatory response from Hanoi. The latter could take the form of increased aircraft on Formosa plus, perhaps, a carrier force sitting off China as distinguished from the force in the South China Sea.

4. The launching of this track, almost certainly, will require the President to explain to our own people and to the world our intentions and objectives. This will also be perhaps the most persuasive form of communication with Ho and Mao. In addition, I am inclined to think the most direct communication we can mount (perhaps via Vientiane and Warsaw) is desirable, as opposed to the use of cut-outs. They should feel they now confront an LBJ who has made up his mind. Contrary to an anxiety expressed at an earlier stage, I believe it quite possible to communicate the limits as well as the seriousness of our intentions without raising seriously the fear in Hanoi that we intend at our initiative to land immediately in the Red River Delta, in China, or seek any other objective than the re-installation of the 1954 and 1962 Accords.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA (Admin) Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381. Top Secret; Personal. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 632–633. Rostow sent a similar, but more extensive memorandum to Rusk on November 23. For text, see ibid., pp. 645–647.

2 No record of this conversation has been found.

413. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President 413. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President1

Saigon, November 17, 1964—8 p.m.

Embtel 1466.2 Huong’s government has survived its second week and, although still under attack by special interest groups, maintains its precarious position, and the fact that it is kept alive lends it slightly more authority. By his refusal to be pressured into changes in his recently announced Cabinet and his use of troops in Saigon over the weekend to restrain student demonstrations, Huong has continued to demonstrate his determination to maintain law and order and not to succumb to minority pressures. Thus far, the factions opposed to some of Huong’s Cabinet do not appear able or perhaps willing to force the issue. In the press, in spite of some attacks on the Cabinet, there are numerous moderate voices urging that the Huong government be given a chance.

We continue to receive expressions of fear by responsible GVN officials that General Khanh is maneuvering to maintain a position independent of the government and may even be encouraging some of the anti-Huong forces. I have seen no hard evidence of its truth, but in view of Khanh’s past behavior, it is not surprising that the suspicion is about.

Aside from the continuing political crisis, the government’s energies were heavily engaged in dealing with the typhoon disaster in Central Vietnam. Although it now appears the early reports, as is usual in such situations, were very much exaggerated, there is no doubt that at least six provinces in Central Vietnam have suffered severely. The Prime Minister and I surveyed the stricken areas by air on Friday3 and were briefed in Danang on the damage and relief efforts. I must say that the Vietnamese response to this challenge has been most encouraging and has produced examples of community spirit which contrast sharply with the lack of national unity which we have been seeing in Saigon. All US agencies are very much involved in assisting the flood relief and I say that their conduct has been exemplary.

On the military and pacification fronts, again there is little to report this week. The floods held down both friendly and enemy activity in the I and II Corps areas. We have reason to hope that the floods may have been relatively more disastrous to the Viet Cong and their exposed supplies than to our side.

Elsewhere Viet Cong casualties were high totaling 255 killed in action during the week. There may be some significance in the increase in incidents in the tier of provinces just south of those affected by the flood where in the past the level of Viet Cong activity has always been quite low. Throughout this area, the Viet Cong appear bent on driving a wedge to separate economically the Northern provinces from those of the South.

Early in the flood crisis, I was queried from Washington with regard to the need for additional US logistical troops and the combat forces to protect them.4 I was not inclined to favor such action at that time and now as the estimates of the flood damage diminish, I am quite certain they are not needed. If, as may be possible, outside engineering assistance is eventually needed to help in reconstructing bridges and other engineering works destroyed by the flood, I would hope to receive that aid from third country sources.

Taylor5

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1536 from Saigon, which is the source text. According to another copy of telegram 1536, it was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 6:21 p.m.

2 Telegram 1466, November 11, transmitted Taylor’s previous weekly report to the President. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 November 13.

4 See footnote 2, Document 410.

5 Telegram 1536 bears this typed signature.

414. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 414. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, November 17, 1964—6:51 p.m.

1113. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Re Deptel 1074.2 It has now been decided that you should plan arrive Washington the 26th in order to start intensive, top level meetings on Friday, the 27th.3 Meeting with President is tentatively scheduled for December 1st. Our thought is that you should arrive early enough on the 26th in order to have as much rest as possible. You may, however, prefer the day of rest in Hawaii, but you can make that decision later.

Forrestal will be leaving evening Wednesday, November 18th directly for Saigon. You can, on the basis of his report to you, decide on makeup of small group to accompany you. We will make following announcement at noon press briefing here tomorrow unless you see objection: “Ambassador Taylor is scheduled to return to Washington for consultations with the President, the Secretaries of State and Defense, and other government officials, beginning Friday, November 27th. Ambassador Taylor will be here for five or six days.”

You may wish to confirm this announcement in Saigon Thursday morning your time.4

We are looking forward to seeing you.

Regards.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 17–5 US–VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared with William Bundy and the White House, and initialed by Rusk.

2 Telegram 1074 to Saigon, November 11, suggested that, subject to his and the President’s approval, Taylor return to Washington on November 21. (Ibid.) Since the President’s schedule did not coincide with this plan, his return was delayed.

3 This decision was taken at a meeting of the Working Group held at 11:30 a.m. at the Department of State and attended by Rusk, McNamara, Wheeler, McCone, William Bundy, McNaughton, and Forrestal. At this same meeting, a 100-page report by the Working Group and a 20-page summary by Bundy were distributed. (Department of State, Bundy Files, Manuscript, ch. 18, p. 10) Regarding the report, see Document 403.

4 On November 18, Taylor cabled that he had no objection to the press release (Telegram 1537 from Saigon; Department of State, Central Files, POL 17–5 US–VIET S)

415. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 415. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 18, 1964—9 p.m.

1550. CINCPAC for POLAD. Yesterday, November 17, I sent Prime Minister Huong a letter proposing methods for integrating U.S. Mission efforts with his new government (text of letter being dispatched by airgram).2 I called today to find out his reaction to the letter and to discuss other related matters.

His first words were to express regret over the bombing incident at the Tan Son Nhut restaurant at noon today which caused 18 U.S. casualties. He then added words of thanks for the quick response of the USS Princeton in bringing relief supplies from Hong Kong.

With regard to the letter and its proposals, he indicated that he was discussing the matter with Deputy Prime Minister Vien and some of the Cabinet this evening. He said at first reading he found nothing in it to cause disagreement.

He then launched into a discussion of his governmental troubles, particularly those arising from the continuing criticism of minority groups. He classified these groups as generally inconsequential in size and number but later admitted to growing concern over the Buddhist opposition. He feels sure that Tam Chau and many of the leaders of the Buddhist association have neutralist or even Communist backing. He further feels there is some understanding between General Khanh and the Buddhists, mentioning reports that Khanh has said that the Huong government will fall if it alienates the Buddhists.

We then discussed Khanh’s attitude. I told him that Khanh had repeatedly indicated to me his sincere desire for the success of the Huong government and his intention to support it. Huong added that Khanh’s expressed attitude toward him had also been thus but nonetheless he was afraid that Khanh was indulging in maneuvers with the Buddhists. I suggested that he try to pull Khanh more into the inner councils of his government and see whether such treatment might not get him into the family. Huong concedes that the army has responded readily to his requests for reinforcements to deal with the student disorders over last weekend.

We discussed the High National Council with which Huong is completely out of patience primarily because of the investigation committee it has set up to examine the composition of his Cabinet. He recognizes this action as a device for keeping alive the criticism of some of his Cabinet members.

Huong recognizes the critical importance of the manner [matter?] setting up the national assembly and feels that it should be the prime concern of the High National Council. The latter, as we know, is divided between those who insist on elections and those who would be satisfied with some method of nominating assembly members. Huong is dead against elections as a general method, feeling that they are impossible in some areas and dangerous in others. The primary danger which he sees is the infiltration of neutralists and Communists in the course of the elective process.

I told Huong confidentially of my departure date for Washington and restated my need for an immediate discussion with him and some of his ministers with regard to their programs. Washington, I indicated. would have many questions with regard to his hopes and aspirations and I would need his assistance in preparing the answers. He agreed to a meeting probably on Friday3 with his principal ministers and I added the suggestion that an additional meeting with him, Vien and Khanh might also be necessary for a discussion of particularly sensitive topics.

At the close of our meeting, I invited him and his Cabinet to a reception on December 7 at my residence to meet with senior American officials of the Mission. He seemed happy to accept.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Limdis. Also sent to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House and repeated to CINCPAC. Received at 10:10 a.m.

2 Not found.

3 November 20.

416. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Ehrlich) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball) 416. Memorandum From the Under Secretary of State’s Special Assistant (Ehrlich) to the Under Secretary of State (Ball)1

Washington, November 18, 1964.

SUBJECT

Viet-Nam

Mr. Bundy has circulated the attached papers concerning “courses of action in Southeast Asia” to Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Mr. McCone, and General Wheeler.2 A meeting with Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, you, and McGeorge and William Bundy to review these papers is scheduled for next Tuesday.3 After further meetings next Thursday and Friday, a meeting with the President is scheduled for December 1.

I think that the approach taken in these papers will cause you serious concern. Three “broad options” are considered. First, to “continue present policies of maximum assistance with SVN and limited external actions in Laos and by the GVN coherently against North Viet-Nam;” and, possibly, specific individual reprisal actions. “Basic to this option is the continued rejection of negotiation in the hope that the situation will improve.” Second, “present policies plus a systematic program of military pressures against the north, meshing at some point with negotiation, but with pressure actions to be continued until we achieve our central present objectives.” Third, “present policies plus additional forceful measures and military moves, followed by negotiations in which we would seek to maintain a believable threat of still further military pressures but would not actually carry out such pressures to any marked degree during the negotiations.”

These papers conclude with a proposed recommendation to the President that we follow “a program of immediate actions within the next few weeks” and that, “if the Communist side does not respond favorably” to these actions, we adopt the third alternative early next year. The “basic ingredients” of the “immediate actions during the next few weeks” would be: (1) “talking tough;” (2) “vigorous actions within our current policy” including: (a) a strong 34–A MAROPS schedule; (b) continued strong air activity in the Panhandle area of Laos, including at least a few United States armed reconnaissance strikes; (c) continued strong air activity in central Laos; (d) perhaps a DeSoto patrol early in December; and (e) “consider explicit use of US air in South Viet-Nam if a lucrative target appears;” (3) reprisals in the event of future serious incidents; (4) “consultations with the GVN to improve its performance;” and (5) “miscellaneous actions clearly foreshadowing stronger actions.”

Nowhere in these papers is there a consideration of your proposal for negotiations within the near future and without increased military action (although with the threat of such action). In fact, the first option (to continue present policies) specifically excludes negotiations. Furthermore, although the outline of the papers calls for a separate section concerning “alternative forms of negotiation” no draft of this section was prepared.4 Rather, “various working papers on negotiations…5 have been woven into” the other sections.

I think there are a number of significant gaps in reasoning and questions unanswered throughout these papers. As we have discussed, the third option is full of dangers-I do not believe that they have received sufficient consideration in these papers. Most serious, however, is the lack of any real analysis of a negotiating track. In my judgment, at the very least, a paper on this track should be prepared as a fourth option.

I am particularly concerned because policy proposals like these seem quickly to develop a bureaucratic life of their own unless immediate action is taken.

As the attached memorandum from Ben Read states, a noon meeting with the President will be held tomorrow to discuss the schedule outlined in Ben’s memorandum as well as other items including Congo policy. As to the schedule, both you and the Secretary will be away on December 1, the proposed date for a meeting with the President to decide which option to adopt. For obvious reasons, I think that the proposed date of the meeting should be changed.

TE

1 Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Courses of Action in Southeast Asia, Book One. Top Secret.

2 No papers were attached to the source text. Regarding the paper Bundy circulated at the November 17 Working Group meeting, see Document 403.

3 November 24.

4 The paper Bundy circulated on November 17 stated that no paper on Section IV, “Alternative Forms of Negotiation,” was included since information on negotiations had been included in Sections V–VII. However, S/P had drafted a paper specifically for Section IV on November 4 and revised it on November 6. Copies of these drafts are in Department of State, S/P Files: Lot 70 D 199, Vietnam.

5 Ellipsis in the source text.

417. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, White House 417. Memorandum for the Record of a Meeting, White House1

Washington, November 19, 1964, 12:30 p.m.

SUBJECT

Vietnam Item, Meeting with the President, 12:30 p.m. Thursday, November 19, 1964

The Secretary of State reported on the work in process regarding South Vietnam and the timing of the President’s consideration of this problem. He noted that Ambassador Taylor would be returning to Washington on the 27th.

Mr. Rusk explained that the working group was preparing a full examination of the South Vietnam situation, including its internal and external ramifications: the role of the Viet Cong, of North Vietnam, Communist China, the Soviet Union, and other nations. The working group had examined U.S. objectives and stakes in Vietnam and Southeast Asia, as well as the various contingencies that might arise. The planners had focused on three broad alternatives: first, a negotiated settlement on any basis obtainable; second, a sharp increase of military pressure on North Vietnam which might perhaps lead at some future date to negotiation; and third, an “in between” alternative of increased pressure on North Vietnam but simultaneous efforts to keep open the channels of communication in case the other side was interested in a settlement. These alternatives would be accompanied by attempts to deal with adjacent problems: to diminish Prince Sihanouk’s “fever” and to improve our position in Laos.

Mr. Rusk stated that we are faced with serious and grave decisions. A first essential is to receive first-hand from Maxwell Taylor his view of the situation in South Vietnam and his judgment as to what we must require of the South Vietnamese themselves. Following such consultations with Taylor, we would plan to submit our recommendations for a thorough review and decision by the President by December 1st.

The President asked for a re-statement of the three alternatives. Mr. William Bundy outlined them as follows: Option A: to continue as at present, but to add to our current efforts reprisals against the Viet Cong and North Vietnam for any further “spectaculars” of the Bien Hoa variety;

Option B: to apply a “hard/fast squeeze”, i.e. a systematic program of attacks of increasing intensity against North Vietnam during which negotiations would not be our immediate goal but would not be ruled out:

Option C: to apply a slow, controlled squeeze on North Vietnam in order to bring about negotiations, increasing gradually our present level of operations against the North.

Mr. Bundy noted that this third option was a complex and sophisticated alternative that would require a high degree of control.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy noted that the Government might profit from the President’s guidance at this juncture in one respect. At the working levels the focus of attention was increasingly on Option C. Unless the President indicated otherwise, the present thrust towards C would undoubtedly continue.

Mr. McNamara added that although all the planners were indeed leaning toward Option C, work was also well advanced on Option B.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy commented that work had not advanced on the “devil’s advocate” exercise, the preparation of a persuasive case for negotiation and withdrawal under present conditions.

Mr. Rusk and Mr. William Bundy responded that the “devil’s advocate” exercise had made some progress under Mr. Ball. It was noted, however, that Mr. Ball had been preoccupied with other assignments.

Mr. Rusk assured the President that we would not permit irresistible momentum to develop in favor of any one option to the exclusion of the others.

Mr. McGeorge Bundy added that while we were inviting Ambassador Taylor to participate in the discussions next week, we were not for the present including the various military figures of our Pacific Command.

The President expressed the hope that no firm decisions would be made without participation by the military; he could not face the Congressional leadership on this kind of subject unless he had fully consulted with the relevant military people.

Mr. McNamara assured the President that the military were already deeply involved in the planning, that the JCS had been working for weeks on this problem, and that General Wheeler would be present at all the discussions with Ambassador Taylor. The JCS was now preparing written comments on the present working group drafts.

Mr. Rusk said that books and papers on Vietnam planning would be sent to Texas during the President’s absence from Washington.

James C. Thomson, Jr.3

1 Source: Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia—Vietnam, 1964 General. Top Secret. Drafted by Thomson on November 24. According to an agenda and list of participants, in addition to those mentioned in this memorandum, Humphrey, McCone, Vance, Ball, and Bromley Smith were present at the meeting. (Johnson Library National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Misc Mtgs, Vol. 1)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

418. Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Working Group 418. Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Working Group1

Washington, November 21, 1964.

Summary

COURSES OF ACTION IN SOUTHEAST ASIA

I. Intelligence Assessment: The Situation in South Vietnam

A. South Vietnam. The political situation remains critical and extremely fragile. The security situation in the countryside has continued to deteriorate.

It is possible that the new government in Saigon can improve South Vietnamese esprit and effectiveness, though on the basis of current indications this appears unlikely. It is also possible that GVN determination and authority could virtually give way suddenly in the near future, though the chances seem better than even that.the new GVN can hang on for this period and thus afford a platform upon which its armed forces, with US assistance, can prosecute the war and attempt to turn the tide. Even under the best of circumstances, however, reversal of present military trends will be extremely difficult.

B. The VC and the North Vietnamese Role. The basic elements of Communist strength in South Vietnam remain indigenous, but the North Vietnamese (DRY) contribution is substantial and may now be growing. There appears to be a rising rate of infiltration.

We believe any orders from Hanoi would in large measure be obeyed by Communist forces in South Vietnam. US ability to compel the DRV to end or reduce the VC insurrection rests essentially upon the effect of US sanctions on the will of the DRV leadership, and to a lesser extent on the effect of such sanction on DRV capabilities. US-inflicted destruction in North Vietnam and Laos would reduce the elements of DRV support and damage DRV/VC morale. It might give the GVN a breathing spell and chance to improve. However, it would almost certainly not destroy DRV capabilities to continue, although at a lessened level.

If the DRV did in fact remove wholly its direction and support to the VC, the South Vietnamese could in time probably reduce the VC threat to manageable proportions. But if any DRV “removal” were superficial only, the South Vietnamese probably could not develop the capability to establish and maintain a workable and free government in South Vietnam.2

II. US Objectives and Stakes in South Vietnam and Southeast Asia

A. US Objectives and the Present Basis of US Action. Behind our policy in South Vietnam and Laos have been three factors, all closely related to our over-all policy of resisting Communist expansion: 1. The general principle of helping countries that try to defend their own freedom against Communist subversion and attack.

2. The specific consequences of Communist control of South Vietnam and Laos on the security of other nations in Asia.

3. The implications worldwide of South Vietnam, and, to a lesser extent, Laos as test cases of Communist “wars of national liberation.”

Essentially, the loss of South Vietnam to Communist control, in any form, would be a major blow to our basic policies. US prestige is heavily committed to the maintenance of a non-Communist South Vietnam, and only less heavily so to a neutralized Laos.

Yet we must face the facts that (a) there is some chance that South Vietnam might come apart under us whatever course of action we pursue; (b) strong military action necessarily involves some risks of an enlarged and even conceivably major conflict in Asia. These problems force us to weigh in our analysis the drawbacks and possibilities of success of various options, including the drawbacks of accepting only the fall-back objectives set forth below.

B. Possible Alternate US Objectives. Our fall-back objectives in South Vietnam would be: 1. To hold the situation together as long as possible, so that we have time to strengthen other areas of Asia.

2. To take forceful enough measures in the situation so that we emerge from it, even in the worst case, with our standing as the principal helper against Communist expansion as little impaired as possible.

3. To make clear to the world, and to nations in Asia particularly, that failure in South Vietnam, if it comes, was due to special local factors—such as a bad colonial heritage and a lack of will to defend itself—that do not apply to other nations

C. Consequences of Communist Control of South Vietnam. 1. In Southeast Asia. The so-called “domino” theory is over-simplified. It might apply if, but only if, Communist China entered Southeast Asia in force and/or the US was forced out of South Vietnam in circumstances of military defeat. Nonetheless, Communist control of South Vietnam would almost immediately make Laos extremely hard to hold, have Cambodia bending sharply to the Communist side, place great pressure on Thailand (a country which has an historic tendency to make “peace” with the side that seems to be winning), and embolden Indonesia to increase its pressure on Malaysia. We could do more in Thailand and with the British in Malaysia to reinforce the defense of these countries, but the initial shock wave would be great.

2. In Asia Generally. The effects in Asia generally would depend heavily on the circumstances in which South Vietnam was lost and on whether the loss did in fact greatly weaken or lead to the early loss of other areas in Southeast Asia. Nationalist China (shaken already by the Chicom nuclear explosion and the UN membership crisis), South Korea, and the Philippines would need maximum reassurance. While Japan’s faith in our military posture and determination might not be shaken, the growing feeling that Communist China must somehow be lived with might well be accentuated. India and Iran appear to be the Asian problem cases outside the Far East. A US defeat could lead to serious repercussions in these countries. There is a great deal we could still do to reassure these countries, but the picture of a defense line clearly breached could have serious effects and could easily, over time, tend to unravel the whole Pacific and South Asian defense structures.

3. In the World at Large. Within NATO (except for Greece and Turkey to some degree), the loss of South Vietnam probably would not shake the faith and resolve to face the threat of Communist aggression or confidence in us for major help. This is so provided we carried out any military actions in Southeast Asia without taking forces from NATO and without generating a wave of “isolationism” in the US. In other areas of the world, either the nature of the Communist threat or the degree of US commitment or both are so radically different than in Southeast Asia that it is difficult to assess the impact. The question would be whether the US was in fact able to go on with its present policies.

4. Summary. There are enough “ifs” in the above analysis so that it cannot be concluded that the loss of South Vietnam would soon have the totally crippling effect in Southeast Asia and Asia generally that the loss of Berlin would have in Europe; but it could be that bad, driving us to the progressive loss of other areas or to taking a stand at some point where there would almost certainly be major conflict and perhaps the great risk of nuclear war.3

D. Attitudes of Other Nations Regarding US Actions. 1. Major US Allies. We must maintain, particularly to our key NATO allies, the picture of a nation that is strong and at the same time wise in the exercise of its power. As for France, we are damned either way we go. Both Britain and, to a lesser extent, Germany sympathize in principle with our whole policy of seeking to restrain Communist Chinese expansion, and the British recognize their own specific parallel stake in the closely related problem of Malaysia. All European countries could be affected in their view of the US and their willingness to accept continued US leadership by the way we handle Southeast Asia. Despite the fact that their Far East “experts” tend to believe that Western influence in Asia is on the wane in any case, our key European allies probably would now [not?] understand our applying an additional measure of force to avoid letting the ship sink; but they could become seriously concerned if we get ourselves involved in a major conflict that degraded our ability to defend Europe and produced anything less than an early and completely satisfactory outcome.

2. “Nonaligned” Nations. In these countries, the issue is our continued ability to exert influence on these countries, to keep the peace in and among them, and to keep the waverers from wavering clear over to Communist answers. The “nonaligned” nations, with the possible exception of India, would by and large be opposed to any stronger action we might take. Indeed, they cannot be expected to support any course of action we follow in South Vietnam arid Laos. A program of systematic attacks against the DRV would find many of these nations supporting a condemnatory resolution in the UN. But, as we saw in the Cuban missile crisis, the nonaligned and Afro-Asian nations will accept and even admire and be grateful for actions that achieve the result we want in a strong and wise way.

3. Summary. As for likely foreign reactions to our three possible courses of action in Part III below, it appears that Option A (continue present course indefinitely) would cause no adverse reactions but if it failed it would leave a considerable after-taste of US failure and ineptitude; Option B (fast unyielding pressure) would run major risks of sharply expressed condemnation, which would be erased only if the course of action succeeded quite clearly and in a reasonable time; Option C (progressive pressure-and-talk) would probably be in-between in both respects.

III. The Broad Options

There are three broad options available to us: A. Option A would be to continue present policies indefinitely: Maximum assistance within South Vietnam, limited external actions in Laos and by the GVN covertly against North Vietnam, specific individual reprisal actions not only against such incidents as the Gulf of Tonkin attack but also against any recurrence of VC “spectaculars” such as Bien Hoa. Basic to this option is the continued rejection of negotiations.

B. Option B would add to present actions a systematic program of military pressures against the north, with increasing pressure actions to be continued at a fairly rapid pace and without interruption until we achieve our present stated objectives. The actions would mesh at some point with negotiation, but we would approach any discussions or negotiations with absolutely inflexible insistence on our present objectives.

C. Option C would add to present actions an orchestration of (1) communications with Hanoi and/or Peiping, and (2) additional graduated military moves against infiltration targets, first in Laos and then in the DRV, and then against other targets in North Vietnam. The military scenario should give the impression of a steady deliberate approach, and should be designed to give the US the option at any time to proceed or not, to escalate or not, and to quicken the pace or not. These decisions would be made from time to time in view of all relevant factors. The negotiating part of this course of action would have to be played largely by ear, but in essence we would be indicating from the outset a willingness to negotiate in an affirmative sense, accepting the possibility that we might not achieve our full objectives.

IV (old V). Analysis of Option A

Option A is a continuation of present policies, with the additional element of deciding to have reprisal action not only against another Gulf of Tonkin incident, but against any repetition of a spectacular attack by the VC within South Vietnam, particularly but not solely an attack involving US forces or installations.

As far as they go, Option A actions are in fact common to all three Options, and would be pursued with equal force under Option B or Option C. It is basic that the situation in the south be improved by all possible means whatever else we do.

A. Actions within South Vietnam. There is a great deal that can be done to improve GVN performance and to strengthen the whole pacification program. We must continue to seek additional third-country contributions (though these will probably remain limited). We are working to improve the key police program, military tactics, the air effort, the economic program including a stronger emphasis on the cities, etc. We continue to reject the introduction of US combat forces or a US taking over of command-but short of such changes in policy we are working as hard as we can on all major avenues for improvement.

The point is that the effectiveness of all such measures depends on having an increasingly effective GVN, with sustained government and popular morale. We do not yet have this, though we have hopes that the present government will settle down and become effective over a period of 2–4 months. The issue is whether this can happen if we do no more than Option A over this period.

B. Actions Outside South Vietnam. We would in any event continue and intensify the various covert forms of action against North Vietnam, and the various Lao and US actions in Laos, adding GVN air and ground action in Laos on a limited scale. We would also conduct reprisals as indicated above.

C. Prognosis.

The above actions will not physically affect the DRV scale of infiltration, nor do we believe they would affect Hanoi’s determination and will. They might, however, keep the DRV from engaging in further spectaculars, and thus keep the scale of the conflict in the south within some limits.

The question is whether the GVN could start to make real and visible headway on these terms, with no indication on the US side that we were prepared to go further. We think that reprisal actions would tend to lift GVN morale and performance for a time, but their lifting effect would decline with each successive case. For a period of time, perhaps some months, this Option might keep the GVN afloat and even get it moving slowly toward effectiveness. Most of us doubt that it can do more than that.

D. Negotiating Avenues.

We ourselves would be rejecting negotiation, as at present, at the outset.

But this still leaves the chance that the GVN itself, or individual South Vietnamese in potentially powerful positions, might at any time start discussions with Hanoi or the Liberation Front. If the situation continued to deteriorate, the chances of this taking place would increase. If it did, Hanoi might not insist on early US withdrawal, but the way would be paved for a Vietnamese “deal” that would end up with the US being withdrawn and a coalition government with Communist representation installed in Saigon. The odds would be heavy that over time such a government—as in Poland in 1946–47—would be taken over by the Communist element, and eventually merged with the north into a unified Communist Vietnam.

We might stand aside in such a process, which would at least avoid our name going onto the deal. Alternatively, if the situation was deteriorating beyond repair, we might seek to cover a retreat by accepting negotiations, most likely through a Geneva conference, that could improve the above deal by adding elements of international supervision that might stretch out the process of Communist control and buy time.

E. Pros and Cons of Option A.

There is clearly a case for Option A as a means of buying a short period of time. We would have gone the last mile in restraint, and in putting the show up to the Vietnamese. We would be giving the Sino-Soviet relationship time to clarify—which we think would be a reaffirmed deep split. And we could hope for some improved GVN performance before we did more. But the odds are against the latter, and on balance it seems more likely we would later have to decide whether to take Options B or C under even worse circumstances.

As an indefinite course of action, Option A appears to offer little hope of getting Hanoi out or an independent South Vietnam re-established. Its sole advantages would be that (a) defeat would be clearly due to GVN failure, and we ourselves would be less implicated than if we tried Option B or Option C, and failed; (b) the most likely result would be a Vietnamese-negotiated deal, under which an eventually unified Communist Vietnam would reassert its traditional hostility to Communist China and limit its own ambitions to Laos and Cambodia. In such a case, whether the rot spread to Thailand would be hard to judge; it seems likely that the Thai would conclude we simply could not be counted on, and would accommodate somehow to Communist China even without any marked military move by Communist China.

V (old VI). Analysis of Option B

A. Rationale and Preparatory Actions.

The basic headings of preparatory action are the same as for Option C.

B. Opening Military Actions.

The opening military actions under Option B would be major air attacks on key targets in the DRV, starting with the major Phuc Yen airfield.

C. Early Negotiating Actions.

Even though we would be taking a totally inflexible position on negotiating, we would have to deal with channels of communication, the UN, and perhaps—despite our strong opposition—a re-convened Geneva Conference of some sort.

D. Probable Communist Responses.

The possible Communist responses again fall under three headings, but with different orders of likelihood than under Option C. 1. It is still considered unlikely that Hanoi would really yield, at least in the early stages.

2. The chances are significantly greater than under Option C that Hanoi might retaliate at least by limited air4 attacks in South Vietnam, possibly an offensive in Laos, conceivably a ground offensive into South Vietnam, and—least likely but necessarily to be considered—ChiCom ground action into Laos primarily.

3. The most likely general course of action would still be for Hanoi to hold firm, doing its utmost to stimulate condemnation of our actions, but possibly trying to pretend that it had reduced its activity in the south.

E. In the Event of the Third Type of Communist Response, Likely Developments and Problems. 1. Within SVN, the initial reaction to attacks on the DRV would probably be one of elation, and there would probably be a spurt of more effective GVN performance.

However, as in Option C, there would be offsetting factors that would come into play, and still leave us with a continuing danger that the situation would resume its present deteriorating course. The Vietnamese people are clearly war-weary. Probably they would hold fairly firm under Option B, perhaps firmer than under Option C once the latter became entwined with real negotiations. But there is the lesser chance that things would weaken.

Either for this reason, or because Hanoi was not caving—the latter in almost any event—we would be driven to up the ante militarily.

2. Our further increases in military pressure would then be the same generally as under Option. C, but applied considerably more rapidly and roughly. And at this point, the odds would necessarily start to increase that Hanoi, no longer able to temporize, would either start to yield by some real actions to cut down, or would move itself to a more drastic military response.

3. Our position internationally could become very difficult at this point. We must face the fact that we would incur a really serious barrage of criticism including the dominant public opinion in some of our key allies such as the UK. Our influence might not be drastically affected on such issues as MLF and NATO, where the issues are less affected by popular opinion, but the effect could be much more serious on such opinion-related issues as the Kennedy Round, African views on Communist China, etc., etc.

F. Likely Developments and Problems if the Communist Side Engaged in Major Retaliation at Some Point.

Right from the outset, this course of action would entail some chance of a Communist military response against the south. Furthermore, as we move to the stage of “further increases of military pressure”, the chance of the more severe types of response would increase. These, and the required responses, are covered in the Military Annex.5

G. Possible Over-all Outcomes. 1. At best, conceivably in the early stages, but much more likely only after we had engaged in the further military pressures covered under E above, Hanoi might decide that the pain it was incurring was greater than the gains of continuing its present strategy in South Vietnam. They might be ready to sit down and work out a settlement in some form that would give us a restoration of the 1954 agreements, hopefully supplemented by more effective international machinery and guarantees to maintain such a settlement.

2. At worst, South Vietnam might come apart while we were pursuing the course of action. In such a case, we would be in the position of having got into an almost irreversible sequence of military actions, but finding ourselves fighting on behalf of a country that no longer wished to continue the struggle itself.

3. Between these two outcomes, there is much less chance than under Option C that the struggle would continue indecisively for a considerable period. We could find ourselves drawn into a situation where such military actions as an amphibious landing in the DRV—proposed as one of our further actions—moved us very far toward continuing occupation of DRV soil. Alternatively, the volume of international noise and desire for a peaceful settlement could reach the point where, in the interest of our world-wide objectives, we would have to consider accepting a negotiation on terms that would be relatively but not necessarily wholly favorable to the attainment of our full objectives.

H. Pros and Cons of Option B.

Pros.

1. Option B probably stands a greater chance than either of the other two of attaining our objectives vis-a-vis Hanoi and a settlement in South Vietnam.

2. Our display of real muscle in action would undoubtedly have a salutary effect on the morale of the rest of non-Communist Asia.

3. The course of military events vis-a-vis Communist China might give us a defensible case to destroy the Chinese Communist nuclear production capability.

Cons.

1. This course of action has considerably higher risks of major military conflict with Hanoi and possibly Communist China.

2. If we found ourselves thus committed to a major military effort, the results could be extremely adverse to our position in other areas, and perhaps to American resolve to maintain present world-wide policies, unless we achieved a clearly satisfactory outcome in a fairly short time.

VI (old VII). Analysis of Option C

A. Rationale and Preparatory Actions. The rationale of Option C is explained in pare III. C. above. The stated basis for our action would be that documented DRV illegal infiltration of armed and trained insurgents, and over-all DRV direction and control of VC insurgency, had now reached an intolerable level and that it was now necessary to hit at the infiltration from the DRV and to bring pressure on Hanoi to cease this infiltration and direction. The immediate preparatory actions (consistent with all three options) are set out in Part VII (old IX) below. Under this Option C, the following preparatory action should be taken: 1. A firm Presidential statement setting forth our rationale.

2. Information actions, surfacing usable information on DRV infiltration and direction.

3. Consultation with leaders of Congress (no new Resolution needed).

4. Talks with the GVN explaining our plan, providing for GVN participation, and insisting that the GVN “shape up.”

5. Appropriate consultation and talks with allies and neutrals—especially the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, the Philippines and Laos.

B. Early Military Actions. There would be advantages if Option C could be initiated following either another “Bien Hoa” or at least strong additional evidence of major infiltration. Absent these “pegs,” the actions, in addition to any reprisal actions required from time to time, would be these: 1. Intensification of GVN sea harassment, one or more US destroyer patrols, Lao strikes on infiltration targets in Laos, high-level recce of the DRV, and shallow GVN ground actions in Laos.

2. US air strikes on infiltration targets in Laos, including Route 7.

3. US/VNAF low-level reconnaissance in southern DRV.

4. US/VNAF air strikes against infiltration targets in southern DRV (after removal of US dependents and taking security measures in SVN).

In addition to such actions, there is at issue whether we should at an early stage make a significant ground deployment to the northern part of South Vietnam, either in the form of a US combat force (perhaps a division) or a SEATO-members force including at least token contingents from Australia, New Zealand, the UK, Thailand, and the Philippines. Such6 a force is not a military requirement-at least until or unless the DRV threatened a ground move to the south-but there is a strong political argument that it would demonstrate resolve and also give us a major bargaining counter in negotiations.

C. Early Negotiating Actions. 1. UN. We would have to defend our position in the Security Council in any case. We would hope that this could be a brief proceeding and we believe that the reactions would be such as to make it crystal clear that the UN could not act usefully. (The latter point would be useful to meet critics in the US.)

2. We would resist any formal Geneva conference on Vietnam, since the mere convening of such a conference would have serious morale effects.

3. We would use all available channels to Hanoi and Peiping to make clear our objectives and our determination.

4. At the same time, we would watch and listen closely for reactions from Hanoi and Peiping. If these showed any signs of weakening in their positions, we would then try to follow up as quietly as possible to see what they had in mind. At this stage we would be insisting on three fundamentals: (a) that the DRV cease its assistance to and direction of the VC; (b) that an independent and secure GVN be reestablished; and (c) that there be adequate international supervising and verification machinery. (These fundamentals would not be fully spelled out; in practice they leave room for minor concessions at later stages.)

D. Probable Communist Responses to Initial Military Actions. There are three possible Communist responses to the above initial military actions: 1. Yield visibly (quite unlikely).

2. Retaliate militarily—e.g., by air attacks against South Vietnam or by an offensive in Laos (initially unlikely).

3. Hold firm while stimulating condemnation of US by world opinion, and, if in negotiations, take a tough position (most likely).

E. If Hanoi Holds Firm. The initial reaction in South Vietnam to attacks on the DRV would probably be one of elation and might cause a spurt of more effective performance. We would try to capitalize on any improvement in the GVN situation by pressing harder for acceptance of our initial negotiating position, continuing (not needing to step up) our military pressures and trying to establish a “common law” justification for attacks on infiltration and other limited targets in the DRV. But the7 elation in South Vietnam would probably wane if the war dragged on, and deteriorating trends would probably resume.8 In this case, we would have to decide whether to intensify our military actions, modify our negotiating positions, or both. A second phase in our military pressure would here include (5) extension of the target system in the DRV to include additional targets on the “94 target list,” (6) aerial mining of DRV ports, and (7) a naval quarantine of the DRV. Any visible modification of our negotiating position at this point would create a major problem, in that key nations on both sides would suspect that we were getting ready for a way out. Hence, any such modifying moves would have to be synchronized with military actions. (Simultaneously, we should strengthen and reassure the nations of the area, possibly involving major additional deployments there.)

Meanwhile, even if the Communists did not attack South Vietnam, they might take steps to reduce our initial advantage by improving air defenses in North Vietnam, deploying Chinese ground forces southward, and hardening their propaganda (thus hardening their public commitment).

F. If the Communist Side Engaged in Major Military Retaliation. We reckon major Communist retaliation to be unlikely in the early stages, although a sharp US/GVN reprisal or a Communist misreading of our intent could change this estimate. In the second phase of military actions, there would be a progressively increasing chance of major Communist military response.

The more serious Communist responses are (1) stepped-up VC activities in South Vietnam, (2) air attacks on South Vietnam, (3) DRV ground offensive in South Vietnam or Laos, and (4) Chicom ground offensive in Southeast Asia. The US plans and capabilities to counter these Communist responses are contained in the Military Annex to this memorandum.

G. Possible Over-all Outcomes. The variable factors are too great to permit a confident evaluation of how the Option C course of action would come out. At best: To avoid heavy risk and punishment, the DRV might feign compliance and settle for an opportunity to subvert the South another day. That is, a respite might be gained. At worst: South Vietnam might come apart while we were pursuing the course of action. In between: We might be faced with no improvement in the internal South Vietnam situation and with the difficult decision whether to escalate on up to major conflict with China.

H. Pros and Cons of Option C. Option C is more controllable and less risky of major military action than Option B. Being a “stretched out” course of action, however, it is likely to generate criticism in some quarters. It is more likely than Option A to achieve at least part of our objectives, and, even if it ended in the loss of South Vietnam, our having taken stronger measures would still leave us a good deal better off than under Option A with respect to the confidence and willingness to stand firm of the nations in the next line of defense in Asia.

VII (old IX). Immediate Actions Over the Next Few Weeks9

To bolster South Vietnamese morale and to convey a firm signal to Hanoi and Peiping, we need in any event a program of immediate actions during the coming weeks. The following program could be conducted for a period of four weeks or might be extended to eight weeks or longer as desired: A. A strong White House or Presidential statement following the meeting with Ambassador Taylor, with the disclosure of the evidence of increased DRV infiltration to be included or to follow promptly.

B. An order stopping the sending of further dependents to Vietnam.

C. Stepped-up air operations in Laos against infiltration targets particularly.

D. Increased high-level reconnaissance of the DRV.

E. Starting low-level reconnaissance of the DRV.

F. A small number of strikes just across the DRV border against the infiltration routes.

G. A destroyer patrol in the Tonkin Gulf and also (but separately) intensified GVN maritime operations along present lines.

H. Major air deployments to the Philippines and at sea, in position to hit North Vietnam.

I. At any time, reprisal air strikes against the DRV might be undertaken for a spectacular DRV or VC action whether against US personnel or not. Reprisals would be linked to DRV activity, and the scale of the reprisal action would be determined on a flexible basis in accordance with the magnitude of the hostile action.

In conjunction with the above sequence of actions, we would consult with the GVN to “shape-up” in every possible way, through intensifying all present programs, putting military forces on a totally wartime operations basis, tightening security in Saigon and elsewhere, etc.

Congress and our major allies would have to be consulted at an early stage. Our basic rationale would be that the increasing DRV infiltration required this degree of action.

None of these actions are inconsistent in theory with a decision to stick with Option A at least for the next few months. Nonetheless, to the degree they foreshadow stronger action, they would tend to have diminishing effect on GVN performance unless taken concurrently with at least an internal US Government decision that we were ready to move to Option C early in 1965 unless the situation changed.

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Master Files, Late Nov 1964. Top Secret. Drafted by William Bundy and McNaughton. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 656–666. The first draft of this summary, prepared on November 17 by Bundy (not found), was revised following the November 19 meeting (see supra) and dated November 21. No copy of the full text of the November 21 draft has been found, but the text printed here is the same as that draft except for changes on seven pages, made on November 26. (Memorandum from Bundy to the NSC Working Group; ibid., Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1) These changes are indicated in footnotes below and were made as a result of the discussion at the Working Group meeting on November 24 (see Document 424).

2 According to Bundy’s memorandum to the Working Group, Section 1, which comprised pages 1–2 of the summary, was revised following the November 24 meeting.

3 The Joint Staff believes that early loss of Southeast Asia and the progressive unraveling of the wider defense structures would be almost inevitable results of the loss of South Vietnam in any circumstances. [Footnote in the source text.]

4 According to Bundy’s memorandum to the Working Group, Section V up to this point, which comprised page 17 of the November 21 draft, was revised following the November 24 meeting.

5 Not found.

6 According to Bundy’s memorandum to the Working Group, the text from this point to the reference to footnote 7 below, which comprised pages 25–26, was revised following the November 24 meeting.

7 See footnote 6 above.

8 The Joint Staff believes there is less chance that deterioration would resume and more chance that a lasting upward trend in SVN could come about. [Footnote in the source text.]

9 According to Bundy’s memorandum to the Working Group, Section VII (old IX), which comprised pages 30–31 of the November 21 draft, was revised following the November 24 meeting.

419. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) 419. Telegram From the Commander in Chief, Pacific (Sharp) to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler)1

Honolulu, November 22, 1964—7:25 p.m.

230515Z. Next courses of action, Southeast Asia. A. Your 001931 DTG 170045Z.2 B. Your 002052 T–3 DTG 191603Z.3

1. My response to Refs A and B is being prepared and will be forwarded shortly.

2. While the new government of the RVN has just been organized, there is cause for hope that it may attain some stability and effectiveness. The RVNAF are barely countering and certainly not reducing the Viet Cong insurgency. If the government survives and achieves some unity amongst the various factions, the effectiveness of the armed forces should increase but increased U.S. action is required to provide the necessary momentum for the counter-insurgency.

3. We still have not made it clear to Hanoi and Peiping that the cost of pursuing their current objectives will become prohibitive. Our action after the Gulf of Tonkin incident caused apprehension in North Vietnam but to date our shooting activities have been those of response only and after the Bien Hoa attack there was no reaction. Thus the pattern is one which may cause the DRV to believe that they can continue their present aggression or even raise the level of action with impunity.

4. What is needed is a campaign of systematically and gradually increased measured military pressures against the DRV conducted in conjunction with a coordinated diplomatic and psychological program.

This campaign would aim to convince the Communists that destruction will continue to occur until they cease supporting the insurgency. It offers least provocation to the Chinese Communists and therefore the least risk of ChiCom intervention as the result of a calculation that it is incompatible with their national security. It would be conducted in a manner which would permit the U.S. to observe its effects concurrently in four areas as the campaign progresses: infiltration, NVN, Communist China, and the political situation in South Vietnam. It would not irrevocably commit the U.S. to pursue escalation to any particular level. It would, however, permit us to make ultimate decisions on how far and in what direction to go in Southeast Asia as we observed effects during the escalation.

5. The required military actions in this campaign call for initial air strikes on infiltration routes, moving to infiltration-associated targets and then expanding to other important targets. Geographically, the air strikes would commence in the Panhandle of Laos, move into the southern part of NVN and gradually move northward. The pattern would be systematic with progressive attacks of ever-increasing intensity and severity. However, sufficient time would be allowed between strikes to determine DRV and ChiCom reaction. These actions, which are geared to specific objectives, should be initiated in a pre-planned sequence with the follow-on action commencing when it has been determined that those actions currently underway are not attaining the objective. A. Step 1. VNAF alone or assisted by Farmgate conduct air attacks on infiltration routes and targets in Laos. (1) Because of limited U.S. participation the effectiveness of this action will depend on the number of aircraft which can be taken away from pacification operations. Pacification operations would probably suffer so we should not stay at this level too long.

B. Step 2. U.S. forces conduct air attacks on infiltration targets in Laos and then in NVN. (1) These strikes would be an effective method of getting the message through to the DRV. The graduated nature of the attacks will cause maximum apprehension while at the same time making DRV decision to retaliate and ChiCom decision to intervene more difficult.

C. Step 3. In event our objectives are not attained in Step 2) U.S. forces conduct major air attacks on DRV. (1) This should convince the DRV to cease aiding Viet Cong and Pathet Lao. It might also cause him to recall his insurgents.

(2) It would not be necessary to strike Phuc Yen until such time as planes based there start to interfere with our operations.

6. Those actions listed above which are directed at Laos are primarily concerned with air strikes on Panhandle infiltration routes and targets. I would leave the situation in the PDJ alone at this time realizing that if the Communists step up their military activities, certain specific U.S. actions can be taken to counter them.

7. The provocation for such a controlled series of attacks has been established. There is, moreover, reason to believe that the military activity in the Panhandle and along the route to NVN is becoming more significant. It is time to reverse this trend. Accordingly I recommend the initiation of the campaign outlined above.

1 Source: Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 12009. Top Secret.

2 Dated November 16, this cable informed Sharp that “a controlled program of systematically increased military pressure against the DRV” was under consideration and asked for Sharp’s views on what U.S. forces might be deployed to Southeast Asia prior to initiating such a program. (National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, ICS Files)

3 Dated November 19, this cable repeated the request for Sharp’s views on U.S. force deployments. (Ibid.)

420. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara) 420. Memorandum From the Joint Chiefs of Staff to the Secretary of Defense (McNamara)1

Washington, November 23, 1964.

JCSM–982–64

SUBJECT

Courses of Action in Southeast Asia

1. This memorandum responds to the memorandum of 17 November 1964 from the Assistant Secretary of State, Far Eastern Affairs, requesting review of the drafts on this subject prepared by the National Security Council (NSC) Working Group.2 Because of the preliminary and tentative nature of these drafts, this memorandum addresses only those matters which are considered to comprise the fundamentals of the present problem.

2. The Joint Chiefs of Staff consider Southeast Asia to be an area of major strategic importance to the United States, the loss of which would lead to grave political and military consequences in the entire Western Pacific, and to serious political consequences world-wide. These considerations are amplified in Appendix A.3 In the present situation the Joint Chiefs of Staff consider that there are three basic issues relative to our courses of action in Southeast Asia as follows: a. What are our objectives?

b. What are the courses of action open to us?

c. What are the probable consequences of these courses of action?

These issues are examined in the following paragraphs.

3. The Joint Chiefs of Staff understand established national policies include as objectives in Southeast Asia a stable and independent noncommunist government in the Republic of South Vietnam (RVN)4 and a stabilized situation in Laos which conforms to the Geneva Accords of 1962.5 They consider these objectives to be valid and essential to maintaining the US security position world-wide. They further consider that the best probability of success in attaining these ends will be afforded by achieving the prerequisite objective of causing the cessation of North Vietnamese (DRY) support and direction of the insurgencies in RVN and Laos. Early implementation of political and military actions designed to achieve these objectives, in addition to continued aggressive programs in SVN, offers the greatest assurance of success.

4. The alternatives open to the United States in Southeast Asia are summarized in the five courses of action listed below, keyed as indicated to the courses of action set forth in the NSC Working Group (NSCWG) paper: a. Course A' (This course of action is implicit in the content of the NSCWG paper but is not clearly identified as a separate and distinct option.): Terminate commitments in RVN and Laos, and withdraw under conditions which impair as little as possible our standing in the eyes of the world.

b. Course A (Corresponds to the NSCWG Course of Action A.): Continue actions within our present policies, including feasible improvements within the boundaries of those policies.

c. Course C (Corresponds to the NSCWG Course of Action C.): Undertake a program of graduated military and political initiatives to apply additional pressures against the DRV, without necessarily determining in advance to what degree we will commit ourselves to achieve our objectives, or at what point we might stop to negotiate, or what our negotiation objectives might be.

d. Course C' (This is a variant and logical extension of the NSCWG Course of Action C, although not specifically identified as such in the NSCWG paper.): Undertake a controlled program of graduated military pressures, systematically applied against the DRV, in coordination with appropriate political pressures. This course is distinguished from Course C by the advance decision to continue military pressures, if necessary, to the full limits of what military actions can contribute toward US national objectives. The military program for this course of action is the program set forth in JCSM–96–64, dated 18 November 1964.6

e. Course B (This Course of Action should be used in lieu of the NSCWG Course of Action B, which is not a valid formulation of any authoritative views known to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.): Undertake a controlled program of intense military pressures against the DRV, swiftly yet deliberately applied, designed to have major military and psychological impact from the outset, and accompanied by appropriate political pressures. The program would be undertaken on the basis that it would be carried through, if necessary, to the full limits of what military actions can contribute toward US national objectives; it would be designed, however, for suspension short of those limits if objectives were earlier achieved. The military program for this course of action is the program recommended in JCSM–955–64, dated 14 November 1964.7

5. The probable consequences of the foregoing courses of action, with respect both to accomplishment of our objectives and to other potential reactions, are summarized below, with additional particulars set forth in Appendix B. a. Course A': Abandons our objectives, sacrifices the military advantages attainable from a firm position on the mainland of Southeast Asia, and initiates progressive deterioration in our military position throughout the Western Pacific and in our political position worldwide.

b. Course A: Puts some added demands on the DRV, but not commensurate with those imposed by the DRV on RVN. Thus it offers no identifiable probability of accomplishing our objectives, nor of alleviating the critical situation in RVN. The present possibility of internal collapse in RVN could lead to accelerated take-over by the communists, and entails substantial risks to US personnel and equipment in country during the attendant disorders.

c. Course C: Is inconclusive as to accomplishment of over-all objectives, because it is undertaken without a clear determination to see things through in full. Its uncertain pace could permit and encourage enemy build-ups to counter our own. Thus it would raise the risks and costs to us of each separate military undertaking, would invite further escalations on the part of the enemy, and would make miscalculation regarding the resolve and determination of the United States more likely. At any specific level of intensity, this course of action appears likely to entail the highest military risks of those considered, and to foster progressively increasing adverse political pressures in many quarters.

d. Course C': Offers a probability of achieving our objective through progressively reducing the DRV support to the insurgencies. Its systematic force build-up would add further deterrence to possible CHICOM intervention, and should make miscalculation of US resolve less likely. Should escalation occur, it can be dealt with adequately and on terms more favorable than those applicable in Course C above. From a strictly military point of view this course of action involves probable higher military costs and casualties than Course B, for example, through failure to eliminate DRV air and DRV facilities available to CHICOM air at the outset. The determination signaled by this course should enlist substantial US public and world support, while giving pause to the opposition.

e. Course B: Offers the best probability of achieving our objectives at the least risk, casualties, and cost, and with the least probability of enemy miscalculation. In addition to its military advantages and its reduced probability of escalation, this course of action offers greater psychological impact and presents to all concerned a clear and unequivocal picture of US determination and US objectives. The possibility of intervention by the CHICOMs is judged to be less likely than in Course C'. There should be no problems beyond those in Courses C or C' in dealing with any world opinion which might oppose this course of action.

6. The Joint Chiefs of Staff reject Course A' because it abandons the objectives. They reject Course A because it does not offer a reasonable probability of achieving the objectives. They do not recommend Course C, because it is inconclusive as to attainment of our objectives, yet entails potentially high risks and costs.

7. Course C' is not recommended as the preferred course of action. However, should a controlled program of systematically increased pressures be directed, the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend the program of actions contained in JCSM–967–64.

8. The Joint Chiefs of Staff recommend that: a. Course B, as defined in this paper and which offers the best probability of attaining the stated objectives, be implemented at this time.

b. The substance of this memorandum be reflected in appropriate revision of the NSC Working Group drafts of a study of US courses of action in Southeast Asia.

For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Earle G. Wheeler8
Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff

1 Source: Department of State, Ball Files: Lot 74 D 272, Vietnam. Top Secret; Sensitive.

2 See Document 403.

3 Neither Appendix A nor any of the other four appendices is printed.

4 NSAM 288 of 17 March 1964. [Footnote in the source text. NSAM 288 is printed as Document 87.]

5 NSAM 249 of 25 June 1963. [Footnote in the source text. NSAM 249 is in Department of State, NSC Files: Lot 72 D 316, NSAM 249.]

6 A copy of this 2-page memorandum with 17 annexes is ibid., Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. IV, JCS; the memorandum is printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 639–640.

7 Document 411.

8 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

421. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President 421. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President1

Saigon, November 24, 1964—11 a.m.

Embtel 1536.2 The Huong government is still in business but has made little progress since my last report. The harassing attacks of minority groups continue the political unrest in Saigon. Troops and police have shown considerable restraint in dealing with demonstrators and have behaved reasonably well in consonance with the orders issued. Reports of deaths and injuries to demonstrators have been greatly exaggerated—we know of no fatalities. Huong complained to me that politically subsidized newspapers were reporting casualties in advance of demonstrations. Chief of State Suu is turning out to be a soft spot in the government structure. He has undercut Huong’s position by sending a letter to the High National Council urging it to convoke a national assembly as soon as possible (by implication to put Huong out of business). He has also shown himself vulnerable to pressures from many quarters and to be unduly concerned for his own popular image. It is a great pity that the Chief of State is not a man of some strength to bolster Huong and his Cabinet.

We had a good military week with Viet Cong activity low and government counterinsurgency activity both high and effective. There were several very good operations conducted by the Vietnamese Army. The losses inflicted in VC during week amounted to 425 killed in action and 146 prisoners.

Clean-up in the flood area in Central Viet-Nam continues to make progress. As predicted, we are finding that the losses will be less than originally reported. Fortunately, there have been no epidemics.

The big question remains the ability of the Huong government to ride out the present rough weather. The typhoon disaster diverted some attention from the government but now the Buddhist leadership is returning to the attack, chastising the government for its “repression of innocent people who only sought to present their just aspirations”. Huong continues to insist that his government will survive.

Taylor3

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1630 from Saigon, which is the source text.

2 See Document 413.

3 Telegram 1630 bears this typed signature.

422. Letter From the Deputy Ambassador in Vietnam (Johnson) to the Secretary of State 422. Letter From the Deputy Ambassador in Vietnam (Johnson) to the Secretary of State1

Saigon, November 24, 1964.

Dear Dean: I am giving below my replies to your queries as I understand them.2

1. You can feel confident that our reporting from here is as accurate as we can make it. Our political section and provincial reporters call the shots as they see them with no one attempting to edit them back.

With respect to Max and myself as far as senior officials and developments are concerned, Max’s glasses were initially inclined to be a little more rosy than perhaps my too black glasses. We always talked it out—and still do for that matter—Max could just not be more thoughtful in this regard. At present there are no significant differences in our view of the situation although if there is a shade I still tend toward the pessimistic. Understandably Max tends to look at the statistics on military operations somewhat more than I, who tend perhaps to look too much at moods.

2. Westmoreland and Zorthian are absolutely first class. Killen is sound for the most part but he prejudices his case by his manner and Max and I find him somewhat more difficult to work with than we hoped. He still thinks “the military” are also an “enemy” that must be dealt with in a firm manner.

3. Can this be won? I perhaps should give the answer I give newspapermen—it must be won. Given the weaknesses here it cannot be won just in SVN. In some way the DRV must be gotten off their backs. This will not guarantee anything here but without it, it is not possible.

I am in full agreement with the plan Max is bringing back.3 The only question is timing—I am inclined to start somewhat earlier than would Max, while Westmoreland is inclined to start somewhat later. Westmoreland thinks that in the next few months we can turn things up a little on the military side. While this might be true, I do not think it is generally true.

Incidentally I was very disappointed in the quality of what Mike brought out. It did not give me the feeling that the two sides of the river had really worked it out together. Without beating the drum for my old shop, I think Jeff Kitchen could help on this type of thing. Max is carrying with him my own concept of our approach.4

I am deeply conscious of the risk but—as with Cuba—the risks of doing nothing are much greater. At the minimum we must stick with it and play for the breaks. The other side must also be having their problems.

Sincerely

Alex

1 Source: Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Correspondence—J. No classification marking. The source text is handwritten.

2 Rusk’s letter has not been found.

3 Presumably this is the program presented in Document 426.

4 Johnson’s plan has not been further identified.

423. Memorandum From the Chairman of the National Security Council Working Group (Bundy) to the Secretary of State 423. Memorandum From the Chairman of the National Security Council Working Group (Bundy) to the Secretary of State1

Washington, November 24, 1964.

SUBJECT

Issues Raised by Papers on Southeast Asia

Although the official comments are not all in at this writing, I think it will be useful for your meeting this afternoon to have a list of the issues that appear to one mind to warrant priority discussion. Some are explicitly disagreed, others have been lurking and should be surfaced in my judgment.

1. Basic Issues as Between the Options

A. Is it true that the South Vietnam situation would deteriorate further under Option A even with reprisals, but stands a significant chance of improving under Option B or Option C?

Comment: Advocates of A maximize the chances of decay even under B and C, advocates of B and C think the lift from greater action could really take hold and move us forward in South Vietnam, whereas A is doomed. All concede there is some chance that the GVN would come apart under any Option.

B. Is the negotiating outcome under Option A (with or without US negotiating participation) likely to be clearly worse than under Option C?

Comment: Advocates of A doubt that it would be.

C. What are the best estimates of the risks of major conflict under Option B and Option C? If, as the intelligence paper states,2 they are about the same as between Option B and Option C at its highest, is there enough chance that C would succeed before it reached this point to make a real difference on the risk factor?

D. Is it true, as the draft paper states,3 that Option B has the best chance of attaining our full objectives?

E. As to our stakes in SEA, is the paper valid as written, or should it be revised in the direction of the Joint Staff comments4 that loss of SVN would be necessarily catastrophic? Is the analysis of the attitudes of non-Asian key allies right, and what weight should we give to this?

Comment: The point of the Joint Staff comments really is that greater risks of major conflict are worth accepting in view of their view of the stakes. The Joint Staff view would also implicitly assign less weight to key non-Asian allies, and still less to the non-aligned countries.

F. Can Option C be carried out in practice under the klieg lights of a democracy, in view of its requirement that we maintain a credible threat of major action while at the same time seeking to negotiate, even if quietly?

Comment: this is a key point raised by advocates of A. The parallel to Korea in 1951–53 is forbidding. Even advocates of C concede the difficulties.

G. Are we safe in assuming that SVN can only come apart for morale reasons, and not in a military sense as well?

Comment: The intelligence estimate is not confident on VC “burst capabilities.” The President’s repeated concern on protecting the south has not really been met in these papers, but we have all felt that the purely military aspects of the VC could be contained. This is a first question to ask of Ambassador Taylor.

II. Issues Relating to the Immediate Courses of Action (Section VII)

A. Is our reprisal planning in proper shape to produce varied options on demand? Does it provide adequately for GVN participation?

Comment: CINCPAC Frag Order No. 3 is the current basis of planning. It provides for optional clusters of targets, but no one option calls for less than about 175 strikes, under very high damage criteria. Such a high order of action could throw off all calculations based on the theory of “squeeze” under Option C and even under Option B. As to GVN participation, the latest plans do crank this in, at some sacrifice of destructiveness.

B. What do we mean to take as a basis for reprisal?

Comment: We all agree that another Bien Hoa would call for reprisal, but it would help to refine our thinking somewhat further. Incidents not solely directed at the US would be desirable for political reasons. What kind might these be?

C. What sort of high-level statement is needed if we adopt the immediate program?

Comment: Should it be generalized, with the infiltration evidence speaking for itself separately, or should it make express use of the infiltration evidence? Is the latter wholly ready for surfacing? Is the new Jorden Report?5

III. Issues Concerning the Execution of Option A

A. Can this Option really be extended to include continued (non-reprisal) actions against the DRV even at a low scale?

Comment: The longer draft6 had so extended it. Most of us think this is a mistake in definition, in that any continued actions against the DRV create international and other pressures and are an effect the early stages of Option C.

B. Could or should ground forces be put into northern SVN even under this Option?

Comment: Advocates of A urge this as a bargaining counter. Most of us think that, apart from lacking any military necessity in the absence of attacks on the DRV, it would appear as a bluff and not help any negotiation.

C. Assuming the situation does deteriorate under this Option, should we let Vietnamese negotiations develop, or ourselves seek a forum?

Comment: This is a less urgent issue, and perhaps cannot be answered now.

IV. Issues Concerning the Execution of Option B

A. Should we hit major targets, especially airfields, at once, or only after and if the DRV has hurt us from them?

Comment: Even under this Option, many of us feel the actions should be progressive, with the prospect of more to come at least as important psychologically as present damage. We all accept the will of the DRV as the real target.

B. Is ground invasion of the DRV (at Vinh per present plans) a military necessity or advantage that outweighs the increased risks the Chicoms would then come in force? (This applies to C as well as B.)

Comment: The intelligence estimate (p. 9 of “Probable Communist Reactions,” dated 19 November) highlights this as significantly raising the odds. It would also tend to change our objectives in the eyes of the world. Is it worth it?

C. At what stage, if ever, might nuclear weapons be required, and on what scale? What would be the implications of such use?

Comment: This is clearly a sensitive issue. The President may want a more precise answer than appears in the papers.

V. Issues Concerning the Execution of Option C

A. Should ground forces be introduced into northern SVN at the early stages?

Comment: The pros and cons of this are argued in Section VII of the long draft.

B. Is our early targeting properly thought through?

Comment: This is partly the question of whether to hit Phuc Yen early. But also some individual comment has highlighted the possible utility of focusing at length on low-key targets, not so much for the sake of damage as to show how helpless the DRV is, cause it to strain its security apparatus, and ask for help from the Chicoms in ways the Chicoms may not be able to give effectively. Also to keep our losses low. Such an undramatic “water drip” technique would, in the opinion of many Chicom experts, both hit DRV will harder than more dramatic attacks and strain the key DRV-Chicom relationships more. Put differently, this school of thought argues that dramatic acts, with probably higher US losses, would tend to knit the DRV people and the DRV and Chicoms; US losses are also a key factor in DRV morale, as their propaganda has shown for months. If we were acting with impunity, this would have a major effect, and the falseness of their propaganda would become a major weakness in their hold over their people.

C. How do we handle any early negotiations?

Comment: This is the least satisfactory part of the present script. To keep up our show of determination and at the same time listen for nibbles is a tough job in any case. We need to consider use of third countries at the outset perhaps more.

D. Do we even listen to nibbles till we have established a clear “common law” pattern of attacks?

Comment: The point is not made as clear as it should be. I think not.

VI. Action Issues Applicable to any Decisions

A. White House statement.

B. High-level speech.

C. Congressional consultation, including whether Ambassador Taylor should testify if Committees ask.

D. Key Allies—UK, Australia, New Zealand, Thailand, Philippines. Individually or would we now form a group as in Korea? (I am inclined against a formal group, with or without publicity—the interests are too diverse.) SEATO?

E. US Government machinery. Do we not need a designated ExCom now, with a subordinate working group?

William P. Bundy7

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Also sent to McNamara, McCone, Wheeler, Ball, and McGeorge Bundy. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 646–650. McGeorge Bundy’s copy of this memorandum bears his handwritten notes reflecting the discussion of these issues at the meeting at 5 p.m. on November 24. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Courses of Action in SEA) For a record of the meeting, see Document 424.

2 A copy of this paper, “Probable Communist Reactions to US Options B and C” (TS# 185782-a), November 19, is in Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1.

3 Document 418.

4 Document 420.

5 The first Jorden Report was released on December 8, 1961; see Foreign Relations, 1961–1963, vol. I, pp. 725–726. In the fall of 1964, a new report on infiltration was being considered. Sometimes called the new Jorden Report, it was published on February 27, 1965, under the title Aggression From the North (Department of State Publication 7839).

6 Presumably Bundy is referring to the 100-page draft paper.

7 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

424. Memorandum of the Meeting of the Executive Committee 424. Memorandum of the Meeting of the Executive Committee1

Washington, November 24, 1964, 5 p.m.

PRESENT

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

Mr. McCone

General Wheeler

Mr. Ball

Mr. McGeorge Bundy

Mr. William Bundy

SUBJECT

Issues Raised by Papers on Southeast Asia

This memorandum records the consensus or majority view of key issues discussed at this meeting, pending discussion with Ambassador Taylor.

Basic Issues

1. There was a consensus that, if the DRV did withdraw its effort, the security situation in the south could be handled in time if the government could maintain itself. However, the struggle would still be long

2. There was a consensus that the South Vietnam situation would deteriorate further under Option A even with reprisals, but that there was a significant chance that the actions proposed under Option B or Option C would improve GVN performance and make possible an improvement in the security situation.

3. There was a consensus that any negotiating outcome under Option A (with or without US negotiating participation) was likely to be clearly worse than under Option C or Option B.

4. There was a divided view as to whether Option B was in fact (as the draft paper2 states) significantly more likely to lead to major escalation than Option C. Mr. McCone undertook to review this question.

5. There was a consensus that it was not true, as the draft paper states, that Option B, in the light of all factors, has the best chance of attaining our full objectives. (Draft paper, page 21, pare H. 1.)

6. There was a consensus that the loss of South Vietnam would be somewhat more serious that stated in Section II of the draft paper, and it would be at least in the direction of the Joint Staff view as stated in the footnote to page 7 of the draft.

7. There was a consensus that the requirement of Option C—maintaining military pressure and a credible threat of major action while at the same time being prepared to negotiate—could in practice be carried out. The difficulties and domestic pressures were noted, but it was felt that continuing military actions could handle such pressures and also pressures for premature negotiations or concessions.

8. There was a consensus that the danger of military defeat in the south, or serious damage, was not serious under the various options provided that adequate security measures were taken.

Immediate Courses of Action

(Section VII of draft)

9. It was reported that our reprisal planning provided proper latitude for any gradation of action that might be required either in the immediate courses of action or under the options.

10. It was agreed that we needed further work to define the types of incident we would use as a basis for reprisal. DoD is doing the initial work on this, and we will consult with Ambassador Taylor.

11. It was agreed that the Saigon intelligence study,3 indicating substantial increases in infiltration both this year and in past years, required careful review and briefing in Washington. We must not be open to the charge of framing evidence to suit our policy, and senior Cabinet officers must be in a position to explain strongly why our earlier and lower estimates have now been found wrong. CIA is taking the lead on this.

Execution of Option B

12. It was agreed that the early hitting of major targets was central to this option.

13. It was agreed that the question of an ultimate limited ground invasion of the DRV—not yet formally proposed by the JCS—should be further examined to produce an assessment of its risks and gains. For the time being, this should be treated as a “detachable” element in the military sequence.

Execution of Option C

14. The question of whether ground forces should be introduced into South Vietnam at an early stage was discussed without any consensus emerging. The arguments for and against this element (pp. 24–25 of the draft) were reviewed, and there was some sentiment for introduction of such forces into northern South Vietnam as a preemptive action. The introduction of forces for security purposes was also discussed, with a somewhat more negative initial reaction but with agreement that this should be reviewed with Ambassador Taylor.

15. There was a consensus that, under Option C, our early military actions against the DRV should be determined, but low in scale, but that some higher-damage actions should be included under the reprisal heading.

Procedure

16. It was agreed that, subject to the approval of the President, the group at this meeting should constitute an Executive Committee for continuing action on this matter.

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by William Bundy on November 25. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 000555. Bundy’s handwritten notes on the meeting show that items I C and E, IV C, and V A provoked the most discussion. (Department of State, Bundy Files Master Papers, Late Nov 1964)

2 Document 418.

3 Document 392.

425. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 425. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, November 25, 1964—11 a.m.

1629. CINCPAC for POLAD. Last Friday2 following our meeting with the Internal [National?] Security Council, I mentioned to Prime Minister Huong that I would like to have a meeting with him, Deputy Prime Minister Vien and General Khanh to discuss questions which might arise during my visit to Washington. I told him I would like to bring Ambassador Johnson and General Westmoreland with me to such a meeting.

The meeting took place the morning of November 24 between 1030 and 1230. I explained that while I did not know the agenda of the coming discussions in Washington, I could well anticipate being asked a number of difficult questions. It would be very useful to me if they would indicate their judgment as to the appropriate answers.

For example, an early question will undoubtedly bear on the life expectancy of the Huong government. We Americans were all pulling for Huong and his cabinet and were watching with concern the harassing tactics of his detractors. Under the circumstances, could we look upon the Huong government as one likely to be with us for a considerable time?

Huong replied in terms which he had used before in discussing the political situation. He recognizes that there are a number of small groups who are working in the interest of certain politicians to topple his government but he considers the groups do not represent any substantial segment of the population. He is particularly aware of the union of some of the Buddhist groups with such men as General Do Mau, Phan Huy Quat and Tran Van Do. Other ringleaders are politicians who have been disappointed in not being included in the cabinet. Huong considers them annoying in aggregate but not basically dangerous.

He is more concerned about the attitude of the High National Council and Chief of State Suu. The High National Council has been very unhelpful, particularly in its action in appointing an investigating committee to look into the background of cabinet members. Chief of State Suu, Huong says, is so kind hearted that he does not recognize the wickedness of men about him and is thus pliable to pressures. He has recently urged Huong not to go too hard on demonstrations who [which] might include innocent people. In spite of all adverse factors, Huong is confident that he and his ministers can hang on.

I then asked Khanh to comment upon the internal condition in the Army. Was he concerned about malcontents there? Khanh replied that, having been in politics for a year, certain members of the Army were finding it hard to break old habits but generally they were becoming better behaved. He pointed out that the officer corps was non-homogeneous in the sense that it came from many sources and included individuals of widely differing backgrounds. Hence it was not surprising to find numerous small groups of malcontents but there is nothing like a political faction. He did recognize, however, that some Dai Viet were still about but are presently lying low.

The next subject we discussed was the estimate of degree of deterioration which has taken place in the provinces in recent months and the danger of a sudden collapse. All three rejected strongly the latter possibility. They concede that the situation has worsened in some provinces but they expect no dramatic toboggan. Khanh remarked that the provincial front would hold and the Saigon front would hold, and so all that remained for concern was the “Washington front.”

I then asked whether they had any suggestions as to ways of improving the pacification program and turning the trend upward. Huong remarked that the real remedy was for the government to demonstrate will and capability to serve the public interest and to assure that U.S. aid reaches the people at the grassroots. Khanh discussed the probable need for more manpower both in the military services and in the police. In spite of slowness in reaching presently authorized strength levels, he is confident that even greater strengths could be attained. Both he and the Prime Minister commented that evidence of U.S. support would be an encouragement to the people and would facilitate recruiting. Huong also mentioned the need for a stronger radio station in Saigon comparable to that of Hanoi. Khanh had previously raised the matter with the U.S. Mission at a meeting with the old NSC.

The next subject discussed was the question of carrying the war into Laos or North Viet-Nam. I noted that General Khanh had raised the slogan “March North” some months before but that I had never understood what he exactly had in mind. Khanh explained that he never meant by “March North” a movement on the ground into North Viet-Nam. He never had any idea of occupying North Viet-Nam. He did have in mind reprisal bombing in compensation for Viet-Cong depredations in the South. He later added that continued infiltration probably offered a broader justification for action against the North than spectacular Viet-Cong attacks.

I advanced some of the usual arguments against this course of action pointing out that air attacks in Laos, while they might limit infiltration, would certainly not stop it. Attacks on the DRV would probably result in some hostile reaction in the form of a ground attack into the northern provinces of South Viet-Nam, of air attacks on northern centers or of heightened Viet-Cong terrorism. In the background, there would always be the possibility of ChiCom intervention in some form. I asked if the government was prepared to take these risks for the possible advantages which might accrue from offensive actions against Hanoi.

All three officials stoutly insisted that they would run the risk unhesitatingly. Vien stressed the stimulating effect upon the South Vietnamese people of seeing the enemy pay for his misdeeds and the favorable effect on the campaign against the Viet-Cong. Khanh rejected my suggestion that the Armed Forces might tend to neglect the anti-Viet-Cong campaign if they thought an easy formula for success could be found in air attacks. Although I pointed out that the destruction of North Viet-Nam would not necessarily conclude the guerrilla warfare in the South, both Khanh and Vien argued strongly that the discouraged Viet-Cong would soon fall apart if Hanoi were out of the picture.

Johnson asked whether attacks on compatriots in the North would not result in sharp criticism of the GVN and of the U.S. They conceded that there would be some complaints but thought they would not be significant.

At end, I summarized my understanding of their views as follows; and they agreed to its accuracy: a. Huong believes his government can survive in spite of current attacks.

b. There has been deterioration in the situation during the last few months but there is no danger of a sudden debacle:

c. The in-country situation can be improved if the government shows that it is the servant of the people. Improvement will probably also require an increase in military and police manpower.

d. Military action against DRV is essential and worth the risks which it may entail. 3

3 At 4 p.m. on November 25, Johnson, at his request, met with Suu to discuss the situation in Saigon. Johnson stressed the need to support Huong, particularly in connection with Taylor’s return to Washington. Johnson concluded his report on the meeting: “Suu obviously got the message.” (Telegram 1635; ibid., Central Files, POL 15 VIET S; published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 001266)

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret; Limdis. Drafted by Taylor on November 24. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 November 20.

426. Paper Prepared by the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) 426. Paper Prepared by the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)1

Saigon, undated.

2

SUBJECT

The Current Situation in South Viet-Nam—November, 1964

After a year of changing and ineffective government, the counterinsurgency program country-wide is bogged down and will require heroic treatment to assure revival. Even in the Saigon area, in spite of the planning and the special treatment accorded the Hop Tac plan, this area also is lagging. The northern provinces of South Viet-Nam which a year ago were considered almost free of Viet-Cong are now in deep trouble. In the Quang Ngai-Binh Dinh area, the gains of the Viet-Cong have been so serious that once more we are threatened with a partition of the country by a Viet-Cong salient driven to the sea. The pressure on this area has been accompanied by continuous sabotage of the railroad and of Highway 1 which in combination threaten an economic strangulation of the northern provinces.

This deterioration of the pacification program has taken place in spite of the very heavy losses inflicted almost daily on the Viet-Cong and the increase in strength and professional competence of the Armed Forces of South Viet-Nam. Not only have the Viet-Cong apparently made good their losses, but of late, have demonstrated three new or newly expanded tactics: the use of stand-off mortar fire against important targets, as in the attack on the Bien Hoa airfield; economic strangulation of limited areas; finally, the stepped-up infiltration of DRV military personnel moving from the north. These new or improved tactics employed against the background of general deterioration offer a serious threat to the pacification program in general and to the safety of important bases and installations in particular.

Perhaps more serious than the downward trend in the pacification situation, because it is the prime cause, is the continued weakness of the central government. Although the Huong government has been installed after executing faithfully and successfully the program laid out by the Khanh government for its own replacement, the chances for the long life and effective performance of the new line-up appear small. Indeed, in view of the factionalism existing in Saigon and elsewhere throughout the country, it is impossible to foresee a stable and effective government under any name in anything like the near future. Nonetheless, we do draw some encouragement from the character and seriousness of purpose of Prime Minister Huong and his cabinet and the apparent intention of General Khanh to keep the Army out of politics, at least for the time being.

As our programs plod along or mark time, we sense the mounting feeling of war weariness and hopelessness which pervade South Viet-Nam, particularly in the urban areas. Although the provinces for the most part appear steadfast, undoubtedly there is chronic discouragement there as well as in the cities. Although the military leaders have not talked recently with much conviction about the need for “marching North,” assuredly many of them are convinced that some new and drastic action must be taken to reverse the present trends and to offer hope of ending the insurgency in some finite time.

The causes for the present unsatisfactory situation are not hard to find. It stems from two primary causes, both already mentioned above, the continued ineffectiveness of the central government, and the other, the increasing strength and effectiveness of the Viet-Cong and their ability to replace losses.

While, in view of the historical record of South Viet-Nam, it is not surprising to have these governmental difficulties, this chronic weakness is a critical liability to future plans. Without an effective central government with which to mesh the U.S. effort, the latter is a spinning wheel unable to transmit impulsion to the machinery of the GVN. While the most critical governmental weaknesses are in Saigon, they are duplicated to a degree in the provinces. It is most difficult to find adequate provincial chiefs and supporting administrative personnel to carry forward the complex programs which are required in the field for successful pacification. It is true that when one regards the limited background of the provincial chiefs and their associates, one should perhaps be surprised by the results which they have accomplished, but unfortunately, these results are generally not adequate for the complex task at hand or for the time schedule which we would like to establish.

As the past history of this country shows, there seems to be a national attribute which makes for factionalism and limits the development of a truly national spirit. Whether this tendency is innate or a development growing out of the conditions of political suppression under which successive generations have lived is hard to determine. But it is an inescapable fact that there is no national tendency toward team play or mutual loyalty to be found among many of the leaders and political groups within South Viet-Nam. Given time, many of these conditions will undoubtedly change for the better, but we are unfortunately pressed for time and unhappily perceive no short-term solution for the establishment of stable and sound government.

The ability of the Viet-Cong continuously to rebuild their units and to make good their losses is one of the mysteries of this guerrilla war. We are aware of the recruiting methods by which local boys are induced or compelled to join the Viet-Cong ranks and have some general appreciation of the amount of infiltration of personnel from the outside. Yet taking both of these sources into account, we still find no plausible explanation of the continued strength of the Viet-Cong if our data on Viet-Cong losses are even approximately correct. Not only do the Viet-Cong units have the recuperative powers of the phoenix, but they have an amazing ability to maintain morale. Only in rare cases have we found evidences of bad morale among Viet-Cong prisoners or recorded in captured Viet-Cong documents.

Undoubtedly one cause for the growing strength of the Viet-Cong is the increased direction and support of their campaign by the government of North Viet-Nam. This direction and support take the form of endless radioed orders and instructions, and the continuous dispatch to South Viet-Nam of trained cadre and military equipment over infiltration routes by land and by water. While in the aggregate, this contribution to the guerrilla campaign over the years must represent a serious drain on the resources of the DRV, that government shows no sign of relaxing its support of the Viet-Cong. In fact, the evidence points to an increased contribution over the last year, a plausible development, since one would expect the DRV to press hard to exploit the obvious internal weaknesses in the south.

If, as the evidence shows, we are playing a losing game in South Viet-Nam, it is high time we change and find a better way. To change the situation, it is quite clear that we need to do three things: first, establish an adequate government in SVN; second, improve the conduct of the counterinsurgency campaign; and, finally, persuade or force the DRV to stop its aid to the Viet-Cong and to use its directive powers to make the Viet-Cong desist from their efforts to overthrow the government of South Viet-Nam.

With regard to the first objective, it is hard to decide what is the minimum government which is necessary to permit reasonable hope for the success of our efforts. We would certainly like to have a government which is capable of maintaining law and order, of making and executing timely decisions, of carrying out approved programs, and generally of leading its people and gearing its efforts effectively with those of the United States.

As indicated above, however, it seems highly unlikely that we will see such a government of South Viet-Nam in the time frame available to us to reverse the downward trend of events. It seems quite probable that we will be obliged to settle for something considerably less.

However, it is hard to visualize our being willing to make added outlays of resources and to run increasing political risks without an allied government which, at least, can speak for and to its people, can maintain law and order in the principal cities, can provide local protection for the vital military bases and installations, can raise and support Armed Forces, and can gear its efforts to those of the United States. Anything less than this would hardly be a government at all, and under such circumstances, the United States Government might do better to carry forward the war on a purely unilateral basis.

The objective of an improved counterinsurgency program will depend for its feasibility upon the capacity of the South Vietnamese government. We cannot do much better than what we are doing at present until the government improves. However, we need to have our plans and means organized on the assumption that some improvement will occur and will permit intensified efforts toward the pacification of the country.

In any case, we feel sure that even after establishing some reasonably satisfactory government and effecting some improvement in the counterinsurgency program, we will not succeed in the end unless we drive the DRV out of its reinforcing role and obtain its cooperation in bringing an end to the Viet-Cong insurgency.

To attain these three objectives, we must consider what are the possible courses of action which are open to us. To improve the government we will, of course, continue to aid, advise and encourage it much as we are doing at the present time. We will try to restrain, insofar as we can, the minority groups bent upon its overthrow. We will indicate clearly the desire of the United States Government to see an end to the succession of weak and transitory governments and we will throw all of our influence on the side of stabilizing programs both for organizations and for personnel.

As these efforts in themselves will probably be inadequate, we should also consider ways and means to raise the morale and restore the confidence both of the government and of the South Vietnamese people. One way to accomplish this lift of morale would be to increase the covert operations against North Viet-Nam by sea and air and the counter-infiltration attacks within the Laotian corridor. While the former would be covert in the sense of being disavowed, nonetheless the knowledge of their occurrence could be made known in such a way as to give the morale lift which is desired. Additionally, we could engage in reprisal bombings, to repay outrageous acts of the Viet-Cong in South Viet-Nam, such as the attack on Bien Hoa.

All these actions, however, may not be sufficient to hold the present government upright. If it fails, we are going to be in deep trouble, with limited resources for subsequent actions. It is true that we could try again with another civilian government but the odds against it would be even higher than those which have confronted the Huong government. We might try in a second civilian government to take over operational control by U.S. officials if indeed the GVN would agree to this change. However, there are more objections to this form of U.S. intervention than there are arguments in favor of it. Another alternative would be to invite back a military dictatorship on the model of that headed of late by General Khanh. However, Khanh did very poorly when he was on the spot and we have little reason to believe that a successor military government could be more effective. Finally, we always have the option of withdrawing, leaving the internal situation to the Vietnamese, and limiting our contribution to military action directed at North Viet-Nam. Such action, while assuring that North Viet-Nam would pay a price for its misdeeds in the South, would probably not save South Viet-Nam from eventual loss to the Viet-Cong.

There is little to say about the ways and means of intensifying the in-country counterinsurgency program except to recognise again that this program depends entirely upon the government. If we can solve the governmental problem, we can improve the in-country program.

In bringing military pressure to bear on North Viet-Nam, there are a number of variations which are possible. At the bottom of the ladder of escalation, we have the initiation of intensified covert operations, anti-infiltration attacks in Laos, and reprisal bombings mentioned above as a means for stiffening South Vietnamese morale. From this level of operations, we could begin to escalate progressively by attacking appropriate targets in North Viet-Nam. If we justified our action primarily upon the need to reduce infiltration, it would be natural to direct these attacks on infiltration-related targets such as staging areas, training facilities, communications centers and the like. The tempo and weight of the attacks could be varied according to the effects sought. In its final forms, this kind of attack could extend to the destruction of all important fixed targets in North Viet-Nam and to the interdiction of movement on all lines of communication.

Before making a final decision on any of the courses of action, it will be necessary to have a heart-to-heart talk with Prime Minister Huong and General Khanh to find out their reaction to the alternatives which we are considering. They will be taking on risks as great or greater than ours so that they have a right to a serious hearing. We should make every effort to get them to ask our help in expanding the war. If they decline, we shall have to rethink the whole situation. If, as is likely, they urge us with enthusiasm, we should take advantage of the opportunity to nail down certain important points such as: a. The GVN undertakes (1) to maintain the strength of its military and police forces; (2) to replace incompetent military commanders and province chiefs and to leave the competent ones in place for an indefinite period; (3) to suppress disorders and demonstrations; (4) to establish effective resources control; and (5) to obtain U.S. concurrence for all military operations outside of South Viet-Nam.

b. The U.S. undertakes responsibility for the air and maritime defense of South Viet-Nam.

c. The GVN undertakes responsibility for the land defense of South Viet-Nam to include the protection of all U.S. nationals and installations.

d. The GVN accepts the U.S. statement (to be prepared) of war aims and circumstances for negotiations.

Shortly after initiating an escalation program it will be important to communicate with the DRV and the ChiComs to establish certain essential points in the minds of their leaders. The first is that under no circumstances will the United States let the DRV go unscathed and reap the benefits of its nefarious actions in South Viet-Nam without paying a heavy price. Furthermore, we will not accept any statement from the DRV to the effect that it is not responsible for the Viet-Cong insurgency and that it cannot control the Viet-Cong actions. We know better and will act accordingly. However, the enemy should know that the United States objectives are limited. We are not seeking to unify North and South Viet-Nam; we are seeking no permanent military presence in Southeast Asia. But on the other hand, we do insist that the DRV let its neighbors, South Viet-Nam and Laos, strictly alone.

Furthermore, we are not trying to change the nature of the government in Hanoi. If the North Vietnamese prefer a Communist government, that is their choice to make. If the DRV remain aloof from the ChiComs in a Tito-like state, we would not be averse to aiding such a government provided it conducted itself decently with its neighbors.

But with all, we are tired of standing by and seeing the unabashed efforts of the DRV to absorb South Viet-Nam into the Communist orbit against its will. We know that Hanoi is responsible and that we are going to punish it until it desists from this behavior.

Just how and when such a communication should be transmitted should be a subject of careful study. But, some such transmission is required to assure that the Communists in the North know exactly what is taking place and will continue to take place.

We can be reasonably sure that the DRV, and Viet-Cong, will not take such offensive actions on our part without a reaction. Already the Viet-Cong, assisted from Hanoi, are doing many things to hamper and harass the central and local governments of South Viet-Nam, to encourage minorities to resist Saigon and to foster the spirit of neutralism and defeatism everywhere. They are quite capable of intensifying such actions, of raising the level of harassments of people and officials, of mounting mortar attacks on the model of Bien Hoa, and of continuing to try to effect the economic strangulation of many areas within South Viet-Nam.

There are several courses of action which they could adopt which are presently not on their program. They can call for international intervention to force us to desist from our pressures. They can engage in limited air and ground attacks in South Viet-Nam using formed units of the armies of North Viet-Nam and perhaps volunteers from Red China. It is quite likely that they will invite some ChiCom military forces into the DRV if only to reinforce its air defense. Furthermore, they have some limited seaborne capability for raids against the South Vietnamese coast.

If their counter actions failed and our pressures became unbearable, the DRV might feign submission and undertake to lie low for a time. They would probably, however, insist that they do not have the capability of compelling the Viet-Cong to lay down their arms and become law-abiding citizens. Any temporary reduction of their support of the Viet-Cong could, of course, be resumed at any time after the United States had been cajoled into leaving the scene of actions.

In view of the foregoing considerations, we reach the point where a decision must be taken as to what course or courses of action we should undertake to change the tide which is running against us. It seems perfectly clear that we must work to the maximum to make something out of the present Huong government or any successor thereto. While doing so, we must be thinking constantly of what we would do if our efforts are unsuccessful and the government collapses. Concurrently, we should stay on the present in-country program, intensifying it as possible in proportion to the current capabilities of the government. To bolster the local morale and restrain the Viet-Cong during this period, we should step up the 34–A operations, engage in bombing attacks and armed recce in the Laotian corridor and undertake reprisal bombing as required. It will be important that United States forces take part in the Laotian operations in order to demonstrate to South Viet-Nam our willingness to share in the risks of attacking the North.

If this course of action is inadequate, and the government falls, then we must start over again or try a new approach. At this moment, it is premature to say exactly what these new measures should be. In any case, we should be prepared for emergency military action against the North if only to shore up a collapsing situation.

If, on the other hand as we hope, the government maintains and proves itself, then we should be prepared to embark on a methodical program of mounting air attacks in order to accomplish our pressure objectives vis-à-vis the DRV and at the same time do our best to improve in-country pacification program. We will leave negotiation initiatives to Hanoi. Throughout this period, our guard must be up in the Western Pacific, ready for any reaction by the DRV or of Red China. Annex I suggests the train of events which we might set in motion.

Whatever the course of events, we should adhere to three principles: a. Do not enter into negotiations until the DRV is hurting.

b. Never let the DRV gain a victory in South Viet-Nam without having paid a disproportionate price.

c. Keep the GVN in the forefront of the combat and the negotiations.

Maxwell D. Taylor3

Annex I4

SUGGESTED SCENARIO FOR CONTROLLED ESCALATION

(The following suggests a sequence of events without at this time attempting to establish precise time intervals. It assumes that 34–A operations and corridor strikes including armed reconnaissance in Laos have been continuing for some period prior to initiating scenario. It also assumes that background briefing on infiltration has been given in both Saigon and Washington.)

1. Definitive discussions with GVN to obtain firm GVN request for joint action against DRV and to reach agreement on the framework of demands to be made on the DRV as well as on general negotiating procedures. (See 15 below)

2. Initiate discussions with Thai Government.

3. Initiate discussions with other selected friendly governments.

4. Quietly initiate necessary preparatory military moves that have thus far not been taken. (Preparatory military moves should have included or include stationing of Hawk battalion and F–105s at Danang, a MEB afloat of Danang and the alerting of the 173rd ABG).

5. Initiate discussions with RLG.

6. Cease travel to Vietnam of additional dependents, but take no action to evacuate dependents already in Vietnam pending further developments.

7. An appropriate intermediary tells Hanoi nothing has been heard from the U.S.; he is concerned over the situation; and does Hanoi have anything to pass on to the U.S.?

8. Yankee Team strikes Route seven targets in Laos.

9. RLAF attack on DRV side of Mua Gia Pass with U.S. air CAP.

10. A single VNAF air strike against an infiltration target in DRV just north of DMZ.

11. A significant MAROP supported by U.S. air cover.

12. GVN-US air strike on infiltration target just north of DMZ.

13. Continue limited military actions in the foregoing categories sequentially with not more than a few days gap between each, while being prepared promptly to make higher level responses to attacks from MIGs or V–C spectaculars in SVN.

14. Throughout the foregoing, in absence of public statements by DRV, initiate no public statement or publicity by ourselves or GVN. If DRV does make public statements, confine ourselves and GVN to statements that GVN is exercising right of self-defense and we are assisting.

15. In light of developments, disclose to selected allies, and possibly USSR, US/GVN terms for cessation of attacks as follows: (It will be important to assure that one of these channels undertakes accurately and fully to communicate these terms to both Hanoi and Peking)

A. Demands 1. DRV return to strict observance of 1954 Accords with respect SVN—that is, stop infiltration and bring about a cessation of VC armed insurgency. (Query—should demand include DRV observance of 1962 Accords with respect to Laos and how should such demand be framed so as to give ICC Laos effective role in monitoring infiltration through Laos?)

B. In return: 1. U.S. will return to 1954 Accords with respect to military personnel in GVN and GVN would be willing to enter into trade talks looking toward normalization of economic relations between DRV and GVN.

2. Subject to faithful compliance by DRV with 1954 Accords, U.S. and GVN would give assurances that they would not use force or support the use of force by any other party to upset the Accords with respect to the DRV.

3. Within the framework of the 1954 Accords, the GVN would permit VC desiring to do so to return to the DRV without their arms or would grant amnesty to those peacefully laying down their arms and desiring to remain in SVN.

C. If and when Hanoi indicates its acceptance of foregoing conditions, careful consideration must be given to immediate subsequent procedures which will avoid dangers of: (a) becoming involved in a cease fire vis-à-vis the DRV and/or the VC accompanied by strung-out negotiations; (b) making conditions so stringent as to be unworkable from practical point of view. Probably best procedure would be to have the GVN and DRV meet in the DMZ under ICC auspices with US observers to reach agreement on mechanics of carrying out understanding while action against the VC and DRV continues, at least in principle.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–157–69. Top Secret. The source text is initialed by Taylor and bears his notation: “Papers used in Washington during Dec 64 trip.” Printed also in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III, pp. 666–673 and published in Declassified Documents, 1983, 000557.

2 Although the source text is undated, William Bundy notes that Taylor, who arrived in Washington on November 26, brought the paper with him. (Department of State, Bundy Files, Bundy Manuscript, ch. 19, p.5)

3 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

4 Top Secret.

427. Editorial Note 427. Editorial Note

Following his meeting with the President on August 6 (see Document 298), U Thant contacted Ho Chi Minh about the possibility of direct talks with the United States. By early September, he had received a positive response, but the record is unclear whether he transmitted it to Ambassador Stevenson at that time, or because of the Presidential campaign, not until November. On November 23, 24, and 26, Stevenson and Secretary of State Rusk discussed the question and Rusk concluded that U Thant should keep the matter in his hands for the time being. Because U Thant was ill for much of December, further talks did not take place until January 1965.

Records of the three conversations between Stevenson and Rusk are in Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations. A 4-page undated paper, entitled “Key Points of Developments Relating to U Thant’s ‘Rangoon’ Initiative,” with an attached 9-page chronology, is ibid., Ball Papers: Lot 74 D 272, Vietnam U Thant. For another account of these discussions, see Walter Johnson (ed.), The Papers of Adlai Stevenson, volume VIII, pages 661–666.

428. Memorandum of the Meeting of the Executive Committee 428. Memorandum of the Meeting of the Executive Committee1

Washington, November 27, 1964, 11:30 a.m.

PRESENT

Secretary Rusk

Secretary McNamara

Ambassador Taylor

Mr. McCone

General Wheeler

Mr. Ball

Mr. McGeorge Bundy

Mr. William Bundy

Mr. McNaughton

Mr. Forrestal

1. The question was raised of what message to the GVN would make them perform better. Ambassador Taylor thought that he must have a strong message but that any threat of “withdrawal unless” would be quite a “gamble”. It was noted that it was still possible to stress that we could not help as we would like unless the GVN did shape up.

2. There was discussion of whether we could carry on “unilateral” military actions if the GVN collapsed or told us to get out. The consensus was that it was hard to visualize continuing in these circumstances, but that the choice must certainly be avoided if at all possible.

3. Ambassador Taylor noted that “neutralism” as it existed in Saigon appeared to mean throwing the internal political situation open and thus inviting Communist participation. There was discussion of neutralism in the sense of withdrawal of external assistance, and the opinion was expressed that external assistance would remain essential unless the VC was defeated and that neutralism either in the sense of no more external assistance or in the sense of a free political system could not be maintained unless this was done.

4. Ambassador Taylor, upon being asked about the problem of administrative cumbersomeness, said that some progress had been made and that this problem could be handled if the GVN itself got going. He expressed the general view that newspaper reports exaggerated the weakness of the present government, that Huong had many fine qualities, and that he, Vien, and Khanh could mesh into a reasonably effective team if they could handle sniping from the Buddhists and students. The Ambassador noted that there was no prospect of a widely based Assembly for some months, but that such an Assembly, if it came, could be serious in causing general static and possibly leading to some Communist representation. In answer to a question, Ambassador Taylor said that General Khanh was performing quite effectively, was out in the field except for weekends, and had made many military command changes of which General Westmoreland approved. Khanh had said that he would make no more changes.

5. Ambassador Taylor noted that General Westmoreland had prepared a report of the military situation, which he would distribute to the group.2 Westmoreland was generally more optimistic than he, Taylor, and saw many signs and possibilities of improvement on the military side. Westmoreland would be inclined to wait six months to have a firmer base for stronger actions. However, the Ambassador said that he himself did not believe that we could count on the situation holding together that long, and that we must do something sooner than this. Secretary McNamara noted his disagreement with General Westmoreland’s view. The view was expressed that the political situation was not likely to become stronger but that nonetheless the US was justified in taking measures along the lines of Option C. Ambassador Taylor noted that stronger action would definitely have a favorable effect on GVN and South Vietnamese performance and morale, but he was not sure this would be enough really to improve the situation. Others in the group agreed with this evaluation, and the view was expressed that the strengthening effect of Option C could at least buy time, possibly measured in years.

It was urged that over the next two months we adopt a program of Option A plus the first stages of Option C. The likelihood of improvement in the government seemed so doubtful that to get what improvement we could it was thought that we should move into some parts of C soon.

6. Ambassador Taylor gave details of the kind of message he would propose giving to the GVN. (This will be incorporated into the draft scenario for discussion at the next meeting.)

7. There was discussion of the infiltration evidence, and it was agreed that State and Defense should check statements made by Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara and General Wheeler on this subject, so that these could be related to the previous MACV and other estimates and a full explanation developed of how these earlier estimates had been made and why they had been wrong in the light of fuller evidence.

8. Ambassador Taylor stressed the importance of police forces and said that he would recommend holding the Popular Forces at the present level but stressing additional police. He noted that the police had better pay and perquisites than the armed forces and thought that this was right.

Ambassador Taylor raised a series of questions which he did not think had been adequately covered in the papers. (This list will be circulated separately.)3

9. It was agreed that we needed a more precise and fully spelled out scenario of what would be proposed if a decision were taken to adopt a general program along the lines of Section VII of the Draft Summary4 (Immediate Actions), with or without a decision to move into the full Option C program at some time thereafter. Mr. William Bundy undertook a produce a draft scenario5 along these lines for discussion at the next meeting of the group, which was scheduled for 11:00 a.m. on Saturday, November 28.

1 Source: Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1. Top Secret. Drafted by William Bundy. Also printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. 111, pp. 674–676. Bundy’s handwritten notes on this meeting are in Department of State, Bundy Files, Master Papers, Late Nov 1964. He also describes it in some detail in his manuscript, Chapter 19, pp. 5–8. (Ibid.) Taylor notes that the meeting began at 9:30 a.m. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69), but this is inconsistent with Rusk’s Appointment Book and Bundy’s Manuscript which give 11:30 and late morning, respectively, as the time of the meeting.

2 Westmoreland’s memorandum to Taylor, November 24, on the military situation in South Vietnam is published in Declassified Documents, 1977, 278E.

3 Document 429.

4 Document 418.

5 Not printed here. (Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. 1: printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, vol. III. pp. 676–677)

429. Paper Prepared by the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor) 429. Paper Prepared by the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor)1

Washington, November 27, 1964.

Questions Requiring Answers

1. What is the situation which is assumed to exist at the time of the initiation of either Course B or Course C? What is going on?

2. What is the minimum acceptable government which must be in being prior to initiating Course C?

3. Under Course B or C, what role does the armed forces of South Viet-Nam play?

4. Similarly, what role does the GVN play in negotiations and public statements?

5. What is the span of time contemplated for Courses B and C?

6. When and how do we communicate with Hanoi? What is said and by whom?

7. What do we communicate to the Government of Viet-Nam with regard to our intention? When? By whom?

8. In this discussion with the GVN, what do we ask from them and what do we offer to add to what we are doing for them?

9. What is to be said to the Congress and the U.S. public? When and by whom?

10. What, when and how do we communicate our intentions to friendly nations?

11. What do we do if the Huong government collapses some place along the B or C track?

12. What are the circumstances justifying retaliation bombing and how do we assure a quick and effective response? Who does it; U.S., GVN or both?

13. In any SVN scenario, how do we fit in an incident affecting only U.S. interests such as the Bay of Tonkin?2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII, Memos. Secret. Attached to a note from the Executive Secretariat of the Department of State, dated November 27, which stated that the questions were circulated for consideration by the members of the Executive Committee.

2 On November 2, following meetings of Executive Committee and with the President, Taylor added the six following questions to the list: “14. What kind of official reply is desired from GVN in response to Ambassador’s presentation?

“15. What kind of public statement from GVN? “16. What say to S[uu?]?

“17. When start military action under Phase 1? How? “18. When present the infiltration data?

“19. What tell third countries about our plans? When in relation to start of Phase 1?” (National Defense University, Taylor Papers. T–272–69)

430. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (Cline) to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) 430. Memorandum From the Deputy Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (Cline) to the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)1

Washington, November 27, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

1. Out of the fog of medieval scholasticism surrounding many months of discussion of Vietnam, a few simple propositions seem to me to emerge as true. Most of the other subtle distinctions and arguments I have heard do not seem to me to affect the US course of action.

2. The political and military situation in SVN is bad. It may deteriorate rapidly at any time. Enlightened and imaginative efforts to stabilize SVN and defeat the VC by actions in SVN should be made whatever course of action the US adopts. The odds are these efforts will not succeed in reversing the unfavorable trend in SVN certainly not for a very long time, during which the US position and the stability of SVN would remain liable to sudden collapse.

3. In this unfavorable position, the US can take military action against NVN designed to achieve the limited objectives of causing the cessation of NVN support (cadres and supplies) and direction of VC insurgency in SVN. Even if successful, this action would not in and of itself insure achievement of the US basic strategic objective of maintaining a stable and effective non-Communist SVN, which is a valid and essential requirement of US policy in Southeast Asia and worldwide. It probably would buy time to try to improve the security situation in SVN, to gradually contain and eventually destroy the VC as an effective insurgent force, and to establish a stable, friendly government.

4. The way achievement of this limited objective of cutting off support and direction from NVN would operate on the situation in SVN would be: (a) reducing VC strength and military capability; (b) damaging VC morale by making the prospect of early victory remote; and (c) greatly increasing SVN morale by demonstrating US commitment to our basic strategic objective in Southeast Asia and eliminating the infiltration problem which makes counterinsurgency efforts seem hopeless.

5. The first phase in any military course of action aimed at causing the cessation of NVN support and direction of the VC insurgency ought to center on US air interdiction of infiltration lines of communication and US air strikes against infiltration associated facilities in Laos and inside NVN near the borders of Laos and the DMZ.

6. The likelihood of extreme NVN or Chicom military reactions against such US military action would be small. There would be an intensive world-wide Communist political and propaganda campaign against the US. NVN would certainly try to defend its territory and forces, and there is likely to be a vigorous NVN effort at reprisals against US/SVN forces and facilities within reach.

7. There is a chance, though less than an even chance, that NVN would calculate that more damaging US attacks would follow. In that case, NVN might effect a cessation or a marked reduction of insurgent activity in SVN and its support and direction thereof, hoping to negotiate with the US terms that would not call for inspection and control arrangements adequate to prevent resumption of its support and direction at a later date. This would be a gain for the US provided the US insisted on adequate inspection and control and did not commit itself not to make further air strikes if NVN support and direction of the VC insurgency in fact continued. It would be a helpful psychological factor working toward a reversal of the unfavorable trend in SVN, and it might be the decisive one in achieving such a reversal.

8. There is, of course, a chance, though small, that NVN would react extremely with a frontal military assault or that the Chicoms would intervene directly on a large scale with air units and/or ground combat units. The US would have to be prepared to deal with these eventualities, but should not be deterred from military action by the risk. If, in fact, on grounds that seem irrational and reckless to us, NVN with Chicom support responds in this way, there would in fact be no way to avoid a direct military conflict between the US and NVN short of acquiescence in Communist domination of SVN and the abandonment of US objectives in Southeast Asia which we have agreed are valid and essential.

9. If NVN temporizes and makes no move toward cessation of its support and direction of VC insurgency in the face of the first phase US military actions described above, as is most likely, the US should proceed, after a pause, to a second phase which would extend air attacks to infiltration associated targets deeper within NVN, and in deliberate sequence to a third phase involving blockade (“quarantine”) of NVN. It is impossible to estimate with confidence the situation that would exist in these successive phases in either NVN or SVN, and therefore impossible to estimate with confidence the relative likelihood of the various possible Communist reactions that might occur. The range of possibilities would be the same, however, and the consequences the same

10. Generally, it is clear that the chances would increase at each step of increased pressure on NVN that NVN would opt to negotiate a cessation of support and direction of the VC insurgency on the most favorable terms they could achieve. At each step the US bargaining position would improve. At each step the chances of extreme NVN and Chicom reaction would increase. Even at the extreme range of US military actions aimed at bringing pressure on NVN, however, provided they do not progress to the point of occupation of NVN territory by substantial numbers of US ground forces, the Chicoms will be reluctant to become directly involved in a military conflict with the US and the chances are therefore better than even that they would not introduce large-scale ground combat units into Vietnam or Laos. As a consequence, the chances are also better than even that NVN would not itself directly invade SVN or Laos but would instead intensify its efforts to negotiate on the best terms possible.

Ray S. Cline

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File. Vietnam Country File. Vol. XXII. Memos. Top Secret.

431. Editorial Note 431. Editorial Note

The Executive Committee resumed its meetings at 11 a.m. on November 28, continuing consideration of the summary (Document 418), Taylor’s report (Document 426), and a new paper drafted by William Bundy, “Scenario for Immediate Action,” dated November 28. (Department of State, Bundy Files, Working Papers, Nov 1964, Vol. I; printed in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, volume III, pages 676–677) Brief accounts of this meeting are in the National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69, and Bundy’s handwritten notes are in Department of State, Bundy Files, Master Papers, Late Nov 1964. Following the meeting, McGeorge Bundy transmitted to the Texas White House the summary, Taylor’s report, and a book of the draft papers on courses of action in South Vietnam. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Courses of Action in SEA)

On November 29, the Executive Committee continued its discussion, and William Bundy drew up a memorandum which presented its conclusions in the form of a draft National Security Action Memorandum on Southeast Asia, a draft White House statement, and a draft statement for Taylor to make to the Government of South Vietnam. (Kennedy Library, Thomson Papers, Southeast Asia Vietnam, General 1964; printed in part in Pentagon Papers: Gravel Edition, volume III, pages 677–683) At 1:30 p.m. on November 30, the Executive Committee held its final review of the papers under consideration since November 3, which resulted in a draft position paper on Southeast Asia and a draft instruction from the President to Ambassador Taylor. Copies of these drafts are in Department of State, Bundy Files, Action Papers, both showing revisions made at the meeting with the President on December 1 (see Document 432). Bundy’s brief handwritten notes on the meeting on November 30 are in Department of State, Bundy Files, Master Papers, Late Nov 1964.

432. Notes on a Meeting, White House 432. Notes on a Meeting, White House1

Washington, December 1, 1964, 11:30 a.m.

PRESENT

President, Humphrey, M. Bundy, Taylor, Rusk, W. Bundy, McNamara, Wheeler, McNaughton, McCone

T: Pacification bogging down. VC activity in north SVN. Govt instability. DRV infiltration up. Two problems: weak govt & VC strength. Won’t collapse immediately, but losing game. Papers suggest acting to boost GVN & weaken VC. (Talked from attachment J.)2

Pres: How many groups have to talk to?

T: 1. Military (Khanh & senior generals—Ky + 2 or 3); 2. Catholics (Archbish + Quinn + few); 3. Buddhists (2: Tam Chao; Tri Quang); 4. Labor (Buu, but splits).

Pres: Where are the Coms? In Buddhists?

T: Reds using Bs.3

Pres: French?

T: No monkey wrenches.

T (continuing): 5. HNC. Pain in the neck.

Pres: How did Diem do it?

T: Tight ship. No cement in the people. All factions enjoying taking part. Never worked together. Need army behind govt & courageous man. Huong is courageous. Better off today than 1 or 2 mos ago.

Pres: Most essential is a stable govt. Looks like Huong on newspaper in mid Atl & if moves, gets wet & sinks. Need to pull all groups together—put on concrete. We did in US post-assassination. Basic to anything is stability. (“You know my views of Diem. Don’t want another Diem”) How bring these people together—if it takes all 50 [states?] & Rockefeller money. They do it or else. No point hitting North if South not together. What can we do? We thought Khanh pretty good, but gone. Ditto Huong.

T: We’ve warned them before.

Pres: Why not say “This is it!”? Not send Johnson City boys out to die if they acting as they are.

T: Maybe emphasize that our offer is for Huong govt.

Pres: Must face problem of how to keep problem from looking worse here than it is. What resources have we? Pope? Cld he straighten it out with Catholics.

McC: Talked to Pope & Sec State.

Pres: Anything to do with Buddhists? Econ? Social?

T: Minds of 3 or 4 people; CIA sees no way to work on them. Don’t want to exile them. Know them.

Pres: Can’t we get the ambitious politicians into the act?

T: More than 100 in the cabinet. 14 (too big) now. Pretty good. Vien (Kin’s uncle) may be white hope. He is close to Huong. He skid succeed Huong.

Pres: Let’s get thinker to work on A B C D’s to Buddhists. Now, Army?

T: Done pretty well. [Khanh] will go back, as indicated.

Pres: Have we oversold them on our necessity of being power in the Pacific. “Are they drunk on Alsop”.

T: Politics tend to think VC is US problem. If Huong govt falls: 1. Another civilian govt, 2. US take over operational control, 3. Mil dictatorship, 4. Shrink our role (retreat). Mil wants increased strength.

M:4 2–4 squ5 effective strength.

Pres: Easy to get in or out. Hard to be patient. Anything more we can do to VN, making them good Rangers. Jet plane can’t interdict VC. Better guerrillas?

T: This is what we’re doing in SVN. 80-1OOg VC (34,000 hardcore & 60–80 regl6 & part-time). Armed forces 550,000 (200,000 real).

Pres: How [can] 34,000 lick 200,000?

T: Ratio in other areas 10:1 to 20:1 for guerrilla situations. Means 20 b[illion] piastres; $175 m[illion].

Wh: Excellent program (guerrilla).

Pres: But failed. If dollars [are needed], give ‘em. Not want to send widow woman to slap Jack Dempsey. DRV will bomb Saigon once. Then we are off to the races. Maybe we’ve given them best training, so all [we] can do is more people. Day of reckoning is coming. Want to be sure we’ve done everything we can. Got to be some things still to do. What? We cld have kept Diem.

T: We need one. Maybe Huong & Vien together may be a Diem. May be progressing. But progress will be slow. Also we must get Hanoi out of the business.

Pres: But hadn’t we better shape up before we do anything. Also dependents should be out.

M: There are 4000.

T: Can do on short notice. Do it when needed.

Pres: I have looked at summary of our efforts re strong desire re 3rd country help—more than chaplain & nurse. If [government?] fails, we want them in with us. UK can’t [because of] Malaysia, Germany has Berlin, Australians a “shirt tail frill”. If as serious as [we] believe, need new approach & get big numbers from them.

R: Will review this. UK can do more. May use Hubert.

Pres: Why not use Chinats. Want promptly [to] fire any leaker.

R: Combat Chinats wd merge SVN problem with whole Chinese problem. Chiang wld exploit contrary to our interests.

McC: Can do much more.

Pres: Can we tell them they can’t exploit. Wh will ask to hit North.

R: Chiang may be reluctant to make troops available.

M: 1000 Phil, Aust. & UK not make much cliff militarily, but much politically.

R: Canadians on ICC & carrying burden elsewhere (Cyprus). Hit Wilson, Germans.

M: Germans—unpopular domestically, opposed to image.

T: Don’t need combat troops unless go North.

[2 paragraphs (2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Pres: List from T in a week of Utopian need. A. Under present conditions & B. anticipated conditions. Give thot to who shld make request respectfully, diplomatically & get job done. Then R, H37 or self go get ‘em. Anything out of India? Tell Bowles so. Pakistan?

Can see forces at work with $4 b[illion] a yr, & they not doing anything. Referred to poll.

Purpose of this mtg: 1. To pull stable govt together. Bell put in anything he can. Rice. Fertilizer. Before Wh saddles up, try anything. 2. After T’s report in wk or 10 days, pitch at 3d countries. 3. Try to get better press. Hesitant to sock neighbor if fever 104. Want to get well first. We’ve never been in position to attack. Easy to sock. Easy to follow Morse. They’ll be back in January. We want to be prepared to answer the questions. If need be, create a new Diem, so then [we] tell Wh to slap, we can slap back.

T: Doubt that Hanoi will slap back.

Pres: Didn’t MacArthur say the same.

T: All measures mentioned [are] needed. But not enuf. 2–3 mos can keep this govt going. Fumbling. Not much time to put new factor in except lift from hurting enemy.

Pres: Papers generally satisfactory. Never reluctant to stand up. But must do damndest in SVN. As many allies in as possible. Plan to get dependents out. “Plans you’ve got now, all right.”

M: Language changes in.

McC: Don’t expect first 30 days or transition to produce much. Reprisals important; could escalate fast.

Pres: “Policy decision that there will be reprisals but decide exactly what at the time.”

Wh: Gave JCS view re hard knock.

Pres: Interrupted to ask if RSM shared view that it’s downhill slide in SVN no matter what we do in country.

M: Yes.

Pres: “I agree with that (start under our own volition), but better if allies with us, dependents out, done all we can.” “Want conditions as favorable as we can get them.”

M: Cited Westy on need for base first.

Pres: We are undertaking some of this in our plan, but want to give T one last chance, McC (Pope), R (Allies). “If more of the same, then I’ll be talking to you, General.”

Pres: Not bad.

R: Do it pre airport.

Pres: T touch base with Hill. Come here to say goodbye & then see press here. “R out 2; RSM ditto; T in 2; Lodge.” Going to do this [from] time to time. Stick to statement & not go into ifs. No speculate. Other decisions time to time & tell when. Not[hing] to be gain[ed] from spelling ifs. Stick to announcement. More effective. Sorry built up to war.

Press at 1:30

Pres left at 1:43.

M: Re infiltration, let’s not release them now.

Pres: & shoot at sunrise if leak.

Reedy: (1) Did Max recommend stikes (2) Did Max recommend mil activity (3) Decisions on new moves (see statement)8 (4) Further meetings w T (Yes). Wh H statement.

Pres: Shld talk to Hill.

R: Ful, Hick, Salt,9 Russell.

Pres: Yes, small mtg so not want it spread, Eyes & Ears only. Give good & bad; cld hope inside, with 3d nations; ask for suggestions. RSM & R decide re House. Mahon if here. Ford maybe

Reedy: Backgrder bad. Either press conf or not.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Meeting Notes File, 12–1–64. Top Secret. The source text is handwritten notes taken by McNaughton. A similar but shorter set of handwritten notes, taken by William Bundy, is in Department of State, Bundy Files, Master Papers, Late Nov 1964. The meeting is also described in Bundy’s manuscript, Chap. 19, pp. 13–17. (Ibid.) The President had met with Rusk, McNamara, and William Bundy at 10:30 a.m. Johnson Library, President’s Daily Diary)

2 Not further identified. Presumably this is Document 426.

3 Buddhists.

4 McNamara.

5 Presumably squadrons.

6 regulars.

7 Vice President Humphrey.

8 For text of the statement issued on December 1, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 1001–1002.

9 Fulbright, Hickenlooper, and Saltonstall.

433. Paper Prepared by the Executive Committee 433. Paper Prepared by the Executive Committee1

Washington, December 2, 1964.

POSITION PAPER ON SOUTHEAST ASIA

I. Concept

A. US objectives in South Vietnam (SVN) are unchanged. They are to: 1. Get Hanoi and North Vietnam (DRY) support and direction removed from South Vietnam, and, to the extent possible, obtain DRV cooperation in ending Viet Cong (VC) operations in SVN.

2. Re-establish an independent and secure South Vietnam with appropriate international safeguards, including the freedom to accept US and other external assistance as required.

3. Maintain the security of other non-Communist nations in Southeast Asia including specifically the maintenance and observance of the Geneva Accords of 1962 in Laos.

B. We will continue to press the South Vietnamese Government (GVN) in every possible way to make the government itself more effective and to push forward with the pacification program. We will also press upon leaders and members of all groups in that country the overriding need for national unity.

C. We will join at once with the South Vietnamese and Lao Governments in a determined action program aimed at DRV activities in both countries and designed to help GVN morale and to increase the costs and strain on Hanoi, foreshadowing still greater pressures to come. Under this program the first phase actions within the next thirty days will be intensified forms of action already under way, plus possibly U.S. air protection of Lao aircraft making strikes in the Corridor, US armed air reconnaissance and air strikes against infiltration routes in Laos, and GVN and possibly US air strikes against the DRV as reprisal against any major or spectacular Viet Cong action in the south, whether against US personnel and installations or not. We would be prepared to stop the flow of dependents to Vietnam at the same time as US strikes in Laos were conducted.

D. Beyond the thirty-day period, first phase actions may be continued without change. Alternatively, additional military measures may be taken, including deployment of a large number of US aircraft to the area, low-level reconnaissance of infiltration targets in the DRV near the borders, and the possible initiation of strikes a short distance across the border against the infiltration routes from the DRV. At this time, we would be prepared to remove US dependents. In the alternative case these actions would become a transitional phase.

E. Thereafter, if the GVN improves its effectiveness to an acceptable degree and Hanoi does not yield on acceptable terms, the US is prepared—at a time to be determined—to enter into a second phase program, in support of the GVN and RLG, of graduated military pressures directed systematically against the DRV. Such a program would consist principally of progressively more serious air strikes, of a weight and tempo adjusted to the situation as it develops (possibly running from two to six months) and of appropriate US deployments to handle any contingency. Targets in the DRV would start with infiltration targets south of the 19th parallel and work up to targets north of that point. This could eventually lead to such measures as air strikes on all major military-related targets, aerial mining of DRV ports, and a US naval blockade of the DRV. The whole sequence of military actions would be designed to give the impression of a steady, deliberate approach, and to give the US the option at any time (subject to enemy reaction) to proceed or not, to escalate or not, and to quicken the pace or not. Concurrently, the US would be alert to any sign of yielding by Hanoi, and would be prepared to explore negotiated solutions that attain US objectives in an acceptable manner.

Tabs D–H2 to this paper contain a more detailed presentation of the precise actions contemplated under this concept. Tab D gives the actions proposed in the first, transitional, and second stages. Tab E spells out illustrative occasions that might be used for reprisals and reprisal targets. Tab F deals with possible major Communist actions and the US/allied counter moves that would then be indicated. Tab G is the Communist order of battle in Southeast Asia, and Tab H is the US order of battle and reinforcement capabilities.

II. Thirty-Day Action Program

A. A White House statement will be issued following the meeting with Ambassador Taylor, with the text as in Tab A, attached.3

B. Ambassador Taylor will consult with the GVN promptly on his return, making a general presentation and pressing for the adoption of specific measures in accordance with the instructions in Tab B, attached.4

C. Laos and Thailand

The US Ambassadors in these countries will inform the government in general terms of the concept we propose to follow and of specific actions requiring their concurrence or participation. In the case of Laos, we will obtain RLG approval of an intensified program of US armed reconnaissance and air strikes both in the Panhandle area of Laos and along the key infiltration routes in central Laos. These actions will not be publicized except to the degree approved by the RLG. It is important, however, for purposes of morale in SVN, that their existence be generally known.

Thailand will be asked to support our program fully, to intensify its own efforts in the north and northeast, and to give further support to operations in Laos, such as additional pilots and possibly artillery teams.

D. Key Allies

We will consult immediately with the UK, Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines.

1. UK. The President will explain the concept and proposed actions fully to Prime Minister Wilson, seeking full British support.

2. Australia and New Zealand will be told the concept and will be pressed not only for support but for additional contributions in South Vietnam. We will also discuss the possibility of small military unit contributions if and when E of the concept is carried out.

3. The Philippines will not be told the concept but will be pressed for additional contributions along the lines of the program for approximately 1800 men already submitted to President Macapagal.5

E. We will press generally and strongly for more third country aid, stressing the gravity of the situation and our deepening concern. A summary of existing third country aid is in Tab C, attached.6

F. Communist Countries 1. We will convey to Hanoi our unchanged determination and objectives, and that we have a growing concern at the DRV role, to see if there is any sign of change in Hanoi’s position.

2. We will make no special approaches to Communist China in this period.

3. We will convey our determination and grave concern to the Soviets, not in the expectation of any change in their position but in effect to warn them to stay out, and with some hope they will pass on the message to Hanoi and Peiping.

G. Other Countries 1. We will convey our grave concern to key interested governments such as Canada, India, and France, but avoid spelling out the concept.

2. In the event of a reprisal action, we will explain and defend our action in the UN as at the time of the Gulf of Tonkin incident. We do not plan to raise the issue otherwise in the UN. (The Lao Government may stress the DRV infiltration in Laos in its speech, and we should support this and spread the information.)

H. Intensified Military Actions (See Tab D) 1. GVN maritime operations (MAROPS) will be intensified.

2. Lao air operations will be intensified, especially in the corridor areas and close to the DRV border. US air cover and flak suppression may be supplied where needed.

3. US high-level reconnaissance over the DRV will be stepped up.

4. US armed air reconnaissance and air strikes will be carried out in Laos, first against the corridor area and within a short time against Route 7 and other infiltration routes. (These actions will be subject to RLG concurrence and publicized only to the degree agreed with Souvanna.)

I. Reprisal Actions (See Tab E)

For any VC provocation similar to the following, a reprisal will be undertaken, preferably within 24 hours, against one or more selected targets in the DRV. GVN forces will be used to the maximum extent, supplemented as necessary by US forces. The exact reprisal will be decided at the time, in accordance with a quick-reaction procedure which will be worked out.

The following may be appropriate occasions for reprisals, but we should be alert for any appropriate occasion: 1. Attacks on airfields.

2. Attack on Saigon.

3. Attacks on provincial or district capitals.

4. Major attacks on US citizens.

5. Attacks on major POL facilities.

6. Attacks on bridges and railroad lines after the presently damaged facilities have been restored and warning given.

7. Other “spectaculars” such as earlier attack on a US transport carrier at a pier in Saigon.

In these or similar cases, the reprisal action would be linked as directly as possible to DRV infiltration, so that we have a common thread of justification. VC attacks on transportation facilities, in addition to being related to DRV infiltration, would provide the occasion for attacks on DRV communications on a parallel basis.

A flexible list of reprisal targets has been prepared running from infiltration targets in the southern part of the DRV up to airfields. ports, and naval bases also located south of the 19th parallel.7

J. US/GVN joint planning will be initiated immediately both for reprisal actions and for possible later air strikes across the border into the DRV.

K. Dependents. We would be prepared to stop the flow of dependents concurrently with the initiation of intensified US air operations in Laos under paragraph H.4. above.

L. Deferred Actions (see Tab D)

The following actions will not be taken within the thirty-day period, but will be considered for adoption in the transitional phase of the program: 1. Major air deployments to the area.

2. Furnishing US air cover for GVN MAROPS.

3. Resuming destroyer patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin. If attacked, these would be an alternative basis for reprisals, and should be considered primarily in this light.

4. US low-level reconnaissance into the DRV.

5. GVN/Lao air strikes across the border; initially against the infiltration routes and installations and then against targets south of the 19th parallel.

6. Evacuation of US dependents. We would be prepared to carry this out concurrently with 4 and 5 above.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 130B. The Executive Committee met at 4:30 p.m. on December 2 to revise the previous draft of this paper (see Document 431) in light of the discussion with the President on December 1. It was approved by the President on December 3 (see Document 434) and formally transmitted to Rusk, McNamara, and McCone as Tab 1 to Document 440.

2 Not attached to the source text. Copies of these tabs, drafted by McNaughton on November 30, are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President.

3 Not found. For the comments Taylor made to the press following his meeting with the President on December 3, see The New York Times, December 4, 1964, p. 18.

4 Not attached, but printed as Document 435.

5 On October 3, the JCS had suggested to the Secretary of Defense the outlines of a proposed Philippine contribution. Following discussions at Manila, October 28–29, the two countries agreed on a tri-service Philippine contribution of 1,800 men. A report on the discussions was transmitted in telegram 806 from Manila, October 30. (Department of State, Central Files, DEF 19 PHIL–VIET S)

6 Not attached to the source text. A copy of this 3-page summary is in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. IV, SE Asia Cables.

7 Presumably the 94-target list.

434. Editorial Note 434. Editorial Note

On December 3, the Executive Committee met at 9:30 a.m. to review a checklist of questions for the final session with the President. At this meeting, Taylor was told that his weekly reports were valuable and should be continued, that he was to report on the activities of the minority groups in Saigon, and that he should note any success in aligning them with the government. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69)

Following the meeting, the Executive Committee met with the President at 12:30, where Taylor’s instructions (Document 435) and the position paper (Document 433) were approved. Taylor noted that the President again stressed the importance of third country aid. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69) Taylor then met for an hour with members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee before discussing Vietnam for 45 minutes with representatives of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. (Ibid.) No other records of these meetings have been found.

435. Instructions From the President to the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor) 435. Instructions From the President to the Ambassador to Vietnam (Taylor)1

Washington, December 3, 1964.

I have now approved the following instructions for your personal guidance on your return to South Vietnam. I hereby authorize and request that from these instructions you prepare a full statement of the present position of the United States Government for appropriate use with the senior officials of the Government of Vietnam. I recognize that for written presentation you may wish to recast in somewhat less specific form the detailed improvements which we seek in the conduct of affairs by the Government of South Vietnam, but I expect you to communicate the essence of these instructions in whatever way you find most effective.

During the recent review in Washington of the situation in SVN, it was clearly established that the unsatisfactory progress being made in the pacification of the Viet Cong was the result of two primary causes from which many secondary causes stemmed: first, the governmental instability in Saigon, and the second, the continued reinforcement and direction of the VC by the North Vietnamese Government. To change the downward trend of events, it will be necessary to deal adequately with both of these factors.

It is clear, however, that these factors are not of equal importance. There must be a stable, effective government to conduct a successful campaign against the Viet Cong even if the aid of North Vietnam for the VC should end. While the elimination of North Vietnamese intervention will raise morale on our side and make it easier for the government to function, it will not in itself end the war against the Viet Cong. It is rather an important contributory factor to the creation of conditions favoring a successful campaign against the Viet Cong within South Vietnam. Since action against North Vietnam is contributory, not central, we should not incur the risks which are inherent in such an expansion of hostilities until there is a government in Saigon capable of handling the serious problems involved in such an expansion and of exploiting the favorable effects which may be anticipated from an end of support and direction by North Vietnam.

It is this consideration which has borne heavily on the recent deliberations in Washington and has conditioned the conclusions reached. There have been many expressions of admiration for the courage being shown by the Huong government, which has the complete support of the USG in its resistance to the minority pressure groups which are attempting to drag it down. However, the difficulties which it is facing raise inevitable questions as to its capacity and readiness to discharge the responsibilities which it would incur if some of the new measures under consideration were taken.

There are certain minimum criteria of performance in South Vietnam which must be met before new measures against North Vietnam would be either justified or practicable. At a minimum, the government should be able to speak for and to its people who will need guidance and leadership throughout the coming critical period. It should be capable of maintaining law and order in its principal centers of population, make plans for the conduct of operations and assure their effective execution by military and police forces completely responsive to its authority. It must have the means to cope with the enemy reactions which must be expected to result from any change in the pattern of our operations.

I particularly request that you and your colleagues in the American country team develop and execute a concerted effort to bring home to all groups in South Vietnam the paramount importance of national unity against the Communist enemy at this critical time. It is a matter of the greatest difficulty for the United States Government to require great sacrifice of American citizens when reports from Saigon repeatedly give evidence of heedless self-interest and shortsightedness among nearly all major groups in South Vietnam. I know of your own great interest and concern for this problem and you can be assured that in your efforts to deal with it you will have the energetic support of the government in Washington.

While effectiveness is largely a subjective judgment, progress in certain specific areas such as those listed below provides some tangible measure. The U.S. Mission should urge upon the GVN particular effort in these fields, not only because of their intrinsic importance to successful pacification, but also because of the indication of governmental effectiveness which progress, or the lack thereof, will provide: 1. Improve the use of manpower for military and pacification purposes.

2. Bring the armed forces and police to authorized strength and maximize their effectiveness.

3. Replace incompetent officials and commanders. Freeze the competent in place for extended periods of service.

4. Clarify and strengthen the police powers of arrest, detention and interrogation of VC suspects.

5. Clarify and strengthen the authority of provincial chiefs.

6. Make demonstrable progress in the Hop Tac operation around Saigon.

7. Broaden and intensify the civic action program using both military and civilian resources to produce tangible evidence of the desire of the government to help the hamlets and villages.

8. Carry out a sanitary clean-up of Saigon.

Throughout, it will be essential that the GVN and the USG cooperate closely and effectively as loyal allies dedicated to the attainment of the same objectives. These objectives in the broadest terms are to cause the DRV to respect the rights of its neighbors and to terminate the Viet Cong insurgency.

While progress is being made toward these goals by a government of growing effectiveness, the USG is willing to strike harder at the infiltration routes in Laos and at sea. In conjunction with the RLG, it is prepared to add U.S. air power as needed to restrict the use of Laotian territory as an infiltration route into South Vietnam. At sea, it favors an intensified continuation of the MAROPS which have proved their usefulness in harassing the enemy. In combination, these operations in Laos and at sea constitute the first phase of military pressures to reduce infiltration and to warn the DRV of the risks it is running.

While these intensified operations are going on, the armed forces of the GVN and the USG must be ready to execute prompt reprisals for any unusual hostile action. The U.S. Mission is authorized to work out with the GVN appropriate plans and procedures to this end.

As a second phase, the United States is also prepared to consider a program of direct military pressure on the DRV, to be executed after the GVN has shown itself firmly in control. The actions undertaken in the first phase should provide encouragement and enlist popular support for the government and thus facilitate its task. The time provided by this phase would be used to advantage in the military, political, and economic efforts outlined earlier, as well as in preparing for the next phase—direct pressure on North Vietnam.

This second phase, in general terms, would constitute a series of air attacks on the DRV progressively mounting in scope and intensity for the purpose of convincing the leaders of DRV that it is to their interest to cease to aid the Viet Cong and to respect the independence and security of South Vietnam, properly assured by appropriate international safeguards.

The participants in the attacks of the second phase, as we now plan it, would be the air forces of the U.S., South Vietnam, and Laos. The U.S. would participate (as at present) in support of the Vietnamese Air Force and at the request of the Government of Vietnam. We would expect to work out joint plans, and before their execution we would agree on our purposes, our public position, and the manner of conducting operations against North Vietnam. The U.S. Mission is authorized to initiate such planning now with the Government of Vietnam with the understanding that the USG does not commit itself now to any form of execution of such plans. You are authorized to make it clear, as appropriate, that the execution of such plans would be preceded by deterrent deployments by the U.S. as well as security precautions by the Government of South Vietnam against possible escalation of hostilities.

You are also authorized to explain that we propose to discuss with our major allies both our present plans of action against the infiltration routes and our preparations for possible later action against North Vietnam. In particular, we propose to seek the military and political cooperation of the governments of Thailand, the Philippines, Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom.

Finally, I request that you give your personal and continuing attention to our effort to multiply the effective participation of other allies in our effort in South Vietnam. I have already requested your assessment of the maximum usable contribution both in present circumstances and in the event of increased efforts along the lines for which planning is authorized in this instruction. This assessment will be the basis of a major further effort by this Government.

I shall be glad to have your prompt report of the reaction of the Government of Vietnam to the policy outlined in these instructions.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. The instructions were approved by the President on December 3 (see Document 434) and formally transmitted to Rusk, McNamara, and McCone as Tab 2 to Document 440.

436. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 436. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 3, 1964—6:51 p.m.

1210. The following message has been handed directly to Canadian Embassy here for transmittal to Seaborn through fastest channel. This is for your information only.

“Canadians are asked to have Seaborn take following position during his next visit to Hanoi which, we understand, is currently scheduled for December 7th or 10th (Embtel 1618).2

The United States has nothing to add to the points made by Seaborn on his last visit to Hanoi in August.3 All the recent indications from Washington, however, point to a continued and increasing determination on the part of the US to assist the South Vietnamese in their struggle. Although he has no specific message on this trip, Seaborn has noted from its public statements increased US concern at DRV role in direct support of Viet Cong, and this together with reported high-level meetings Washington makes him feel that time is ripe for any new message Hanoi may wish to convey.

Seaborn should convey attitude of real personal concern over the growing possibility of direct confrontation between GVN and DRV.”

FYI: Purpose of this approach is to probe for any new DRV reactions.

Harriman

1 Source: Department of State, Vietnam Negotiating Files: Lot 69 D 412, Seaborn. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared with William Bundy and McNaughton. Also sent to Ottawa. Also printed in George C. Herring, ed., The Secret Diplomacy of the Vietnam War: The Negotiating Volumes of the Pentagon Papers (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1983), p. 37.

2 On November 9, Seaborn informed Johnson that he planned to go to Hanoi on November 23. (Telegram 1438 from Saigon, November 9; ibid., Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) Eight days later, the Department asked if Seaborn could postpone his trip until at least December 7. (Telegram 1112 to Saigon, November 17; ibid., POL 27–14 VIET S) Seaborn agreed and suggested that he deliver no message, but ask if North Vietnam had any message for him to deliver to the United States. (Telegram 1618, November 24; ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

3 See Document 304.

437. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom 437. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the United Kingdom1

Washington, December 4, 1964—10:18 p.m.

3669. A. In talks with Peck and Stewart (UK) on December 3 and with Waller and Laking2 jointly on December 4, Bundy explained general decisions made here during Taylor’s discussions along following lines: 1. We deeply concerned about fragility internal GVN situation. Huong himself has guts and his areas of inexperience are partially supplied by Deputy PM Vien and on military side by Khanh, who appears be cooperating reasonably well although not as fully as we would wish. Thus, GVN as whole does have some promise settling down and slowly improving its performance if it can deal with major Buddhist threat now building up. On security side, armed forces have held together well and such factors as recruitment showing improvement. Nonetheless, situation is still slowly deteriorating although little likelihood really major VC military successes at least in next two months or so.

2. USG believes this fragile situation makes any dramatic action unwise for this reason alone but that it does require some additional elements that would tend to lift SVN morale and would also convey slightly stronger signal to Hanoi. USG therefore proposes immediate program including two new elements: (a) intensified US “armed reconnaissance” strikes against infiltration routes in Laos, (b) reprisals against any dramatic VC action in south such as Bien Hoa attack, preferably with reprisal occasion involving GVN and not solely US elements. Reprisal targets would be carefully selected, probably infiltration installations, between 17th and 19th parallels. Actions in Laos would necessarily require Souvanna’s concurrence.

3. Time table for above calls for Taylor consultations with GVN on his return to obtain agreement series GVN actions in return for above program and additional US undertakings, support forces increases, economic measures, etc. (These will be worked out in Saigon and announced there.) Sullivan will thereafter talk to Souvanna about 10 December and Martin will concurrently brief Thai rather fully. Laos air actions would be initiated about 15 December if RLG has concurred.

4. Para 2 program now worked out only for initial 30-day period. May then be continued or we may at some time move onward into program of gradually increased pressures through air attacks on DRV with GVN forces playing major role at least at outset. This second phase not yet decided but clearly preferred to any alternative of more sharp and dramatic military action. Crucial determinants will be whether GVN settles down and whether Hanoi shows any signs of responding to Para 2 program designed to impress them with our determination and to foreshadow possible future actions.

B. Following this briefing, Bundy went on to say prospect possible more serious decisions made it more than ever vital have increased third country contributions. Suggested UK increase numbers of police advisors, Australia consider 200-man augmentation combat advisors, and GNZ likewise seek to increase its contribution markedly. Indicated President had deep personal concern this aspect, would discuss this with Wilson, and would send personal messages to Menzies and Holyoake early next week.3

C. In response to presentation: 1. Peck and Stewart indicated personal support these decisions and expressed belief HMG would support all points and would be relieved we not contemplating early drastic action. At same time, they noted that if military action did increase, HMG at some point would be under great pressure take some lead in seeking a reconvened Geneva Conference or other visible negotiating avenue. We said we would be alert for all indications Hanoi and Peiping changes of position but we are opposed any visible negotiations at least for some time to come and in absence clear indications they could produce our objective of independent and secure SVN. British also raised question of possible ChiCom reaction and tended agree our judgment major response unlikely unless actions carried so far as to appear to threaten existence of DRV or China herself.

2. Waller and Laking likewise raised question re negotiations and Commie reactions. They further asked about scale Lao operations to which we responded exact program being worked out and would in any case depend on RLG acceptance.

D. To Waller and Laking only we mentioned that planning for possible second phase had considered possibility introducing division-size ground forces into northern SVN to pre-empt any ground reaction by DRV. We said such a force would be much more effective if it included at least small units from GOA and GNZ. They responded that Malaysia commitments increasingly onerous but that they would pass suggestion on for comment.

E. Above is for information Ambassador Powell4 and Charges only at this time. Ambassador Bruce5 is being briefed here. You will be further instructed, but may discuss above with senior officials if they raise with you. We stressed vital importance avoiding press leaks that go beyond formal statements here or possibly later in Saigon.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and initialed by Ball. Also sent to Canberra and Wellington.

2 John K. Waller, Australian Ambassador, and George R. Laking, New Zealand Ambassador.

3 Copies of the letters to Menzies and Holyoake, dated December 12, are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII, Memos.

4 Herbert B. Powell, Ambassador to New Zealand.

5 David K.E. Bruce, Ambassador to the United Kingdom.

438. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President 438. Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President1

Washington, December 5, 1964.

SUBJECT

The British and Vietnam

1. I think you should know that the British will find it very, very difficult indeed to increase their commitment in Vietnam right now. That does not necessarily mean that we should not hit them hard while Wilson is here, but I think it does mean that we cannot expect a definite and affirmative answer.

2. There is no political base whatever in England, in any party, for an increased British commitment in Vietnam now. For 10 years we have accepted a situation in which the British give political support, but avoid any major commitment on the ground of their other interests and their position as Co-Chairman of the Geneva Agreements of 1954. The most that Wilson could possibly do at this stage would be a slight enlargement of the Thompson advisory mission and of their police training effort, with perhaps a green light to a few bold British officers to get themselves in the line of fire as our men do. All this he would have to do quietly. There is no workable basis for a public change in British policy at a time when there is no public change in ours. You might press him to go from the current level of 7 Britishers to about a hundred, but we would be lucky to get 50 in this first phase.

3. When and if we open a second phase and need to land a mixed force of U.S. and other troops, we might conceivably get a small British contingent along with larger ones from Australia and New Zealand. Our own commitment would have gone up and there would be a better case for asking the British to join in. On the other hand, Tommy Thompson points out that if the British Co-Chairman send troops in, that might be the trigger, or at least the excuse, for the Soviet Co-Chairman to help Hanoi.

4. The reciprocal price of this would be stronger support on our side for Malaysia and perhaps closer participation in naval and air deployments designed to cool off Sukarno. This kind of bargain in this part of the world makes a good deal of sense, and Rusk and McNamara will be ready to go forward with the British in detailed discussions on this basis.

5. The point of this memorandum is simply to make sure that you know how very hard it will be for Wilson to do as much for us in South Vietnam as we need him to. It is hard to treat a thing as our problem for 10 years and then try to get other people to take on a share of it, just because it is getting worse (though we choose not to say so).

McG.B.2

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Secret.

2 Printed from a copy that bears these typed initials.

439. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 439. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 7, 1964—9 p.m.

1746. Bangkok eyes only for Ambassador. Together with Westmoreland and Alex Johnson I met today with Prime Minister Huong, Deputy PriMin Vien and General Khanh. I gave them a paper translated into French2 following very closely the lines of my instructions3 emphasizing necessity discretion and secrecy.

All three read the paper soberly and carefully and we subsequently had extended discussion in which two main points of concern on their part emerged. First, while accepting the listed concrete specifics of indications of governmental effectiveness, concern as to what we really meant and whether they would be able to meet the broad conditions precedent to undertaking Phase 2, concentrating particularly on “a stable effective government capable of conducting successfully the campaign against the Viet Cong” and “a government in Saigon able to speak for and to its people.” The second concern related to failure of the paper to say anything with respect to Cambodia and the help to the Viet Cong that comes through Cambodia.

With respect to the first point, I detected an undercurrent of disappointment on the part of the Prime Minister that he felt that the paper implied that he had not been carrying on government in a capable manner. He pointed out that the army and the police have been responsive to his direction and that “what we have done up to now proves we have control.” I pointed out that we were by no means criticizing, in fact we were very impressed with his conduct of the govt up to now but that we were expecting to have a period during which the govt would be able to demonstrate its ability to continue such control and that the Buddhist agitation was giving an impression, false to be sure, that a large segment of the population was against the govt The PriMin asked what proof he must present to demonstrate that the Buddhist Institute does not represent the overwhelming majority of Buddhists in Vietnam.

In regard to the second point, both the PriMin and Khanh spoke at some length concerning the provocative attitude of Cambodia and help for VC coming through Cambodia. I pointed out that the whole program was directed towards Hanoi which was the key and if this was dealt with the problem of Cambodian support to the VC would take care of itself.

In conclusion the PriMin agreed that while reserving on details for later discussion they generally approved our proposals. It was agreed that the same group would meet again at 8:00 Wednesday4 morning for further discussion and at that time I plan to table what we are prepared to offer the GVN to help strengthen the govt.

Meanwhile I perceive no objection to going ahead with proposed discussions with other allies.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to Bangkok. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Johnson and cleared with Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 9:18 a.m.

2 A copy of this paper was transmitted as enclosure 1 to airgram A–468 from Saigon, December 15. (Ibid.)

3 Document 435.

4 December 9.

440. Memorandum From the President to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense (McNamara), and the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone) 440. Memorandum From the President to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense (McNamara), and the Director of Central Intelligence (McCone)1

Washington, December 7, 1964.

I have approved the attached paper (Tab 1)2 on policy toward Southeast Asia as guidance for our work in this field in coming months, subject to such amendment and further development as I may approve from time to time. I have also approved the attached instructions (Tab 2)3 to Ambassador Taylor for his use on his return to South Vietnam. Taken together, these documents state my present position.

I consider it a matter of the highest importance that the substance of this position should not become public except as I specifically direct.

In discussions of relevant parts of these matters with foreign governments, I expect that every effort will be made to impress upon our foreign friends the importance of discretion, but I recognize that we cannot control what foreign governments say.

In the case of American officials the matter is different. The officers to whom this memorandum is directed are requested to take personal responsibility for the supervision of the execution of this policy and for insuring that knowledge of all parts of it within the Executive Branch is confined as narrowly as possible to those who have an immediate working need to know.

Lyndon B. Johnson

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 1 30B.

2 Document 433.

3 Document 435.

XIII. U.S. Response to the Governmental Crisis In South Vietnam, December 8–31XIII. U.S. Response to the Governmental Crisis In South Vietnam, December 8–31

441. Memorandum of a Conversation

White House, Washington, December 8, 1964, 4 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 199. Secret. No drafting or clearance information appears on the source text which is dated December 10.

442. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 9, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Johnson and cleared with Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 6:04 a.m.

443. Memorandum of a Conversation

Soviet Embassy, Washington, December 9, 1964, 1 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Akalovsky on December 16 and approved in the Executive Secretariat on December 30. Gromyko was in the United States to attend the 19th session of the U.N. General Assembly, which began December 1.

444. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 10, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII, Memos. Secret.

445. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 12, 1964—5:54 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared in draft with William Bundy and the first sentence cleared in substance with McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

446. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 15, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII, Memos. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Attached to the source text was a memorandum from McGeorge Bundy to the President, dated December 15, which stated: “We don’t get an awful lot of good news from Saigon, and this one is of real interest.” The President had written across the memorandum: “I’d like to see this accelerated.”

447. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President

Saigon, December 16, 1964—1 p.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–161–69. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Taylor and transmitted as telegram 1826 from Saigon, which is the source text.

448. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 16, 1964, 8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

449. Letter From the President to Senator Mike Mansfield

Washington, December 17, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Names File, Mansfield. No classification marking. Drafted by the President and McGeorge Bundy. Senator Mansfield was the Senate Majority Leader.

450. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 19, 1964–6:10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis; Ivory. Drafted by William Bundy; cleared in draft with McGeorge Bundy, McNaughton, and Forrestal; and initialed by Harriman. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

451. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 20, 1964—5 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, London, Paris, Vientiane, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC. Received at 9:20 a.m.

452. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 20, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, London, Paris, Vientiane, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC. Received at 9:19 a.m.

453. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 20, 1964–11 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CIA, the White House, and JCS. Received at 2:43 p.m.

454. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) and the Commander in Chief of the Vietnamese Armed Forces (Khanh)

Saigon, December 21, 1964, 10:30 a.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69. Secret. U. Alexis Johnson, the only other participant, presumably prepared this record. The source text indicates the meeting took place at Khanh’s office at the JGS. For other accounts of the meeting, see Taylor, Swords and Plowshares, p. 331, and Johnson, Right Hand of Power, p. 418.

455. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 21, 1964—8:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared with Westmoreland and McNaughton, and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC.

456. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 21, 1964—8:39 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal and William Bundy, cleared with McNaughton, and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC.

457. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 22, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House and CINCPAC. Received at 7:43 a.m.

458. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 22, 1964—10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Confidential; Flash; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. Received at 10:14 a.m.

459. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 22, 1964—12:58 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIV, Cables. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CIA, and the White House. Rusk’s Appointment Book shows that he met with William Bundy and Forrestal at 11:22 a.m. and 12:40 p.m., and with Forrestal alone at 1:10 p.m., presumably to discuss the drafting of this telegram. (Ibid.)

460. Telegram from the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 23, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House. Received at 6:01 a.m.

461. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President

Saigon, December 23, 1964—6 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1916 from Saigon, which is the source text. According to another copy, the telegram was drafted by Taylor. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–157–69) Telegram 1916 was received in the Department of State at 8:33 a.m.

462. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 23, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. Received at 9:19 a.m.

463. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 23, 1964—6:41 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared with William Bundy and McNaughton, and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC.

464. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 24, 1964—1:42 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense and the White House.

465. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 24, 1964—1:43 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared with McGeorge Bundy and Secretary Rusk. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 206F.

466. Memorandum From Edward G. Lansdale to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 24, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIV, Memos. Personal. At this time, Lansdale was a Consultant to the White House on Food for Peace.

467. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 25, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 8:46 a.m.

468. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 25, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis; Ivory. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 9:27 a.m.

469. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 25, 1964—4:56 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared with Rusk, Vance, and McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC.

470. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 26, 1964—7 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US–VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor and cleared with Johnson. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 9:21 a.m.

471. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 26, 1964—1:05 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US–VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared with McGeorge and William Bundy, and initialed by Rusk. Reported to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC.

472. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 28, 1964—9 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC.

473. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)

Washington, December 28, 1964–16:43 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Westmoreland Papers, Message File, 1964. Secret. Also sent to CINCPAC for Sharp.

474. Paper Prepared by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)

Washington, December 28, 1964.

Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. The source text bears the handwritten notation: “This package went w/Mr. B to Texas 12/29/64.” Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 108A.

475. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam

Washington, December 29, 1964—5:36 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis; Ivory. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared with Bromley Smith, and initialed by Ball. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, CINCPAC, Bangkok, and Vientiane.

476. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 30, 1964—10 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 12:20 p.m. and transmitted to the Texas White House as CAP 64378.

477. Telegram From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)

Washington, December 30, 1964—11:15 a.m.

Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–157–69. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted in Texas and sent to Washington for transmission to Taylor during the morning of December 30. Sixteen corrections were phoned to Bromley Smith for inclusion, all but two of which were of one or two words. The two of substance were the addition of “if not by air…target 36” in paragraph 3 and “and I want you to know…overseas” in paragraph 8. A list of the corrections and a marked-up draft are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Pres/Taylor Nodis Clores and Codeword Messages.

478. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State

Saigon, December 31, 1964—8 p.m.

Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Taylor and Johnson. Repeated to CIA for McCone, to the Department of Defense for McNamara, to the White House for Bundy, and to CINCPAC for Admiral Sharp.

479. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)

Washington, December 31, 1964—2:53 p.m.

Source: Johnson Library, Westmoreland Papers, Message File, 1964. Secret. Also sent to CINCPAC for Admiral Sharp.

441. Memorandum of a Conversation 441. Memorandum of a Conversation1

White House, Washington, December 8, 1964, 4 p.m.

PARTICIPANTS

The President

The Secretary of State

The Secretary of Defense

The Under Secretary of State

Ambassador David K. E. Bruce

McGeorge Bundy

William R. Tyler

Richard E. Neustadt

The British Prime Minister

The Foreign Secretary

The Defense Secretary

Lord Harlech

Sir Burke Trend

Sir Harold Caccia

[Here follows discussion of unrelated subjects.]

The discussions then turned to the subject of Vietnam and the President asked the Secretary of State to describe the problem there.

The Secretary explained that the principal consideration now was to turn Peking and Hanoi around before they had a firm commitment to go South. On the South Vietnam side, the purpose was to get the South Vietnamese to win the war in their own country. The major problem was establishing political unity in the cities and dealing with infiltration from the outside.

The U.S. Government had tried to send political signals to Peking and Hanoi, pointing out that if they left their neighbors alone they would have no problem with the U.S.; if they pushed on, there would be trouble. In addition, military actions were being taken—armed reconnaissance in Laos, the Gulf of Tonkin, and the redeployment of units of the West Pacific fleet—to give them additional signals.

The Secretary went on to say that the U.S. was appealing to a number of countries for assistance, both for its practical effect as well as for the political impact, to demonstrate to Saigon and Hanoi the degree of free world solidarity. It was the U.S. Government’s hope that the UK would put people into the countryside. Engineers, technicians and military were needed. The UK’s Mr. Thompson had good ideas, too. Showing the flag was important. In Hanoi, Saigon and here in the U.S., people were interested in what others were doing and how much help the allies were giving.

Responding to this, Gordon Walker said the U.S. problem in Vietnam and the British in Malaysia were essentially the same. Only the opponents were different. The British had a major commitment, albeit with smaller forces. They could not put troops on the ground in Vietnam for they had a battle of their own to fight. But the British wanted to help the U.S. in ways that could be publicized-training Vietnamese troops in jungle warfare, providing medics, putting police in Saigon. And publicizing these actions would in fact step up the British commitment.

On the policy of signals, the British wanted to help the U.S. in Vietnam and hoped the U.S. would help British in Malaysia. However, Gordon Walker stressed the importance of keeping retaliatory action related to things retaliated against. Disproportionate retaliation would put the British in a difficult position especially since they are co-chairman of the 14-Nation conference. They would not call the conference without U.S. consent and did not want to be forced into a conference against the U.S. will.

Concluding, Gordon Walker said it was important that the British be consulted about further steps contemplated in Vietnam so that they could support U.S. efforts effectively. (The Prime Minister told the President he expected to be questioned extensively about the war in Vietnam during the parliamentary debate.)

Secretary Rusk thought from a tactical standpoint it was important that all participants understand the degree to which the earlier agreements had been violated. This was intolerable and the U.S. was not prepared to go to a conference which took up where the 1962 conference began. In this connection, he pointed out that Laos was important because it was the place where signals could be exchanged with the other side. He also explained that efforts were being made to clear the atmosphere with Cambodia. But as co-chairman he urged the British to press the Soviets to join them in getting compliance with the 1962 agreements and to stop playing a neutral game in the aggression against South Vietnam.

In reply, the Foreign Secretary said the dossier of the violations would be most helpful to him. He also assured the Secretary he would not agree to a conference without U.S. consent.

At this point the communiqué was brought in, checked by both sides and approved by the President and the Prime Minister.2

1 Source: Department of State, Presidential Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 66 D 199. Secret. No drafting or clearance information appears on the source text which is dated December 10.

2 For text, see American Foreign Policy: Current Documents, 1964, pp. 615–616.

442. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 442. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 9, 1964—6 p.m.

1763. Embassy telegram 1746.2 Westmoreland, Alex Johnson and I again met this morning with PriMin Huong, DepPriMin Vien and General Khanh to follow up on our meeting of Dec 7. I gave them paper translated into French entitled “Actions Designed To Strengthen the Govt of Vietnam”3 pointing out GVN problem is one of better performance vis-à-vis its own people and foreign govts, greater appeal to its own people by convincing them of its interest in them, and the development of national and international confidence in GVN. Paper listed eight areas “in which progress beyond present levels would not only have intrinsic importance in pacification area but would be a measure of the effectiveness of the govt”: 1. Attainment of authorized strength for military, paramilitary and police forces and better use of manpower.

2. Establishment of new and higher force goals for military, pare” military and police forces.

3. Better performance by civilian and military officials, including replacement of incompetent and retention of competent.

4. Improvement of budgetary operations, particularly expenditures in provinces.

5. Clarification and strengthening of province chief powers

6. Clarification and strengthening of police powers.

7. More vigor in Hop Tac operation.

8. After considerable time when stability is achieved, reviewing cases of political prisoners from previous regimes.

Recognizing that much work was already being done in the foregoing fields, the paper singled out the following nine specific points for which clear responsibility needed to be assigned: 1. Establishment of new 1965 force goals for military, paramilitary and police forces.

2. Clarification of roles of popular forces, police and civil defense.

3. Improved budgetary formulation and implementation to insure efficient governmental operations while guarding against inflation.

4. Clarification and strengthening powers of province chiefs and exercise of those powers.

5. An improved and increased effort in the information field to include consideration of a high-powered radio transmitter for Saigon.

6. An extended rural development program in the provinces to include civil and military resources.

7. Additional forms of economic assistance for industrial urban and rural development.

8. Improvement of certain highway bridges and port facilities.

9. Renewed efforts to attract third country assistance.

I also offered to assist in any way govt desired with approaches to minority leaders. Paper closed with statement that foregoing represented an expansion of expenditures, and budget deficit for CY 1965 may be larger than for CY 1964, thus there was compelling need to manage financial and fiscal affairs of govt so as to hold down threat of inflation.

Paper was generally well-received and agreed specific joint action responsibilities assigned to be confirmed by paper which I will make available to them tomorrow.4

PriMin said that review of cases of political prisoners was “a very delicate” matter indicating that he did not want to commit himself at this time on this point. In response to statement in paper that it was important that the military continue to express public confidence in the govt, Khanh opined that this was “no problem” pointing to Dec 2 communiqué.5 He said that statement had been delayed until then because he did not want it to be just his personal statement but signed by all the military chiefs.

In response to statement in the paper that while not giving an impression of submitting to pressure, the govt might consider honorable ways of conciliating most important minority groups, PriMin said that he felt that he had overwhelming support “in the South” (apparent implication was that Northern politicians and elements such as Tam Chau were primary opponents) and that it was clear they commanded very little support. However, PriMin reaffirmed his willingness to make orderly changes in a few Ministers if and when this seemed desirable.

In discussion third country assistance, I emphasized importance it also had from USG domestic point of view. In reply to PriMin’s question, I said that we did not desire to “internationalize” war such as Korean pattern and agreed with Vien’s observation that the question really involved making third country, free world support concretely evident in Vietnam. Khanh suggested a “third country aid headquarters building” in front of which all the third country flags could be flying but recognized problem of those who did not want to seem to be involved in military activities.

In response to statement in paper on importance of filling diplomatic posts abroad, the PriMin said that he had already discussed this with FonMin and received in silence Khanh’s offer of more unemployed Generals for diplomatic posts.

With respect to powers of province chiefs, Khanh insisted that they in fact already had ample powers to be “little presidents” but it was a matter of training and willingness to exercise their powers. He and Vien agreed to work together on this.

While expressing appreciation for the offer of a stronger radio, Khanh asked that we also urgently study the question of television, at least on a limited and experimental basis in the Saigon area. He said that in underdeveloped countries such as Vietnam the visual image was especially important and could be a powerful instrument in communication for the govt as well as for education. He said he had heard that under an arrangement with the Japanese, Hanoi was to have television by 1966 and that it was expected Cambodia would also shortly have it. I said we were studying the matter and would be prepared to discuss it further with them.

On my offer to be of assistance in dealing with minority elements, both the PriMin and Khanh expressed strong reservations about either Johnson or myself seeing them and urged that even lower level con facts be very carefully managed because of propensity of such elements to misuse and circulate false interpretations of such meetings. However, the PriMin enthusiastically endorsed my proposed meeting with key newspaper editors.

All in all it was, I feel, a good meeting and successful in obtaining a reasonably common approach by PriMin, Vien and Khanh looking toward dealing with some of GVN’s more concrete problems.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Johnson and cleared with Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 6:04 a.m.

2 Document 439.

3 A copy of this paper was transmitted as enclosure 2 to airgram A–468 from Saigon, December 15. (Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8)

4 A copy of this paper was transmitted as enclosure 3 to airgram A–468.

5 A copy of the communiqué, issued following a meeting at Dalat on December 2 of the corps and division Generals with Khanh, was transmitted in telegram 1732 from Saigon, December 4. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S) Taylor reported on the meeting in telegram 1770, December 10 (ibid., DEF 2 VIET S), as did Westmoreland in MAC J2 15711, December 4. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 12056)

443. Memorandum of a Conversation 443. Memorandum of a Conversation1

Soviet Embassy, Washington, December 9, 1964, 1 p.m.

SUBJECT

South East Asia

PARTICIPANTS

U.S. The Secretary

Ambassador Thompson

Ambassador Kohler

Mr. Tyler

Mr. Akalovsky

U.S.S.R. Foreign Minister Gromyko

Deputy Foreign Minister Semenov

Ambassador Dobrynin

Mr. Smirnovsky, Chief, American Section, Foreign Ministry

Mr. Sukhodrev

In response to the Secretary’s remark that he wished to discuss the situation in South East Asia, Mr. Gromyko said he had also wanted to discuss this matter. Mr. Gromyko said he wished to ask what intentions the U.S. had in that area. As the Soviet Union had stated on a number of earlier occasions, it believed that the U.S. had made a great mistake by getting involved in South Vietnam, because there were no U.S. interests involved in that area. But the U.S. had its troops in South Vietnam and was now increasing them. This was not in accord with the U.S.-expressed desire to reduce tensions in the area. Consequently, the question arose as to what the real U.S. intentions were. The Soviet Union had no troops or experts in the area and had taken no action similar to the actions taken by the U.S.

The Secretary observed that on the basis of Mr. Gromyko’s remarks, it appeared that there was no problem between the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. in South East Asia. Unfortunately, Hanoi and Peiping were very active in that area. Our position was very simple: if Peiping and Hanoi left their neighbors alone, there would be no U.S. troops in that area. We had no interests and we sought no bases there, and all we were doing was because of Hanoi and Peiping. The Secretary hoped that there was no difference between our two countries as to the facts of the situation. In 1959, Hanoi had made the decision to go after South Vietnam, and that decision had been made public in 1960. North Vietnam was sending men and supplies to South Vietnam. Hanoi was in control of daily operations, and we knew that command lines went from the Viet Cong to Hanoi. There were constant infiltrations, which particularly increased in 1964. Infiltrators came through Laos. which was a direct contravention of the 1962 accords. There were more and more men in South Vietnam who had been trained in the North Vietnamese forces, and they were North Vietnamese rather than some South Vietnamese who might have undergone training in North Vietnam. Perhaps some people on the Soviet side said that this was a war of liberation, but we regarded the situation as pure aggression. The Secretary repeated that if Hanoi and Peiping left their neighbors alone, we would not be there; otherwise, he stressed, we were in a serious situation. He hoped the Soviet Union would in no way encourage Hanoi and Peiping and would use its influence to restrain them. Again, he could only say that if Hanoi and Peiping left the area alone, we would come home; otherwise, there would be a real scrap.

Mr. Gromyko said he wished to point out that the U.S. had prevented elections from taking place in Vietnam as provided for under the 1954 agreement. Thus, the U.S. had blocked the chance for unification. The U.S. had sent troops to South Vietnam and now it could see what had developed. He also wished to point out that U.S. troops had been sent not in response to any action by Hanoi and Peiping; rather, they had been there from the very beginning.

The Secretary asked what period Mr. Gromyko was talking about.

Mr. Gromyko replied he had in mind the entire period after the 1954 Geneva agreement. He said the U.S. was trying to tell the Vietnamese how to resolve their problems. The Soviet Union knew that the U.S. sympathies were with South Vietnam; on the other hand, the Soviet Union was in sympathy with North Vietnam. Yet the difference was that the U.S. had troops in South Vietnam whereas the Soviet Union had no troops in North Vietnam. If the Soviet Union were to match the U.S., it would have troops in North Vietnam.

The Secretary said that as far as the 1954–55 period was concerned, it had become very clear that no free elections were possible in North Vietnam. In that period, Hanoi had asked the Soviet Union for help, and the Soviet Union gave it. South Vietnam had asked for assistance from the U.S., and we met their request. At that time, we had had no troops, but only assistance missions in South Vietnam. In any event, it was clear that no free elections could have been possible. The Secretary noted that neither South Vietnam nor the U.S. had signed the 1954 agreement, although we had accepted it and had said that a violation of the agreement would have serious consequences. But even if, for the sake of argument, one accepted the view that one of the clauses of the agreement had been violated, that was no justification for military action and aggression. He did not know the extent of the Soviet responsibility with respect to Hanoi, but he wished to point out that even though there had been no Soviet troops in Greece or Korea, there was no doubt about Soviet involvement in those situations. The Secretary reiterated once again that the only problem in South East Asia was that Hanoi and Peiping did not wish to leave their neighbors alone.

[Here follows discussion on Laos.]

He [Rusk] then said he wished to point out that as far as U.S. troops in South Vietnam were concerned, we had fewer troops in South Vietnam than North Vietnam had. He suggested that Mr. Gromyko and he should not tease each other. We knew perfectly well who those personnel were, what routes they followed, etc. The situation was one of pure and cold aggression.

Mr. Gromyko suggested the U.S. was committing aggression against North Vietnam.

The Secretary said there seemed to be ideological differences on this point between our two sides. Were we aggressors because we helped others defend themselves?

Mr. Gromyko inquired who had asked the U.S. for help. There had been several governments in South Vietnam, they changed all the time, and none of them had popular support.

The Secretary noted we had been told that policies would continue even if personalities change.

Mr. Gromyko commented the methods of change in South Vietnam were rather curious. In any event, the Soviet Government regarded the U.S. policy in South Vietnam as contrary to the interests of peace. He reiterated that elections should have been held in Vietnam. Although he did not know what their outcome would have been, the fact was that the 1954 agreement had been violated.

The Secretary asked Mr. Gromyko whether he seriously believed that free elections were possible in North Vietnam.

Mr. Gromyko replied in the affirmative. He said the election procedure was set forth in the 1954 agreement and had been developed with U.S. participation. What he thought had happened was that the U.S. had probably decided that the North Vietnamese would obtain a majority. This was the only explanation of the U.S. refusal to accept elections. Thus, the U.S. had one policy regarding elections in Germany, and another policy regarding elections in Vietnam.

The Secretary asked whether this was not true in the case of the Soviet Union.

Mr. Gromyko said no, adding that the U.S. had troops in South Vietnam whereas the Soviet Union had no troops in North Vietnam.

The Secretary said we were not against peaceful discussion of the South Vietnamese problem. However, North Vietnam should stop its activities and leave South Vietnam alone.

Mr. Gromyko again asked by whom the U.S. had been invited to South Vietnam. Was it by the man who had been overthrown and since forgotten?

The Secretary said we had been invited by all the governments which had served in South Vietnam.

Mr. Gromyko interjected that none of those governments had been supported by the people.

The Secretary wondered why Hanoi did not want to leave South Vietnam and Laos alone.

Mr. Gromyko suggested that this question be asked of the North Vietnamese Government at the conference. He observed that the Secretary’s remarks did not open good prospects for the future.

The Secretary said Mr. Gromyko’s remarks implied that Hanoi would continue its activities.

Mr. Gromyko contended the Soviet Union had no information regarding the presence of any North Vietnamese troops in South Vietnam. Any information about infiltrators or guerrillas from North Vietnam was strictly a U.S. responsibility. He said perhaps South Vietnam and Laos were sending infiltrators in the other direction.

1 Source: Department of State, Secretary’s Memoranda of Conversation: Lot 65 D 330. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Akalovsky on December 16 and approved in the Executive Secretariat on December 30. Gromyko was in the United States to attend the 19th session of the U.N. General Assembly, which began December 1.

444. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 444. Memorandum From Chester L. Cooper of the National Security Council Staff to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, December 10, 1964.

SUBJECT

Stability of South Vietnam’s Government, Report No. 1

This is my initial report covering one of the two matters of current interest to the President regarding Vietnam—the problem of the government’s stability. A report on third country participation will be submitted tomorrow.2 Unless unusual developments dictate more frequent reporting, or unless instructed otherwise, I plan to prepare these reports on an every-other-day basis. Subsequent memoranda obviously will tend to be more brief than these initial efforts.

1. Premier Tran Van Huong’s five-week old government appears momentarily strengthened by his own exertions and by the firm support of US officials and VN military leaders. Nevertheless, a concerted Buddhist effort to overthrow Huong still seems likely. The Buddhists have been moving cautiously, however, and ten days of quiet in Saigon have permitted an easing of martial law restrictions. Huong’s firmness against recent demonstrators, largely schoolboys and hoodlums, has been publicly endorsed by the High National Council and key Catholic leaders and privately by responsible labor leaders. Huong’s administrative performance is still spotty, partly through unfamiliarity, but he seems willing to learn. Privately, he has said he is willing eventually to change some of his less able or more controversial ministers, but he will not do this while under fire.

2. External threats to the stability of the government arise from the activities of the Cambodians and the Viet Cong. There have been some hints that Cambodia will recognize the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam as the legitimate government (this in turn would probably result in the Government of Vietnam’s recognizing the dissident Cambodian Khmer Serei movement and closing the Mekong River to Cambodian shipping). The Viet Cong have been stepping up their political agitation and have been sending cadres into Saigon to stimulate and intensify anti-government demonstrations.

3. Buddhist leaders have been holding strategy talks in Saigon and gearing up their followers for possible anti-government action. Their foremost strategist, monk Tri Quang, says they have set up a “Struggle Committee” and plan to apply quiet pressure on Chief of State Suu and the US to get Huong replaced constitutionally. Today, however, the Buddhist leadership issued a communiqué announcing opposition to the government and refusal to cooperate with the present cabinet. Huong [Tri Quang?] privately threatens to stage hunger strikes by monks and mass demonstrations if necessary; these, he says, would prove decisive. The Buddhists imply that they are reluctant to oppose the US and they probably fear army reprisals; they have set no firm deadlines and say there may yet be time for a “quiet solution.” What Buddhist leaders really want is still unclear-perhaps even to themselves. And though we continue to watch and investigate, we have no evidence to tie them to the Viet Cong or even to indicate that they sympathize with Viet Cong aims.

4. Ambassador Taylor has been meeting with Chief of State Suu; Huong, and his cabinet; the High National Council; military leaders; and the local press. He has made it clear that, while it is US policy to help South Vietnam, an expanded US commitment cannot be justified to the US government and public unless Vietnamese groups unite behind their legitimate government. Other Embassy officers are discreetly getting this message to the Buddhists and other political oppositionists. Taylor, in addition, has provided Huong and his top lieutenants (including Khanh) a list of measures designed to strengthen the government’s image domestically and abroad.3 These suggestions seem to have been well received.

5. Complementing the efforts of the Ambassador to urge unity on the disparate elements of the Vietnamese official community, the CIA Station in Saigon is covertly putting pressure on elements close to Tri Quang to moderate Buddhist opposition to the government. Buddhists in the United States and abroad are being urged to bring their influence to bear, and the possibility of getting the Dalai Lama’s brother to visit Saigon with this message is being explored. Covert efforts to generate support for Huong are also being made among the Saigon students, in senior military circles, and among old guard politicians.4

CLC

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII, Memos. Secret.

2 A copy of this memorandum is ibid. On December 14, Cooper and McGeorge Bundy sent to the President the second memorandum in this series. For text, see Declassified Documents, 1979, 221C.

3 See Document 442.

4 At the bottom of the source text, the President wrote: “Mac, I like this.”

445. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 445. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 12, 1964—5:54 p.m.

1266. For the Ambassador from the Acting Secretary. Meeting today again underscored great concern of highest authority for fullest possible Country Team efforts bring various political groups into support for GVN.2 Would be helpful if your next status report could cover attitudes of key groups and summarize various U.S. contacts and types of effort with each, indicating how effort coordinated by you or Deputy Ambassador. For this purpose key groups would appear to include Buddhists, military, Catholics, students, sects, and perhaps such groups as Montagnards, indigenous press, civil servants, as you believe these important.

In our discussions, the problem of immediate priority was obviously relations between Buddhists and GVN and Buddhists and U.S. which seemed to be developing into major confrontations. We are particularly concerned that communications between Buddhists and GVN/U.S. are deteriorating. We thought some of the following ideas on the method and substance of communications with the Buddhists which were developed here were worth passing on to you.

A. Attempt to get across to Buddhist leaders a sense that, (1) unlike summer 1963, their cause does not now have wide-spread popular support outside Viet-Nam and;

(2) A direct confrontation with the Government at this time could, in our judgment, render it virtually impossible for us to undertake some of the measures which we think would be useful in dealing with the VC threat directed and supported from the North. These thoughts might be conveyed by: a. A direct approach to Buddhist leaders by Emboffs at appropriate level.

b. Play-back of appropriate U.S. press commentary by VOA.

c. Public statements here in Washington.

B. Letter from Ambassador Lodge to Tri Quang. Embassy views on what might be said obviously better than our own. Such letter might, however, include thought that essence of democratic government which Buddhists say they want is building of orderly methods of taking political action without causing chaos and collapse of entire structure of government, If this idea seems worthwhile, we will be happy to approach Lodge with Embassy draft.

C. In order provide Buddhists with a possible attractive stake in enterprise, we might devise methods of funneling material aid through Buddhist leadership so that they may become involved in supporting their adherents at village and hamlet level in conjunction with pacification effort. Perhaps active Buddhist social welfare organizations could be created, both in Viet-Nam and possibly also in U.S., which could act as brokers between American official and unofficial aid programs and Buddhist laymen in Viet-Nam in same way as Catholic and Protestant missionaries work to support their followers in provinces. Possibly Catholic or Protestant advisor, American or Vietnamese, could be found to help the Buddhists set up program and deal with necessary paper work.

D. GVN might seek prominent Buddhist interlocutor who could formulate Buddhist grievances in responsible and respectable manner so that GVN could at appropriate time promptly and publicly give satisfaction in order to cut some ground out from under hard-line Buddhist leaders.

[1 paragraph (4 lines of source text) not declassified]

We would appreciate your comments on these ideas plus any others you may have of your own. We are trying to. develop further specific thoughts on actions which might be taken with other groups listed in Para 1 of this message.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal and cleared in draft with William Bundy and the first sentence cleared in substance with McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to CINCPAC for POLAD.

2 Also discussed at the meeting, which was held at the Department of State at 10 a.m. and was attended by William (Chairman) and McGeorge Bundy, Ball, Forrestal, Cooper, McCone, Vance, McNaughton, and Admirals Mustin and McDonald, were air operations in Laos, deployment of Hawk missiles to Vietnam, infiltration, third country briefings, and OPLAN 34A. (Telegram 1265 to Saigon, December 12; ibid., POL 27 VIET S, and JCS 2339/164, December 12; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218. ICS Files)

446. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 446. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 15, 1964—6 p.m.

1817. FYI. During the late spring and summer of this year, an experiment was launched in Quang Ngai Province in which the Quang Ngai representatives of [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] played important and complementary roles. The common purpose was to try a new blend of psywar, civic action, and intelligence factors in order to get at and root out the Viet Cong apparatus which was rapidly digging itself into the provinces immediately around Quang Ngai City. This original need was first recognized by a Vietnamese official, the Quang Ngai police chief, with American involvement originating at his request. This initial experiment had as its product a team of forty specially trained and specially armed persons, operating directly under control of Quang Ngai Province Chief and, under him, District Chief of the district surrounding Quang Ngai City. The original purpose, as stated above, seems to have been successful to the degree that the local population in area of the team’s operation has been changed in attitude from one which was fearful of and responsive to the local Viet Cong, to an attitude which practical experience has demonstrated has made that district difficult and even dangerous for Viet Cong to operate in. Thus success of this experiment, in terms of its objectives, seems to be considerable.

In addition to original team, five additional similar teams have subsequently been created and committed to identical work within Quang Ngai Province. [6–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

I feel this kind of activity may have significant impact on problem of rural pacification at the household, village, and district level. [8–1/2 lines of source text not declassified]

[1 paragraph (9–1/2 lines of source text) not declassified]

Minister of Interior Vien, under whose purview province chiefs fall, is totally in support and is eager to endorse this program in whatever province it may be introduced. As initial [less than 1 line of source text not declassified] survey of six provinces in the North, just completed, indicates understanding and receptivity on the part of the province chiefs concerned. Further expansion will take place as rapidly as possible. We have still to [1–1/2 lines of source text not declassified] avoid raising some of the difficulties encountered in the CIDG program.

Taylor

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII, Memos. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC. Attached to the source text was a memorandum from McGeorge Bundy to the President, dated December 15, which stated: “We don’t get an awful lot of good news from Saigon, and this one is of real interest.” The President had written across the memorandum: “I’d like to see this accelerated.”

447. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President 447. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President1

Saigon, December 16, 1964—1 p.m.

Embtel 1764.2 Since returning from Washington, my primary preoccupation has been to meet with the politically important groups in Saigon in compliance with your instructions to make crystal-clear the attitude of the USG toward the minority efforts to overthrow the Huang cabinet and to undertake to offset these efforts. I have stressed our firm intention to continue to support the struggle of SVN but the essentiality of a durable government in order to permit that support to be effective. Among those with whom I have spoken are Chief of State Suu, Huong and his senior advisers, the members of his cabinet, most of the members of the High National Council, the key Generals, and many of the local editors. Key members of the Embassy staff have also been spreading the word to all their contacts. Although there has been little discussion of the views presented in these meetings and no attempt to rebut them, my impression is that these comments have had an effect and are receiving wide currency in Vietnamese circles.

During the week, the opposition of the Buddhist Institute leadership to the government and to Huong personally took the form of public letters to Chief of State Suu and to me,3 castigating Huong and claiming Suu and I bear responsibility for the government. Three Institute leaders carried on a hunger strike against the government, among them Tri Quang who has taken full charge of the anti-GVN campaign. I have deliberately avoided direct contact with the Institute leaders preferring to work through Embassy officers who are regularly in touch with them. The immediate problem appears to establish communication between them and a spokesman for Huong who personally has no desire to talk to the bonzes, much less to compromise with them.

The relatively restrained character of the Buddhist campaign thus far suggests that the Institute leadership is well aware of their lack of a broad base of support even among most other Buddhists and lack of a truly religious issue to use against the government. They appear to be trying to provoke the government to take actions against them which will give them an issue and an appeal to popular sympathy. Needless to say, the Mission is giving this entire matter of the Buddhist opposition its priority attention.

General Khanh is the cause of some uneasiness again, not primarily because of any anti-governmental inclination but because of the restlessness of many of the Generals under his leadership. While he continues to be the most able of the lot, he often displays a fundamental lack of principle which eventually erodes the confidence in him of most of his associates. So far as I can see, he is having little luck in unifying the Armed Forces and eliminating the factions, the primary task he set for himself upon quitting the government.

There is little newsworthy to report in the other areas of our activity. Except for a rather large action at An Lao in Binh Dinh Province on December 7, military operations have been relatively routine. Pacification progress around Saigon seems to be picking up but probably will not reach all year end target objectives.

We had another series of heavy rains which have caused some flooding north of Saigon and south of the area devastated by typhoons last month. Relief action is in progress and the situation appears to be in hand.

In response to your expressed interest in the attitudes of minority groups toward the Huong government, I am sending to State today a comprehensive summary of attitudes of the principal minority elements toward the government as we presently appraise them.4

Taylor5

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–161–69. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Drafted by Taylor and transmitted as telegram 1826 from Saigon, which is the source text.

2 Telegram 1764 from Saigon, December 9, transmitted Taylor’s report to the President on the activities in Vietnam while Taylor was in Washington. (Ibid.)

3 Translations of these letters were transmitted in telegram 1790 from Saigon, December 11. (Department of State, Central Files, SOC 12)

4 Infra.

5 Telegram 1826 bears this typed signature.

448. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 448. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 16, 1964, 8 p.m.

1836. For the Acting Secretary from Taylor. CINCPAC for POLAD. Pursuant to your request2 following is summary of attitudes and our contacts with key groups:

1. Buddhists: Despite slight opening for possible compromise indicated in conversation yesterday with Tri Quang (Embtel 1833),3 our assessment is that Buddhist Institute leadership still remains intent on confrontation with GVN and at this point will not be greatly swayed by efforts at direct persuasion by us.

Extent to which they willing to go in reaching compromise will undoubtedly depend far more on their assessment of local strength and support they are able to find (or manufacture) for such confrontation than on our views. Other major factor is their estimate Huong’s ability to resist their demands and their necessity to “save face” if Huong’s resistance is successful. Therefore, most useful role for us at moment is maintenance our firm position of support for Huong while at same time continuing quiet contact with Buddhist Institute leaders to ensure they understand fully US position and to explore and possibly facilitate establishment of dialogue between them and GVN.

Some elements of direct US action with Buddhist Institute leadership as envisaged reftel already being undertaken, while certain other suggestions would seem to have only limited or even no positive effect at this time. With regard to specific lettered paragraphs your message: A. (a) EmbOffs have been maintaining constant contact with Buddhist leaders Tri Quang and to lesser extent with Tam Chau and Mai Tho Trayen. EmbOffs also see various secondary members Buddhist Institute leadership and other Buddhist elements frequently. Gard currently in Saigon and will be assisting us in this effort while he is here. Believe contacts to date have given Buddhist Institute leadership clear idea of US attitude to extent they willing listen to it. It is clear that they have decided to proceed with campaign of pressure on government in full knowledge it contrary to US position.

A.(b) Buddhist Institute leadership, like other Vietnamese, believes VOA is voice of USG and while they will interpret playbacks as USG pressure against them, believe it useful to keep before them evidence that foreign observers, particularly local correspondents, view Buddhist Institute campaign of opposition as being without justifiable foundation and a negative exercise.

A.(c) Believe that for the present, official statements from Washington directed specifically at Buddhist Institute leaders would likely prove counterproductive. They directly aware of US position. However, they will probably interpret public statements as attacks on them before Vietnamese public opinion, and this would work against our efforts to keep channels of communications open. At same time, statements from Washington on need for political stability and orderly processes of government, such as that proposed for President’s press conference,4 will continue to be useful.

B. Believe letter from Lodge might prove useful, but would prefer to hold this one in reserve for time being. At moment, Buddhist Institute leadership still seems intent on confrontation and we doubt that they can be dissuaded until situation develops in manner which will either indicate to them they are playing a losing hand or pave way for reasonable “face saving” compromise that they can accept without achieving their major goal, i.e., ouster of Huong.

C. Believe this too might be useful in future. But at present juncture this would be interpreted either as sign of US weakness or as effort to buy them off. US posture of quiet strength more desirable at present and stakes for which Buddhist Institute leadership now playing are for effective control of GVN so that material US aid would at present look like very poor consolation prize. We have discussed this very subject on numerous occasions with Buddhist Institute leadership but in each case they have failed to follow through because of their lack of organization and experience. This continues to be one of our principal aims but Buddhist response to date has been most disappointing. Even concerted direct welfare effort by American wives has fallen on sterile ground.

D. As noted above, we believe essential Buddhist Institute aim at present is incompatible with retention of Huong government and little room for maneuver exists. At same time Embassy is quietly canvassing Buddhist opinion in effort to determine extent to which Tri Quang and Tam Chau and followers might be isolated within movement. Mai Tho Truyen has given indication to Political Counselor and Gard, for example, of his dissatisfaction with current Buddhist policy as expressed by bonzes. Theravada leaders have stated that Theravada groups dissociating selves with UBA campaign, which they view as political. Other prominent lay Buddhists expressed similar sentiment. However, there does not appear to be a lay leader on scene who is now capable or willing serve as focus for this discontent and to return direction of Buddhist Institute’s political activity to lay leaders.

E. Embassy is currently examining this question with Gard.

In short, we believe that if correct posture pursued by Huong (combination of obvious fairness and strength) and mistakes by his government can be avoided so as to deny genuinely exploitable issue to Buddhists, and if continuing support can be assured him from Suu, HNC, and the military, we believe essential weakness of Buddhist Institute’s position will become increasingly evident and way may then become open to getting Buddhist leaders off hook (should that then appear desirable). At present, therefore, we plan to stand strongly behind Huong and advise him of our views.

However, at moment we do not believe Buddhist leadership can be dissuaded from pursuing confrontation until they have more fully grasped unfavorable conjunction (from their viewpoint) of political variables or until face saving device found to get them off hook.

Specific suggestions we have envisaged making to Huong include following: 1. That Huong maintain non-provocative course combined with strength and focus public attention on the positive GVN programs.

2. That he consider taking additional steps which, without being labeled as such, will be interpreted by the Buddhist hierarchy as nods in their direction; for example: a) Huong might consider appointing additional members of his cabinet such as a Minister of Defense and a Minister Without Portfolio (for liaison with the HNC and religious and private groups) who would be acceptable to the Buddhists. This can be done without the charge that he is changing his government under pressure.

b) Huong might create a citizens’ committee for flood relief and appeal again for support of religious and private groups in the flood relief area thus providing the opportunity for the GVN to work cooperatively with the Buddhist hierarchy at the Saigon level.

c) Huong might seek to clarify in a future public statement the impression alleged by the Buddhists that he had lumped the Buddhist hierarchy, out-politicians and the VC as sharply the same motives in their opposition to his government [sic].

Longer range steps which the GVN might take are as follows: 1. Arrange for the Dalai Lama, his brother, or other Buddhist leaders from other countries to visit Vietnam to educate Vietnamese bonzes on the perils of Communism and their civil responsibilities.

2. Consider changes in his current Cabinet at the proper time, replacing those Ministers who have not performed well or whose past history is demonstrably open to question.

Measures which the US Mission might take in addition to maintaining close contact with the Buddhist hierarchy are: 1. Maintain pressure on them.

2. Continue with a program directed primarily toward Buddhists recently approved by the Mission Council. These measures are designed to foster desired Buddhist views and activities in the following fields among others: (a) Buddhists against Communists, especially Viet Cong; (b) Buddhist responsibility toward political authority and stability for GVN; (c) Buddhist contributions toward social stability, especially through education and social welfare; (d) Buddhist contacts with foreign countries in ways best for GVN-USG interests. Gard is especially working on the implementation of measures (b), (c), and (d) stated above, both in SVN and elsewhere in Asia.

3. Continue our work with students to keep them in classroom.

Summary attitudes of other key groups follow: 2. “Out” politicians: Political spectrum of “out” politicians ranges from active oppositionists who desire Huong’s downfall to other wing—represented largely by Southerners—which actively supports him. Main body of politicians, such as Sung’s Northern Dai Viets, Hoan’s Southern Dai Viets, Hiep’s Southern VNQDD, who together probably constitute most important mass of politicians in Vietnam, today are essentially opposed to efforts to overturn Huong government by force. Though not personally devoted to Huong or his Cabinet, they nevertheless would view his removal under pressure as blow to efforts to establish orderly political processes in Vietnam, and possibly first step on way toward another military takeover. In total political spectrum there are also numerous irresponsible politicians (such as Hoang Co Thuy, who was involved in exploiting Buddhist memorial services in early November) who see opposition to Huong simply as means to further their own ambitions. Although they have potential for trouble-making, they have little following.

Political Counselor and other Embassy officers are in frequent touch with all these political figures.

4. [sic] Civil servants: Primacy of concern for furtherance of their careers renders civil servants circumspect at all times with regard to taking conspicuous positions for or against any incumbent government, and also renders them timid in taking initiatives during periods of instability. They also tend to approve developments which might lead to strong stable government, and Huong’s early display of strength has found favor for that reason. Prime Minister Huong has also won approval of many civil servants for his record of integrity and his willingness to accept humble circumstances. In many ways, Huong resembles ideal Confucian government official. On other hand, his reputation for honesty also causes concern among individuals who are uncertain what this reputation might mean in terms of stringent insistence on efficiency and honesty. As known Southern regionalist Huong finds his strongest support among those bureaucrats who come from South, with rather less warmth than those of Center and North.

Embassy Political Section has numerous close contacts among upper and middle level of permanent civil service. Other elements of Mission, and notably USOM, have close working relations with Vietnamese bureaucrats at all levels.

5. Press: Since imposition of martial law, press censorship has been enforced. Ten papers have been temporarily suspended and several others have voluntarily folded. These harsh measures have been privately applauded by more responsible journalists who have watched Saigon’s journalistic world become more and more chaotic in past year to point where some fifty dailies were being published. Rumors were rife that more volatile papers were infiltrated by crypto-VCs or their sympathizers.

Undoubtedly many journalists oppose Huong, but their opposition will be permanent or temporary depending upon amount of success he enjoys. If he proves capable of governing and then succeeds in issuing some sort of reasonable press statute, ranks of journalistic opposition might be thinned to point of inconsequence. At same time, many editors and journalists have ties with political and other groups, and their attitudes toward Huong government will be affected to large extent by actions and attitudes of these larger groups.

Embassy maintains frequent contacts with journalists through Political Section, USIS [less than 1 1ine of source text not declassified]. Ambassador has had two receptions for selected editors and publishers to discuss political situation and expects to have others in future.

6. Cao Dai: Leaders of Tay Ninh or founding sect of Cao Daiism have expressed full if unenthusiastic support for Huong government. This support is due in part to realization that Huong was choice of Suu, devout Cao Dai coreligionist, and High National Council, whose Deputy Chairman is Cao Dai Archbishop Vinh. There is respectiveness [sic] long known to many Cao Dai leaders, but also concern that he may not provide strong leadership and that security conditions, especially in Tay Ninh, may deteriorate.

Nevertheless, Cao Hoai Sang, administrative head of ecclesiastical hierarchy, has issued formal statement backing Huong. Prime Mission contacts include Vinh, Sang, other church hierarchy, and provincial officials, especially Brig Gen. Le Van Tat in Tay Ninh.

7. Hoa Hao: Hoa Hao seem to be hopelessly split rather than incohesive organization, and no overall “Hoe Hao attitude” is discernible. In general, major factions and leaders of sect support Huong and GVN. Chairman of sect’s central committee (i.e., religious organization), Luong Trong Tuong, is member of High National Council and reportedly voted in favor of Huong’s investiture. Just after late November disorders, Tuong issued statement in favor of Huong and GVN. One Hoa Hao party politician, Phan Ba Cam, has expressed opposition to Huong, but Cam does not enjoy wide prestige in sect itself. Factionalized politically as Hoa Hao are, it would be difficult to envisage any effective political opposition to GVN on their part unless GVN tried to curtail greatly local semi-autonomy many Hoa Hao groups now enjoy in lower Delta.

Mission contacts include major Hoa Hao leaders such as province chiefs of An Giang, Chau Doc, and Kien Phong, various district chiefs and lesser officials in these and other provinces, and some Hoa Hao politicians in Saigon, including Truong on HNC.

8. Chinese: Chinese press and leaders of economic elite and Chinese congregations, who view urban unrest as extension of threat which Viet Cong pose to Chinese commercial and social interests, have given full moral support to Huong government. Most of them see activities of Vietnamese Buddhist leadership as disruptive influence in already unstable political situation, and, accustomed themselves to order of contemplative monks, tend to brand leading Vietnamese bonzes as “un-Buddhist.” Broad mass of working class Chinese, on other hand, probably are fully engrossed in day-to-day struggle for basic necessities and are little concerned about future of government, Buddhist leaders or Viet Cong.

Contacts: Number of Embassy and USOM officers have social and business contacts with Chinese commercial, financial, and educational leaders. There are two Chinese language officers in Economic Section, one who speaks Mandarin, and another, Sino-American, who speaks Cantonese.

One political officer is member of Chinese branch of Rotary Club in Cholon, and another, who speaks Mandarin Chinese, maintains social contact with leaders of two of five congregations and with Deputy Chief of Federation of Congregations, as well as with Chinese Embassy officers. Political Section also monitors five of 12 Chinese daily newspapers.

9. Montagnards: Political changes which have occurred in SVN during past year and half have had little impact on attitudes and allegiances of Montagnard people, who have never had feeling of loyalty and attachment to Vietnamese Government. In fact, average Montagnard in both cities and hamlets would like to rid Highlands of Vietnamese settlers and government. At same time, however, vast majority of Montagnards also dislike Viet Cong and seldom provide them willing support. Montagnard rebellion which occurred in September and subsequent Pleiku conference in October did not basically change relationships between Vietnamese and Montagnards but they pose both new dangers and opportunities for GVN program in Highlands. Sincere fulfillment of promises made by General Khanh at conference would undoubtedly do much to win more enthusiastic response from at least some of Montagnards. (Implementation of some of these programs by new Huong government have occurred too recently to gauge Montagnard reaction.) Rebel organization behind Rhade revolt still commands allegiances of CIDG in several Special Forces camps and consequently still poses serious threat to GVN. Demands of this rebel organization are tantamount to request for complete autonomy for Montagnards, and it is clear government’s promised program will not satisfy this group. There have been some indications that this group will stage another demonstration and/or revolt sometime in late December if its demands are not met.

US Mission is cooperating with GVN in initiation and development of programs aimed at improving economic and social conditions of Montagnards. Mission has urged GVN at various levels to show due urgency in implementation of its programs for Montagnards. At same time, United States is making it clear, as it has in past, to Montagnard CIDG that US stands with Vietnamese Government and will assist it in suppressing rebellious acts which would only benefit Viet Cong in long run.

MACV, USOM and Embassy officers maintain regular contact with Montagnard civil and military leaders.

10. Labor: Attitude of great majority of labor leaders and rank-and-file can best be best be described as ambivalent, passively loyal and apathetic. While organized labor’s hostility to Communist ideology as such has remained fairly active, its interest in promises of more radical approach to such problems has been increasing rather than decreasing. This is partly attributable to frustration caused by fact that post-Diem governments have not carried out any of revolutionary reforms which fall of Diem made appear imminent. Moreover, as insurgency continues and fatigue of general population increases, labor seems to have begun to doubt in ultimate victory against Viet Cong.

Thus, under slogan of “apolitical activities” workers have tended to withdraw from public life, seemingly waiting for outcome of military effort.

American presence in Vietnam is perhaps most important factor holding organized labor from jumping on other side of the fence. Labor members realize that without American help economy of country would have suffered and standards of living would not be what they are today.

Embassy Labor Attaché has frequent contacts with labor leaders, management representatives, and with senior Ministry of Labor officials.

11. Students: At base of student discontent is disappointment that revolution has not produced leadership with dynamism and charisma. Most students who think about it are uneasy about some of Ministers, but most are unwilling to take violent action—in fact, there is some indication that some student leaders believe Buddhist movement has been discredited and are trying to detach themselves.

There seems to have been some increase in regional feelings, with Southerners in general tending toward at least mild support of government. Ones who do not support government feel, apparently sincerely, that urgency of situation does not permit men whose past records have been ineffectual (some Cabinet members) to remain in office. In short run main danger, however, seems to stem from fact that students can be easily used by outside forces, such as Buddhists or politicians. In fact, these outsiders are probably more effective in drumming up student support, especially among high school students, than main student groups themselves. In this context students’ capacity for troublemaking should not be underestimated.

Most students do not feel they have been properly “called” to service by country: they are in large measure ashamed of appeal of their government and its ineffectiveness. In this sense, there will probably be certain favorable reaction to government which shows itself to be strong, and especially one which shows itself anxious to draw on student participation. However, actual strong measures taken against students on streets have drawn unfavorable reaction and have made good propaganda against government. Students also strongly object to military government and Gen Khanh in particular.

Between them various elements of Mission have contact with virtually all surfaced student leaders, and there are frequent exchanges of views with many of them. Beyond this, such multi-agency programs as English teaching and USOM and AID work with student economic projects bring US representatives into contact with students at many levels. The Mission Youth Committee meets once per month under direction of cultural affairs officer.

12. Summary of military attitudes toward Huong government: Since transfer of power from military to civilian government, VN military has taken public position of full support for such transfer and of somewhat ambiguous support for Huong government. Following December 2 Generals’ meeting at Dalat communiqué was issued (Embtel 1732),5 signed by Gen Khanh and highest ranking military officers which promised “to support without reservation civilian government working for people” without specifically mentioning Huong government. Position of Gen Khanh himself, both publicly and privately has been something less than forthright and has led to fears in many circles that he is harboring ambitions to take over government again. These fears are based on such Khanh statements as that carried in local press on November 30 that “troubled political situation in Saigon should not drag on” and remarks to Political Counselor (Embtel 1752)6 that he would stay out of politics “until time is ripe”. Misgivings concerning Khanh also based on his precipitate action before relinquishing post of Prime Minister to grant sizeable across-the-board pay increases to military and civilian personnel, to reinstate Dalat Generals, and to make last minute promotion or transfer of number of Generals.

Finally, under Huong government Khanh has attempted, with some degree of success, to transfer authority from civilian show [side?] of government to RVNAF High Command or to himself. Khanh has obtained authority to appoint most general officers, to make promotions up to rank of Colonel, and for expanded mobilization authority for the High Command. He is currently attempting to obtain greater promotion and budgetary authority. Khanh’s moves have been countered by recent action of “Young Turks” who ostensibly called Dalat meeting in order to obtain active expression of support for Huong government and inaugurate certain reforms in military services. In fact there is evidence that “Young Turks”, rather than seeking more support for Huong, are trying to curb Khanh’s personal power and even that some (notably I Corps Commander Gen Thi) may have ambitions of replacing Khanh as Commander in Chief.

There is also some indication that Sub-Brigadier Generals who were last to review [receive?] their promotions under Khanh may be rallying around him as counter-balance to “Young Turks”.

In terms of practical support, military has put its full weight behind Huong’s thus far successful efforts to curb demonstrations and maintain government’s authority. This was demonstrated by actions of troops assigned to handle demonstrations, obtaining of authorization to draft demonstrators, and by forthright expressions of determination to preserve law and order on part of Saigon Commander, General Dong.

There are two dangers against which we must remain alert: First an outright military attempt to seize power, and second greater erosion of governmental control over military from civilian to military hands. We have made number of attempts to influence latter. Ambassador interceded directly with Huong and Khanh (Embtels 1452 and 1460)7 to obtain modifications of proposed reorganization of armed forces which would have confused chain of command and given Chief of State stronger position than that intended in charter. He has impressed on Khanh and other Generals, most recently following his return from Washington, the necessity for full support for Huong (Embtel 1760).8 In addition Gen Westmoreland and his staff are monitoring closely current military organizational efforts and attempting to prevent any being adopted which are unsound and would erode Huong government’s authority. We will continue our efforts along these lines.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Secret; Limdis. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 Document 445.

3 Telegram 1833, December 16, described a 3-hour conversation between Manfull and Tri Quang which gave the impression that the Buddhist leaders were determined to seek Huong’s overthrow despite some slight indications that a settlement short of that might be worked out. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII. Cables)

4 The proposed statement had been sent in telegram 1255 to Saigon, December 11. (Ibid.)

5 See footnote 5, Document 442.

6 Telegram 1752, December 8, reported on a reception Taylor had given for senior Vietnamese officials and Khanh at which the Ambassador briefed them on his trip to Washington. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII, Cables)

7 Telegram 1452, November 10, transmitted a report on a meeting with Huong on November 9 to discuss the reorganization of the armed forces. Telegram 1460, also November 10, reported on a similar meeting with Khanh on November 10. (Both in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

8 Telegram 1760, December 9, transmitted a report on a dinner that Westmoreland had given for Vietnamese military officers at which Taylor reported on his trip to Washington. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIII, Cables)

449. Letter From the President to Senator Mike Mansfield 449. Letter From the President to Senator Mike Mansfield1

Washington, December 17, 1964.

DEAR MIKE: I want to thank you for your memorandum of December 9,2 which I read with care. I asked Mac Bundy to comment on it, and in particular to see which of your policy suggestions we could fit into our current program. He has written me a memorandum of comments, which I enclose as of possible interest.

I think we have the same basic view of this problem and the same sense of its difficulties. The one suggestion in your memorandum which I myself would take direct issue with is that we are “overcommitted” there. Given the size of the stake, it seems to me that we are doing only what we have to do. That we could always do it better is clear, and it is in that spirit that I greatly welcome your memorandum on the subject.

Sincerely,

LBJ

Enclosure

Washington, December 16, 1964.

Memorandum From the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) to the President3

SUBJECT

Senator Mansfield’s Memorandum of December 9

1. Senator Mansfield’s memorandum is characteristically thoughtful. There is a difference in emphasis between him and us, but certainly no difference in fundamental purpose. I think he agrees with us that the most important task is to try to help in getting a more effective and better supported government in Saigon; of course this is a point that you have hammered on in every meeting in recent months. And we certainly agree with him “that American and Western interests are best served by the frugal use of American resources to forestall Chinese political and military domination of the area and to keep open an opportunity for the development of native institutions of national independence, regional cooperation and popularly responsible government.” What seems frugal to us may seem too much to him, but this is not a difference in principle.

2. Senator Mansfield’s memorandum makes seven policy suggestions and I comment on them in order: (1) We think it would be a mistake to make a commitment against any U.S. action of any kind beyond the borders of South Vietnam. On the other hand, you have repeatedly said that we seek no wider war and intend no reckless action. I myself do not see the grounds for the flatness of the Senator’s recommendation, given the facts of infiltration and of North Vietnamese control over the Communists in the South.

(2) There is a lot of force in the Senator’s recommendation that we avoid entanglement on the Cambodian border. But Communist infiltration across this border is a fact, and it is hard to see how we can impose the stringent restrictions on the Vietnamese which the Senator suggests. As a practical matter, we do agree that there are other areas of higher priority, and this position is being urged on the Vietnamese authorities by the country team. We do not fully share the memorandum’s very high judgment of Sihanouk, but we agree that it is important to negotiate differences if possible. I myself would suppose that negotiation implied some give on both sides, and we do not find much give in Sihanouk’s current position.

(3) We agree on the importance of supporting Souvanna Phouma; this has been our position for two years. We do not quite agree that the initiative in these relations should be “his totally” because that seems to us not a good way of conducting relations which involve U.S. commitments and responsibilities. Souvanna himself has given repeated indications of his satisfaction with our current policy in Laos. Souvanna, indeed, is considerably more favorable to U.S. action outside South Vietnam than the Senator’s memorandum, so that if we followed all his advice we could not follow all of Senator Mansfield’s.

(4) We do not currently share the view that we should stand aside entirely from those who are trying to increase their contacts with Hanoi. We do recognize the advantages of detaching Hanoi from China, but at the moment we have also the quite tangible problem of what Hanoi is doing in South Vietnam. This seems to us to argue against a present policy of Free World friendliness to North Vietnam.

(5) We agree with the general purpose of this recommendation, but it is not clear to us that peaceful unification of all Vietnam is the best slogan for a government which has all it can do to deal with its own immediate problems. Nevertheless, this suggestion is worth further consideration and it is being reviewed with the State Department.

(6) No matter what course is taken, it seems likely to us that we face years of involvement in South Vietnam, though not necessarily “a vast increase in the commitment.” The Administration has regularly insisted that this problem is not one which will be solved tomorrow, but it may well be important to make this point still more clear to the American people. In general, the Administration’s policy seems to correspond to the view of most thoughtful Americans: We do not want a big war out there, and neither do we intend to back out on a 10-year-long commitment.

(7) Right now we do not see how we can have useful exploratory talks with the Chinese, in the light of the extraordinary virulence of their public and private comments about the U.S. It takes two to conduct a conversation, and everything we currently know about Peking suggests that there is no interest there in a serious conversation on any terms that are remotely acceptable to us. Recent reports from leaders of the British Labour Party, who have been in touch with the Chinese and who might be expected to sympathize with suggestion No. 7, only confirm our current pessimistic assessment of this possibility.

McGeorge Bundy4

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Names File, Mansfield. No classification marking. Drafted by the President and McGeorge Bundy. Senator Mansfield was the Senate Majority Leader.

2 The memorandum [4 pages of source text] was not declassified. (Ibid.)

3 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Memos to the President, McGeorge Bundy. Secret.

4 Printed from a copy that bears this typed signature.

450. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 450. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 19, 1964–6:10 p.m.

1312. High-level meeting today2 reviewed Ops program for next two weeks which will be covered by septels through military channels.3 Agreed to continue information policy of no comment in event of Hanoi charges, with any aircraft loss being handled from Washington according to circumstances. Reviewed third-country aid situation as covered septels.

Main discussion centered on question of surfacing infiltration evidence. Our feeling is that press both here and in Saigon now accepts increased infiltration as fact but that formal GVN/US release could be misinterpreted and become vehicle undesirable speculation. Accordingly, we believe we should handle this in two ways: a. General background briefings both here and in Saigon should continue to indicate infiltration has increased without getting into specifics.

b. If Saigon continues to be pressed for more precise information, but in response to such pressure rather than on our initiative, Saigon could have one or more deep background sessions with American press to indicate general nature and thrust of information now available. Such backgrounders should draw on Cooper presentation as revised4 emphasizing 1964 increase rather than revision estimates for earlier years, and should avoid specific numbers game except as tentative orders of magnitude and should stress that picture constantly being adjusted to reflect latest information some of which necessarily subject considerations military security. In other words, we would be seeking to get general picture into survey stories such as Grose article of November 15 rather than as spot news commanding wide attention. FYI: We would anticipate senior officials here will testify to Congress this subject perhaps in late January and would then give as specific figures as possible stressing that they are estimates and in response to Congressional inquiry. End FYI.

Saigon 18666 received after meeting concluded. In view above decision on formal infiltration briefing, we accept your judgment resumption your periodic background meetings now desirable. It remains important, however, to avoid sensitive areas and even generalized discussion of plans related to infiltration problem. We believe line should be that we obviously concerned this problem but that any discussion specific actions not useful. Our impression here is that knowledgeable press now simply assumes we are doing more but fully accepts that we are not talking about it. Naturally you could use your own discretion in discussions GVN political situation and on plans for action within SVN.

Re Vientiane 904 and Bangkok 7987 both posts should take cue from Saigon on information given to RTG and RLG. Saigon should inform in advance when and if background sessions scheduled to permit simultaneous oral handling in other posts but avoiding transmission written document.

Ball

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis; Ivory. Drafted by William Bundy; cleared in draft with McGeorge Bundy, McNaughton, and Forrestal; and initialed by Harriman. Repeated to Bangkok, Vientiane, and CINCPAC.

2 In addition to Operations Plan 34A and infiltration, the meeting, which was held at the Department of State at 10 a.m. and was attended by William (Chairman) and McGeorge Bundy, Ball, Forrestal, Vance, McNaughton, Cooper, Rowan, McCone, Mustin, and others, discussed Laos and third country aid including the formation of an international force. (JCS 2339/166, December 19; National Archives and Records Administration, RG 218, JCS Files)

3 These telegrams have not been further identified.

4 On December 4, Cooper had sent to William Bundy a memorandum attaching a summary statement and detailed discussion of Viet Cong infiltration, a list of questions and answers that could be used in connection with its release, an explanation of past low estimates, and a list of supporting evidence. On December 9, Bundy attached Cooper’s presentation to memoranda to Rusk, McNamara, McCone, McNaughton, Ball, and McGeorge Bundy. Cooper’s and Bundy’s memoranda are in Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. The attached four documents have not been found.

5 For text, see The New York Times, November 2, 1964, p. 1

6 Telegram 1866, December 19, reported that relations with the press in Vietnam had improved in recent months, but failure to provide information on infiltration either in briefings or at backgrounders would jeopardize the situation. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

7 In these telegrams, December 16 and 19, respectively, the Embassies reported that they had received Cooper’s report on infiltration and wanted to present copies of it to local officials. (Ibid., POL 27–3 LAOS–VIET N and POL 23–7 VIET S)

451. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 451. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 20, 1964—5 p.m.

1870. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 1869.2 Alex Johnson and I immediately saw Huong this morning while General Throckmorton and General Moore went to JGS to persuade military group to hold up on press conference scheduled for 0900.3

Briefly Prime Minister had no information beyond that he had been given when Khanh and the ten Young Turks called on him at 2:00 a.m. this morning to inform him of the action that had been taken and to ask that he remain as Prime Minister. He said that he was not asked to nor did he concur in dissolution of High National Council (although he told us he agreed that there were some problems with its composition) and told military delegation he would only remain if military did not constitute itself as a “state within a state,” if the authority of the state were respected by all, and if those arrested who were not Communists would be released in due course. He said the military group had told him that Chief of State had accepted what they had done but the officers asked that if Chief of State did resign Huong also take over Suu’s position in addition to remaining PM. Huong indicated his belief that although Chief of State was very weak and “soft” it was preferable that he remain but that if he did leave, Huong would be willing to accept the position if the military would truly support civilian government. He asked for our advice as to what he should do and that we should make clear to the military our view on the proper role of the military with respect to a civilian government. In reply to my questions he said he was not really sure who controlled the military, he felt the “Young Turks” were loyal to him but he had a question about Khanh and agreed that Khanh was perhaps not in real control.

I said that I was not able to give him any advice until I had talked to the military group and had a better idea of what had happened. I would do this and get in touch with him later in the day. Meanwhile I observed that he seemed to have preserved his freedom of action and therefore was in a strong position to impose the conditions under which he would be willing to remain as Prime Minister. I also thought it important the government get out some statement later today.

Immediately upon our return from seeing Huong we met at the Embassy with Ky (VNAF), Thieu (IV Corps), Thi (I Corps), and Cang also accompanied by General Throckmorton, General Moore and General Rowland.4

Recalling my conversations with them immediately following my return from Washington on the importance of government stability I very forcefully expressed my disappointment in the action they had taken, made it clear they had jeopardized US support in everything they had been seeking and asked for their explanations.

Ky acting as spokesman gave long involved explanation revolving around point that action had been designed to remove disruptive elements in High National Council and allegedly strengthen unity. Only concrete point of complaint was the HNC had intervened in matter of officer retirements which designed to promote unity in armed forces. Took position that having taken action military now withdraw and return power to civilians, giving to Suu the legislative powers formerly exercised by HNC and especially the task of preparing for assembly elections. In response to my questions they alleged that Military Council was advisory only to General Khanh as C in C and that decisions were in fact taken by General Khanh.

I pointed out that they had in fact usurped power which had been transferred to HNC and government last August 27 and all the world would interpret action simply as military coup. They had destroyed charter and whole basis for orderly development of government started last August 27 and which had so greatly encouraged US and rest of world. If Huong and Suu remained in office under these conditions it would make a mockery of civilian government, it being obvious they remaining only at sufferance of military and at best were military puppets subject to removal any time military displeased with them. Having now taken this action they had to accept responsibility and could not just wash their hands to [of] the affair and say it was up to the civilians to straighten it out. I strongly urged that they seek some way of walking [taking] back their statement of the dissolution of the High National Council and cancel press conference scheduled for this afternoon or if they unwilling to do this at least retain flexibility of action and not slam doors. If they did not make claim of having dissolved HNC perhaps some way might be worked out salvage the mess into which they have gotten themselves.

They seemed somewhat impressed and left to see Khanh.

I asked them to make an appointment for me with Khanh for 3 p.m. with whom they were lunching. Khanh called later and alleged inability to see me at that time because of press conference which he said had to take place. Thus I have not seen Khanh on this subject up to present moment.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, London, Paris, Vientiane, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC. Received at 9:20 a.m.

2 Telegram 1869, December 20, 2 p.m., reported that a newly-formed Military Council had met late on December 19 and decided to dissolve the High National Council. Huang and Suu were informed about 2 a.m. on December 20, but Khanh, who had agreed to inform Taylor, failed to do so. (113id.)

3 Reports on this meeting were transmitted in MACV 005, 200520Z, and 008, 200750Z. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 12056)

4 The meeting took place from 12:09 to 1:25, and the Embassy transmitted a summary of it as an enclosure to airgram A–493, December 24. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S; published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 433D) For other descriptions of this meeting, see Taylor, Swords and Plowshares, pp. 330–331; Ky, Twenty Years, pp. 53–55; and Johnson, Right Hand of Power, pp. 418–419.

452. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 452. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 20, 1964—7 p.m.

1874. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 1870.2 Alex Johnson and I have just again seen Prime Minister Huong.3 Deputy Prime Minister Vien was also with him. He said no one from the military had contacted him since the 2:00 a.m. call on him last night reported reftel. However, Huong had seen Chief of State Suu and they had decided that it was important for both of them to remain with the Chief of State taking over the legislative functions of the High National Council and the government taking on preparations for the formation of the assembly. They would thus stay on provided that there were a solemn undertaking by the military, confirmed by secret vote of each General, not again to “interfere in civilian affairs”.

I outlined my conversation with the four Generals (reftel), pointing out that in spite of my urgings on them, as well as on Khanh, they had nevertheless just held a press conference (Embtel 1871)4 at which, also in spite of my urgings, they had formally announced by a “Military Council Decree No. 1” the dissolution of the HNC. I said that it seemed to me the Prime Minister had only two choices, either to accept the action of the military or to denounce it. If he accepted the completely illegal action of the Military Council, situation would clearly be one of military dictatorship with only a civilian facade. Obviously his government would have no power and would be operating only in the shadow of the military. This would present us with an entirely new situation and I could not predict the attitude of my government. However, it could certainly jeopardize the possibility of our continued support, including everything I had discussed following my recent return from Washington. It was impossible for me to see how govt could accept the validity of a “decree” by the Military Council. (It was evident that up to this time neither he nor Vien had focused on the fact that the Military Council had issued what purported to be a decree and finally were impressed by the problem this presented.)

I said that it seemed to me that he was in a strong position to exact conditions from the military, and that as a price for remaining in office he should do so. I suggested that these conditions should be:

1. That he not accept the legality of the Military Council decree purporting to dissolve the HNC; in rejecting it, he might use some face-saving words about the favorable intentions of the Generals.

2. That he agree in consultation with Suu, Vinh (Vice President of HNC) and Huyen (HNC member who seems to be respected by the military) to revamp the membership of the HNC (or an analogous committee under a different name).

3. That military immediately release to the custody of the government all prisoners they had taken; and

4. That there be a specific undertaking by the military to support his government, including a willingness to participate in it and share responsibility by accepting a Cabinet post, such as Ministry of Defense.

Huong and Vien agreed to these conditions, expressed intention of immediately seeing Khanh and then having a Cabinet meeting later this evening. They will promptly inform us of results. I told them they could say bluntly to Khanh and the military that we have lost confidence in either a true military dictatorship or a military dictatorship behind the facade of a civilian government and under such circumstances there was real doubt USG could continue support SVN.

Will report further developments soonest.5

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Confidential; Immediate; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, London, Paris, Vientiane, Bangkok, Phnom Penh, and CINCPAC. Received at 9:19 a.m.

2 Supra.

3 The meeting took place at 4:30 p.m.

4 Telegram 1871, December 20, 5 p.m., transmitted the text of Military Council Decree No. 1. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S) The text of the proclamation read at the press conference was transmitted in telegram 1872 from Saigon. (Ibid.)

5 At 10:06 a.m. on December 20, the Department of State transmitted a flash telegram drafted by William Bundy which reads: “Entirely agree with line you are taking. We are following closely.” (Telegram 1313 to Saigon; ibid.)

453. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 453. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 20, 1964–11 p.m.

1877. For Secretary Rusk. DOD for McNamara. White House for Bundy. CIA for McCone. JCS for Wheeler. At the end of an active day, it may be well to record a few personal impressions of the events which began in the middle of the night of 19–20 December and which are still in progress. It is fairly clear that the Generals had been developing for some time a growing antipathy for certain members of the HNC because they were considered hostile to the interests of the armed forces or because they were partisans of Big Minh or for both reasons. Apparently it was the opposition of the HNC to the retirement proposal (Embtels 1857 and 1858)2 which would have ousted Minh from active service which brought matter to a head. There seems to have been some unexplained feeling of urgency that action had to be taken last night “to avoid a mutiny in the armed forces” as one of the Young Turks described the situation to us. In the background, there was also the impatience with civilian politicians which is constantly on the lips of the military.

The action taken against the HNC and the round-up of some of its members along with certain offending politicians seem to have received the approval of all (or a vast majority) of the Council of the Armed Forces which. in turn. includes most of the influential Generals. However, its authors did not look much beyond the pleasure of striking at their civilian adversaries and certainly gave no serious consideration to the consequences which they are now beginning to perceive with some dismay. Apparently they had hoped to break the political crockery and then retire to the more congenial task of fighting the VC. How to continue the work of the HNC in forming the national assembly without a HNC was considered only to the extent of hoping to pass the responsibility to Chief of State Suu who, everyone knows, is utterly incapable of discharging this responsibility even with extensive staff assistance. One may suspect that the Generals are trying to build up Suu’s powers because of the ease of manipulating him.

Suu certainly not capable of resisting the military; Huong is capable only with strong US encouragement. At the outset of our meeting this evening (Embtel 1874),3 he was quite prepared to accept the fait accompli presented by the Generals and stay in office pro bono publico until Alex Johnson and I pointed out some of the implications. It was Armed Forces Council Decree No. 1 announcing the dissolution of the HNC which Huong only saw as we arrived which convinced him of the need of some kind of understanding with the military before agreeing to remain in office.

Another outstanding point in the situation is that the Generals have felt no reluctance in acting without consultation with US representatives and in disregarding our advice on important matters once we became aware of developments. I specifically asked Khanh to put off a press conference if possible or, if one were held, to avoid reference to the dissolution of the HNC. Nevertheless, the conference was held and Armed Forces Council Decree No. 1 was issued. Perhaps most serious of all is the deliberate disregard of the message which I brought from Washington and personally transmitted to most of these Generals that continued and increased US aid for SVN depended upon governmental stability and evidence of national unity. We are not yet clear as to whether Khanh has lost control of the “Young Turks” or is using them to his own ends.

As I see it at this moment, we are faced with four possibilities: a. Huong, despite our advice, may agree to continue in office without obtaining adequate concessions from the Generals. In this case, he will be the prisoner of the Generals and thus his government unable to speak with any authority or to cooperate effectively with us in the prosecution of the war. Every governmental official will be looking over his shoulder to see if the military headsman is watching him.

b. Huang may attempt to impose conditions on the military for his remaining in office, fail and resign. Suu may then persuade some civilian politicians to form a new government but it would be even more impotent than Huong under the situation of subparagraph a. above.

c. Huong may resign and the military may move in and reestablish a military dictatorship such as existed up to last August. If Khanh were the head, the government would have little chance of improving on Khanh’s former sorry performance. Under another General, we might hope for better things—depending on the General. After flaunting US advice in the present circumstances, any military government is likely to give us even greater problems—if the Generals get away with it this time.

d. Huong may make his conditions stick with the Generals. This will be good news and the ensuing government will be worth a serious try.

As the tenor of the foregoing analysis indicates, I can see good only in the last possibility and will do everything possible to realize it. If any of the other developments occur, we will have to give serious consideration to some shock treatment to restore a sense of responsibility to the leadership of this unhappy land.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CIA, the White House, and JCS. Received at 2:43 p.m.

2 Telegram 1857, December 19, reported on a conversation between Taylor and Huong on the draft administrative retirement order. Telegram 1858, also December 19, described a conversation with Suu on the retirement proposal. (Ibid., POL 1 VIET S)

3 Supra.

454. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) and the Commander in Chief of the Vietnamese Armed Forces (Khanh) 454. Memorandum of a Conversation Between the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) and the Commander in Chief of the Vietnamese Armed Forces (Khanh)1

Saigon, December 21, 1964, 10:30 a.m.

SUBJECT

December 20 Armed Forces Council Action against High National Council

(Following is a more complete account than that contained in Embassy telegram 18812 of the foregoing conversation based on notes made at the time by Mr. Johnson. It was from these same notes that the conversation was recounted to Prime Minister Huong immediately following the meeting with General Khanh.)3

We met General Khanh in his office at the JGS at 10:30 a.m., December 21. He was alone. The conversation was entirely in French. As usual, General Khanh had a large pad with him and, on occasion, took notes during the conversation. General Khanh was very self-possessed and the atmosphere throughout was very calm, matter of fact and straightforward.

Ambassador Taylor opened the conversation by asking who was responsible for the action of December 20, recalling that the previous day the four Generals had stated that the Armed Forces Council was only advisory to Khanh and that the final responsibility was his.4

General Khanh replied that it was “a decision of the Army”, a decision by all of the Armed Forces Council including himself—“It is not my Army”. He said that it was not only his decision but that of everyone else. However, “I am responsible—je suis responsable.” He said that as Commander-in-Chief he must listen when the great majority of the officers express their opinion. The decision was taken to “limit the deterioration of the situation”. Under the Charter, the High National Council had only two missions—that is, to act as the legislative branch during the interim and to provide for the formation of a National Assembly. It had exceeded its authority.

Ambassador Taylor asked what was the authority for taking action against the High National Council. General Khanh replied, “Those fellows in the Council are not good-ces yens ne vent pas bons”, citing Quyen as a Communist. General Khanh then referred to the proposed retirement of the nine generals and other officers and said that “Mirth’s people” in the High National Council had opposed this. This was an “unconstitutional” act by the High National Council. Now that the matter has been taken care of, “We will return to our position”. Suu had been given the responsibility for the legislative functions of the High National Council and, if necessary, Suu could form a Committee of Lawyers (Conseiller des Juristes) to assist him. However, there was little in fact to be done as the laws for the election of the National Assembly were already completed.

Ambassador Taylor then asked whether this meant the re-entry of the Army into politics to which General Khanh replied that, “It would remain in its role—reste dans son role”.

Ambassador Taylor then inquired as to whether the Armed Forces Council replaces the High National Council to which General Khanh replied that the Armed Forces Council was not the MRC. After taking this “sole” decision, it returns to its military role.

Ambassador Taylor inquired as to whether General Khanh thought the Government could, in fact, govern after the events of December 20. The Ambassador recalled his conversations following his return from his last trip to Washington on the importance of stability in the government and having a loyal ally with whom we could work with confidence. He did not feel that the act of December 20 was consistent with this. In effect, there would be a civilian facade with the military shadow hanging over them. It would be difficult, if not impossible, for us to cooperate with such a setup. General Khanh replied that loyalty was a reciprocal matter and that Vietnam was not a vassal of the United States.

Ambassador Taylor said that he could not but say that he had lost confidence in General Khanh. General Khanh replied that the Ambassador should keep to his place as Ambassador and, as Ambassador, it was really not appropriate for him to be dealing in this way with the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces on a political matter nor was it appropriate for him to have summoned some of his Generals to the Embassy yesterday.

Ambassador Taylor replied that General Khanh had faced him with a fait accompli without even the courtesy of informing him until long after it was all over. General Khanh replied that he had not wanted to disturb the Ambassador during the middle of the night and had informed “Colonel Miller”, asking that he inform the Ambassador. The Ambassador said that informing “Colonel Miller” was not informing him. General Khanh finally appeared to admit that he should have taken better steps earlier to inform the Ambassador.

General Khanh then said, “I am ready to quit.” He asked the Ambassador whether he thought this would be helpful in the situation to which the Ambassador replied in the affirmative. He indicated that he was thinking of possibly taking command of a Corps or retiring from the Army and becoming a civilian. What would the Ambassador think of that? The Ambassador replied that this was entirely a matter between General Khanh and his government, but that he saw no objection if, as a civilian living in the country, Khanh was loyally supporting the government. The Ambassador said that he had previously heard that General Khanh was thinking of taking a trip abroad—did he have any thought of this—to which General Khanh replied in the negative. General Khanh then referred to Diem saying the U.S. had not been very “loyal” to him. The Ambassador replied that some Americans may have perhaps done things that they had no authority to do.

General Khanh then indicated that he was attracted by the thought of leaving the country and asked what our views would be if “his generals” did not agree, or the Prime Minister would not accept his resignation. The Ambassador said these were entirely matters between him and his government.

General Khanh asked how long he had to reach a decision to which the Ambassador replied that he was certainly not setting any time limits and felt that General Khanh should give serious consideration to a prompt resolution of the problem that had been created. As we left, he again referred to the possibility of leaving the country and said that he would get in touch with the Ambassador.5

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–272–69. Secret. U. Alexis Johnson, the only other participant, presumably prepared this record. The source text indicates the meeting took place at Khanh’s office at the JGS. For other accounts of the meeting, see Taylor, Swords and Plowshares, p. 331, and Johnson, Right Hand of Power, p. 418.

2 Telegram 1881, December 21, transmitted a summary of this conversation. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 Taylor reported on his conversation with Huong, which immediately followed that with Khanh, in telegram 1880 from Saigon, December 21. Among other things, Taylor told him that he had received word from Washington agreeing entirely with the position that he had taken with both men. (Ibid.)

4 Regarding Taylor’s meeting with the Generals, see Document 451.

5 Following the meeting, Taylor reported that Khanh was prepared to step down and asked for funds to allow him to travel. (Telegram 1890 from Saigon, December 22; Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S) The Department of State agreed that Taylor should accept Khanh’s offer (telegram 1321 to Saigon, December 22; ibid.), but its telegram informing Taylor crossed with another Taylor message stating that General Khanh was reconsidering his offer to step down. (Telegram 1897 from Saigon, December 22; ibid.)

455. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 455. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 21, 1964—8:36 p.m.

1319. State/Defense Message. Continue to believe line you are following entirely sound. We have talked over situation with Westmoreland and throw out following possible ideas for bringing military back into line and at same time making gestures that would ensure their support for Huong both basically and against possible Buddhist threat. We naturally continue to rely on your discretion whether or how any of these ideas should be applied.

1. Appears important that Huong himself get credit for dismissing Khanh and Westmoreland thinks such action would probably have favorable reception among most senior officers particularly Young Turks.

2. Perhaps even before announcing such action Huong might consult with members Armed Forces Council collectively or individually and indicate that he seeking their advice on appointment of successor, making clear that decision must be his and that officer appointed must necessarily have full powers as commander-in-chief. (Westmoreland believes Council members accept necessity basic unity of command and avoidance any semblance committee decision as opposed to advisory function to commander-in-chief.)

3. Hopefully such discussion might produce consensus on candidate. As we understand it, Ky has indicated to Westmoreland his own preference stick with Air Force and has told Westmoreland natural leader might be Thieu. However, latter is Catholic and Dai Viet, and appointment might give Buddhists issue. Our judgment is that Thi less stable than Ky himself, and Westmoreland suggests Dong or Co as possible dark horses, who have avoided involvement in politics. Criteria would appear to be most complete possible acceptance by senior officers but also not giving Buddhists any easy issue. We gather Ky not popular with Buddhists but suppose that would be equally true of any general prepared to act firmly in support of Huong Government.

4. Huong might express willingness, after new commander-in-chief appointed to discuss disposition of senior officers and to assure proper system for promotions and appointments throughout armed forces. He might offer handle question of senior officers by review of individual cases and possibly by retiring some to accept appropriate senior civilian government positions for which they qualified.

5. Above possible actions would all be aimed at strengthening Huong’s personal position, which seems cardinal objective, while at same time meeting all reasonable desires senior generals.

In effect above steps would be aimed at compensating Armed Forces Council for rescinding decree about HNC. Questions of replacing some HNC members and of their release are separate but might of course become integral parts of total package.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared with Westmoreland and McNaughton, and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC.

456. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 456. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 21, 1964—8:39 p.m.

1320. In support of your efforts to persuade military at least partially undo damage Saturday’s2 actions, we have also been considering possible leverage we might apply in the event you concluded it was necessary.

If dispute continues unresolved, most obvious action might be withholding approval any pending US assistance actions and letting this become known. You are in best position evaluate whether these would impress generals or conversely hurt Huong’s position. In addition, following steps aimed more specifically at military have occurred to us:

1. Suspend Operation Barrel Roll. We not clear whether this would have significant effect on attitude of generals, and whether they are aware of our operations and value them at least psychologically. We also concerned suspension might give wrong signal to Hanoi. On other hand, publicity or aircraft loss under present circumstances might have adverse effects both here and in Saigon. Since next operation not scheduled until 24 December would appreciate your comments for further review this possibility. Obviously, any action in this connection should not be discussed with generals since this might imply commitment to resume or increase if they behave.

2. Instruct all or selected corps and division advisors make known [to] their counterpart our dissatisfaction with blow by military at structure civilian government, perhaps suspending for the time being further contacts with their counterparts.

3. Stand down temporarily Farmgate.

4. Suspend logistical airlift where critical supply shortages do not exist.

On balance, we inclined believe none except possibly first and second steps would produce desired results. Obviously any would hamper over-all war effort, especially if continued for very long.

We have also considered and rejected possibility of cutting essential POL and direct military supplies. Similarly, we do not favor suspension or interruption CPI, since it would primarily affect civilian confidence in Huong Government.

We are prepared consider any other suggestions which Mission may have on means of bringing home to Armed Forces Council necessity of restoring reality of civilian government.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal and William Bundy, cleared with McNaughton, and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to CINCPAC.

2 December 19.

457. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 457. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 22, 1964—7 p.m.

1895. CINCPAC for POLAD. FYI. Following is text of a statement which is being made available to MACV advisors and other Mission personnel to use as background for discussions of recent events in Saigon and USG position. MACV advisors down to division level are being encouraged to initiate discussions in their discretion. Sector advisors will use it to respond to discussions initiated by their counterparts. Zorthian is using text as basis for background statement at this evening’s press conference: The United States Govt appreciates the motives which led to the actions that were taken by the Armed Forces Council last Sunday but feels that the consequences were not fully appreciated. The armed forces gained much credit and stature, not only in Vietnam but throughout the world, by their statesmanlike decision of last August to provide for an orderly transfer of power to a civilian govt and an orderly method of establishing that govt and its institutions. While progress in establishing that govt and preparing the way for a national assembly had not been perfect nor satisfactory to everyone, the record was very creditable and unique in the history of Vietnam. All of the friends of Vietnam were much encouraged and, as the Ambassador of the United States has publicly stated, the United States was prepared to move forward with additional help for Vietnam, including help in dealing with the problem of infiltration from the North.

Although it is realized that this was probably not the intent, the action that was taken last Sunday was immediately and understandably interpreted by all the world as another military coup, setting back all that had been accomplished since last August and again demonstrating the political instability of Vietnam and raising serious question as to the reliability of Vietnam as an ally. It is inescapable conclusion that if a group of military officers could issue decisions abolishing one of the three fundamental organs of the governmental structure, that is, the High National Council, and carry out military arrests of- citizens, that group of military officers has clearly set themselves above and beyond the structure of government in Vietnam.

Even though those officers might profess that they would not do the same thing again, the fact is that there would be nothing to prevent their similarly seeking to change the Prime Minister or the Chief of State. Thus, even though the armed forces have expressed their support of the Prime Minister and the Chief of State, these civilian officials would have no real power, nor would they be able to speak authoritatively for Vietnam. They and other govts with which they are dealing would always be conscious of the fact that they are holding office only at the sufferance of the military and are subject to removal at any time by them. Thus in fact two govts would be set up, a civilian govt acting simply as a facade with no real authority with a “government” of military officers hovering over them at all times. There would thus be the image of a puppet govt under the domination of military leaders who had no real responsibility but who actually exercised the power.

As far as the United States is concerned, this would present a most difficult situation for the United States Government which would not know where to find the authoritative voice of Vietnam. The United States would not be able to rely on the commitments of the civilian government and thus would not have an effective government with which it could deal on the host of matters of common interest. The United States reps in Vietnam are naturally concerned over the situation which has arisen and are seeking ways to assist in finding an honorable solution.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Confidential; Priority. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House and CINCPAC. Received at 7:43 a.m.

458. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 458. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 22, 1964—10 p.m.

1900. Embtel 1896.2 From reftel and subsequent tels it is evident Khanh has thrown down gauntlet.

In order immediately dissuade him from any illusion that he can turn this into personal vendetta between myself or Embassy and himself, strongly urge that Dept issue formal statement, if possible at noon briefing, drawn heavily from background statement contained Embtel 1895.3 Hope such statement could also be given heavy play by VOA.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Confidential; Flash; Limdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. Received at 10:14 a.m.

2 Telegram 1396, December 22, 3 p.m., transmitted the text of a statement which Khanh had read over Radio Vietnam at 7 p.m. and had circulated in Vietnamese, French, and English. The statement gave his reasons for the dissolution of the High National Council and included the following phrases:

“We make sacrifices for the country’s independence and the Vietnamese people’s liberty, but not to carry out the policy of any foreign country.”

“All of us are determined to fulfill our duty as the sons of our time. Better to live poor but proud as free citizens of an independent country rather than in ease and shame as slaves of the foreigners and Communists.” (Ibid., POL 27 VIET S)

3 Supra.

459. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 459. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 22, 1964—12:58 p.m.

1324. From Secretary for Ambassador. Your 19002 received too late for us to arrange for statement at noon briefing, particularly since President and SecDef are in Texas, and I feel that on a matter of this importance there must be full consultation.

I expect, however, that by the end of the day we will be able to send you by flash telegram a draft of a statement which we could put out here and which could be carried by VOA during the day in Saigon.3

I badly need your advice on several points which I feel have to be considered in charting our future course.

1. What is your best judgment as to the support Khanh can mobilize among his military colleagues? Westmoreland and Ambassador Khiem have indicated that Khanh’s position is weak, but under the existing circumstances, we need to be as sure as we can of degree of significant military support he may have been able to muster.

2. Who are the most likely candidates to replace Khanh and what do we expect would be their relationship with political groups in Vietnam, with the Huong Government and with ourselves?

3. We must attempt downplay personality issue between USG and Khanh which risks coalescing anti-US sentiment Should we not measure all our steps in terms of encouraging unity among the Vietnamese, stating that this is the main objective of U.S. policy. That unity can best be achieved by a process of consultation among the important political groups, including the military, so as to restore effective government commanding broad support where no one group dictates to the others.

I should like to emphasize, as I see it, that political unity within the South Vietnamese leadership is the utterly fundamental object of our policy and a basic condition for any prospect of success in South Vietnam. Every step, whether concerning the future of a particular South Vietnamese personality or otherwise, should be measured by its effect upon strengthening or weakening unity. There are several circumstances which could face us with the elementary decision as to our role in South Vietnam. But, because of the far-reaching consequences of any such decision, we must do our best to create circumstances in which that issue does not arise. I wish to compliment you on the vigor with which you have pursued this issue of unity since your return from Washington. I would much appreciate any further thoughts you have on the relation between this present crisis and the issue of unity.

I shall be available this afternoon and evening, and you may wish to arrange a telecon in the early morning your time for further discussion.

Rusk

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIV, Cables. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal. Repeated to the Department of Defense, CIA, and the White House. Rusk’s Appointment Book shows that he met with William Bundy and Forrestal at 11:22 a.m. and 12:40 p.m., and with Forrestal alone at 1:10 p.m., presumably to discuss the drafting of this telegram. (Ibid.)

2 Supra.

3 See footnote 3, Document 462.

460. Telegram from the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 460. Telegram from the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 23, 1964—6 p.m.

1915. For Secretary from Ambassador. Deptel 1324.2 This cable responds to questions 1 and 2 of reftel. Since his collapse before the Buddhist pressures last August, Khanh’s standing with his military colleagues has been low. On several occasions, they would have dropped him except for the understanding that he had U.S. support.

His position now is somewhat different. Insofar as the current issues are concerned he seems to have the full support of the 20 Generals of the Council of the Armed Forces who include the “Young Turks” and the corps commanders who accept responsibility with him for the illegal acts of December 20. Since they are all out on the same limb, that uncomfortable position imposes considerable unity in the ranks. Khanh is smart and will try to hold them in line by using anti-American themes and reminding them how offended they have been by U.S. disapproval of their actions. However, in the long run, he will probably fail to retain their support because of the normal tendency to bickering and disunity within any VN group and because of his personal unpopularity with most of the Generals.

As to likely candidates to replace Khanh, I can only mention a few who seem to us the best qualified. General Nguyen Huu Co, now commanding II Corps, seems to be an able soldier who commands the respect of the Vietnamese and Americans close to him. So far as we can see, he has thus far stayed clear of politics. General Pham Van Dong has handled himself very well in his sensitive assignment as CG, Capital Military District, and has the confidence of Prime Minister Huong. Although one of the oldest and most senior officers in length of service, he works closely with the Young Turks. General Nguyen Van Thieu, commanding IV Corps, is usually included in our list of possible candidates. He has had wide experience including that of Chief of Staff, Armed Forces and I know General Westmoreland thinks well of his military ability. However, he has two political strikes on him—he is a Catholic and a Dai Viet, hence a target for the Buddhists.

I am not putting Big Minh on the list. Even if he were not lazy and generally incompetent, he is too controversial a figure in the officer corps to consider for Commander-in-Chief.

With regard to their relationships to the political groups, Dong is not liked by the turbulent elements of the Buddhists or of the students because of his execution of the orders of Huong to put down demonstrations. Thieu would have the disadvantages cited above. I do not know of any political counts against Co.

Of the three, I believe that Huong knows only Dong and likes him. I have no reason to believe that Co and Dong could not work well with the Huong government. However, Thieu, having many of Khanh’s characteristics, would have much greater difficulty.

As to desirability from U.S. point of view, General Throckmorton, speaking for MACV, would rate the three in this order: Co, Dong, Thieu. If General Westmoreland is still available, I suggest you get his personal opinion.

Before signing off, I must point out that, while Khanh is definitely dispensable, no officer in the RVNAF stands out like a light as his possible successor. Any choice will involve some risk as we will never fully know his capability and limitations until we try him. In any event, the choice will by no means be entirely with us.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, and the White House. Received at 6:01 a.m.

2 Supra.

461. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President 461. Message From the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) to the President1

Saigon, December 23, 1964—6 p.m.

Embtel 1826.2 As you have seen from our recent cables, we are in the midst of another first-class governmental crisis in Saigon. The infighting is going on on three fronts: the govt versus the Generals, the Generals versus the US Ambassador and the Buddhists versus the govt.

On the first front, negotiations are now in progress between PriMin Huong and General Khanh to find way to patch up the situation precipitated by the acts of the Generals on December 20 in undertaking to abolish the High National Council and in arresting some 22 officials and politicians. We are urging Huong to drive a hard bargain with the military, insisting at a minimum on refusing to recognize the validity of the abolition of the High National Council, on the release of the political prisoners to the govt and on a public declaration of support by the Generals for Huong govt and statement of their willingness to cooperate with and participate in it if requested. At the moment Khanh is insisting on acceptance of the abolition of the High National Council and is acting as if he intended to hold the prisoners hostage until the govt gives in. I am doing my best to keep Huong bucked up but it is hard to put starch into him because he believes the Buddhist threat is his foremost problem and thus feels he cannot afford to alienate the military at this time. I have assured him that he has an important trump in his ability to threaten resignation if his conditions are not met. I have the feeling that General Khanh and the other Generals are most anxious to keep him in office and have no satisfactory replacement for him.

With regard to the Generals versus the Ambassador, the former are acting greatly offended by my disapproval of their recent actions privately expressed to four of their number3 and resent our efforts to strengthen the Huong govt against their pressures. One unfortunate effect of our action in opposing the Generals has been to drive them closer to Khanh who senses the opportunity to solidify his military position by pursuing an anti-Taylor, anti-US line. Although it is to neither of our interests to conduct public quarrel, I am afraid that Khanh intends to make publicly offensive statements which it will be hard to ignore. Once the immediate heat has subsided and the Generals have reverted to a more reasonable mood, I shall try to restore normal relations with them.

The Buddhist front has been relatively quiet. Indeed, we have received intimations they are deliberately laying off the govt while it is being threatened by the military. Although Huong has always suspected some collusion between Khanh and the Buddhists, our contacts among the latter indicate nothing but dislike for him. However, the Buddhist issue is still with us and may flare up again at any time.

In summary, we still do not know the outcome of the political events of the weekend. We are telling Huong that he has only two choices which are acceptable: (1) To stay in office after imposing hard conditions on the Generals or (2) to resign and force the military to take responsibility for their actions. I am afraid he may be tempted to temporize and carry on with the challenge of the military unanswered; but if he does so, it will be only to postpone the showdown and will leave us with a cowed government which cannot make decisions with any assurance of being allowed to carry them out. Particularly since such situation would further aggrandize Khanh, who is already pretty insufferable, it would be very difficult for us to work with such a lineup.

Taylor4

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Nodis. Transmitted as telegram 1916 from Saigon, which is the source text. According to another copy, the telegram was drafted by Taylor. (National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–157–69) Telegram 1916 was received in the Department of State at 8:33 a.m.

2 Document 447.

3 See Document 451.

4 Telegram 1916 bears this typed signature.

462. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 462. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 23, 1964—8 p.m.

1919. This afternoon I called on Vice Premier Vien and Chief of State Suu in that order to discuss with them their meeting this morning with Khanh (see Embtel 1914).2 Vien’s account of the meeting was essentially the same as one given me by Huong with one important exception. He anticipates that the events of the next few days will take the following form: after three or four days Khanh, he hopes, will release the prisoners taken over the weekend, after which the government will then reassemble the available members of the HNC and set them to work again at their old stand in Gia Long Palace. Thus, without any announcement, they will nullify in effect the attempt of the Generals to abolish the HNC. At the same time, the government will announce its intention of overhauling the membership of the Council.

I told Vien that this was all very well except for the possibility that Khanh may hold the prisoners as hostage until he gets agreement with the government to validate the actions of the Generals. Vien agrees as to this possibility but sees no way of getting around it.

I urged that the government demand the release of the prisoners at once and if Khanh demurs to denounce the insubordination of the Generals to the public. I doubt very much that the Generals would enjoy being placed in this position.

Vien mentioned that the Generals were meeting again today and that he had indications they were planning an offensive against the American Ambassador. I told him that I was aware of these maneuvers and regretted them primarily because of the effect they would have on U.S. relations.

After a half hour’s conversation with Vien, I moved to Gia Long and talked with Chief of State Suu. I indicated my admiration for the fortitude with which he and Huong were facing the military challenge and assured him of U.S. support. I pointed out that to accept dissolution of HNC by military would be to accept military intervention in the affairs of his government, a situation which would call into question validity of the government itself. I emphasized that it would be impossible to have two governments, one presenting the facade, the other holding the power, and that U.S. cooperation with such a duality would be difficult if not impossible. Finally, I reviewed the four-point position I have been urging Huong to take with Khanh (Embtel 1874) and gave him substance of Department’s statement (Deptel 1328).3

Suu seemed to be in relatively good shape and spirits (in contrast to Huong this morning) although as usual he was not very voluble. He expressed regret for military action and termed it illegal. He referred to meeting earlier today with Huong, Vien and Khanh and indicated they were seeking solution to present impasse. Suu indicated Khanh still does not accept government position and, in effect, is using HNC prisoners as “hostages” against retirement of senior Generals and government’s acceptance of dissolution of HNC. I suggested government could declare that it does not accept dissolution of HNC which it regards as continuing in existence and repeated my suggestion to Vien that, if prisoners were not released to government, the government should publicly demand their release. I observed that Suu and Huang, perhaps, had more power than they realized, noting that military officers would be sensitive to public charges of insubordination. Suu expressed concern that such a position would directly confront the military. I suggested that Suu and Huong might consider discussing the retirement issue with Khanh in the context of the four-point position I had recommended to Huong.

In closing, I stressed again to Suu that (1) it was impossible to live with military officers in whom one had lost confidence and (2) the impasse should not be allowed to drag on.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. Received at 9:19 a.m.

2 Telegram 1914, December 23, 6 p.m., reported that Huong had invited Taylor and Johnson to his office to report on a meeting with Khanh held earlier in the day. Huong indicated that the meeting had “gone very badly” but that Khanh would accept the four conditions for Huong and Suu remaining in office (see Document 452), except for the restoration of the High National Council. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S)

3 Telegram 1328 to Saigon, December 22, 5:33 p.m., transmitted the text of the following statement which was being issued by the Spokesman of the Department of State:

“Ambassador Taylor has been acting throughout with the full support of the US Government. As we have repeatedly made clear, a duly constituted government exercising full power on the basis of national unity, and without improper interference from any group, is the essential condition for the successful prosecution of the effort to defeat the Viet Cong, and is the basis of US support for that effort. This is the position Ambassador Taylor has been expressing to Vietnamese leaders.” (Ibid.)

463. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 463. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 23, 1964—6:41 p.m.

1339. Transcript Secretary’s press conference2 being relayed in wireless file. The following represents our reflections on today’s traffic, and we pass them on only for purposes of consultation.

Our inclination now is to avoid further statements until situation becomes more clear. We are particularly attempting avoid contributing to personality clash between USG and Khanh, although we realize he may indeed be committed to anti-American campaign. We also hope that if Khanh eventually goes, it appears as much as possible to be the result of decision of his colleagues and not ours.

We wonder whether it is wise to put too much pressure on Suu and Huong in effort to secure early reversal of Armed Forces Council’s action in disbanding HNC or publicly to repudiate offending generals. It seems to us it is important attempt isolate Khanh, perhaps by working on Young Turks and other generals. Realize this may take time, but we are not sure that Huong and Suu are up to taking on military establishment by themselves.

We agree completely that rash action of military must be reversed, but we would imagine that such reversal will have to be result of apparent compromise, perhaps by getting Young Turks to agree that changes in membership of Council might be undertaken by Suu.

Your assessment in Embtel 19153 of potential candidates for Commander-in-Chief agrees with ours.

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared with William Bundy and McNaughton, and initialed by Rusk. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC.

2 For the transcript of Rusk’s press conference, held at 11 a.m., see Department of State Bulletin, January 11, 1965, pp. 34–39. The Secretary stressed the need for Vietnamese unity.

3 Document 460

464. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 464. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 24, 1964—1:42 p.m.

1346. For the Ambassador from the Secretary. Following telegram2 gives you our latest reaction to separate channel message on PNG possibility.3 In further reference to Saigon’s 19304 believe effort should be made to defuse issue of personalities and keep in front the issue that effective unity among Vietnamese leaders is essential to success of SVN effort. Personality issue as used by Khanh is false issue and we should attempt to keep in front the basic issue of unity and an effective government whatever the formula South Vietnamese leaders find to bring it about.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to the Department of Defense and the White House.

2 Infra.

3 Presumably reference is to cable 240442Z which described a meeting of South Vietnamese officers on December 23 at which they decided to propose that Taylor be declared persona non grata. (Declassified Documents, 1979,132A)

4 Telegram 1930, December 24, 11 p.m., reported that Taylor had met with U.S. press representatives that day and briefed them for background only on the situation in Saigon. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9)

465. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 465. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 24, 1964—1:43 p.m.

1347. Delivery to Ambassador or Deputy Ambassador in discretion of duty officer. With reference to Ky conversation with Embassy officer reported separate channel,2 our first reactions are as follows: 1. If Huong should in fact be presented with demand to declare you PNG, you should at earliest opportunity advise him that you have been acting with full support of USG and that any acceptance of such demand or hesitation in rejecting it would make it virtually impossible for USG to continue support GVN effort. You should point out that existence of demand bound to become known to many including US press and that atmosphere alone would become terribly bad if he hesitated even for tactical reasons. If required you may inform him you are giving this advice on direct orders of President.

2. If Huong nonetheless insists he must proceed with PNG action, you should tell him this is matter of gravest importance on which two governments should be in fullest consultation. You should stress that no such step should be discussed publicly by him and should say that in order understand what GVN has in mind you must pose following questions: a. Does GVN desire to break relations between USG and GVN? If so, how do Huang and military leaders estimate their capability if they repudiate US support? Do they have in mind that they can win without US presence and help, or do they have in mind accepting consequences of weakening of effort?

b. If GVN does not desire to break relationship, how does GVN think American people could possibly be brought to support continued US effort in SVN in face PNG action trusted ambassador who has complete confidence and indeed affection American people?3

3. At same time we detect in Ky’s account of Khanh’s position the continuing possibility bulk of generals including Young Turks can still be brought around to reasonable solution that would include restoration of HNC, possibly reconstituted, on the one hand, and on the other hand willingness by Huong to work out problem of senior generals on some basis. In process of working this out we would hope and expect Huong and military would in end unite on dumping Khanh as their own decision.

4. To move toward such solution, Huong himself could offer to meet with military council and could use all available contacts to generals other than Khanh to soften their attitudes and get dispute off anti-US and anti-Taylor aspect and on to necessity reasonable solution in interests national unity. Once PNG issue disposed of firmly, urgency would be reduced, and Huong could afford a little time to bring all hands around and emerge with personal credit for decisions and solution, which clearly vital if he is to remain.

5. At same time, suggest you use all available MACV counterpart contacts to generals. Line stated your 18954 is good starting point to extent not already used, and should be extended to explaining in quiet way that of course USG could never accept PNG demand but that other issues can be worked out among Vietnamese and this must be done. Westmoreland’s frequent past contacts with Ky may be particularly useful for this sort of approach and his absence last weekend may be special asset. Seems to us that for you personally to participate in any talks with generals would at this moment be unwise for many reasons above all necessity that solution come from Huong.

6. We not clear here whether Ky and other generals aware of policy line you conveyed on your return from Washington. If not, this might now be used with them to offset any impression of negativism on our part as reflected in Ky’s remarks. They could also be told that if government were in stable condition such VC actions as bombing of BOQ5 (which we should assume to be VC in absence other indications) could have been considered as “unusual actions” within meaning your instructions6 and appropriate action taken, but that this impossible under current conditions or in face any pressures to revise carefully considered USG policies. Under present conditions American public might even doubt VC responsibility. Same point would apply to any possible future decision to initiate second phase. In other words, without offering anything beyond terms of your instructions you could use these to their fullest to bring them around. Even listening to any grievances in this broad policy area should be constructive, although of course stress should be placed on essential stability and national unity. We recognize risk discussions this area might be taken as implied commitment to take decisions for which we are not ready, but believe this outweighed by necessity have frank discussions.

7. We have not even crossed bridges of what to do if Huong should accept PNG demand or if generals continue implacable on issue of HNC or its equivalent or against any reasonable solution. Obviously this would pose gravest possible questions.

8. As to possible disclosure by generals of contents your talks with Khanh and four generals, we have reviewed record these talks. Believe line we should take both here and in Saigon, preferably on background basis, is that you stressed that action of military undermined basis civilian duly constituted government, however unintentionally, and must be corrected if government to meet South Vietnamese desires and need for national unity. If claim is made that you insulted Khanh, response should be that action and manner in which it was taken necessarily raised question of confidence and necessary frank relationships with those responsible, unless and until it corrected, but that issue is one of principle and of objectives of Vietnamese themselves, not personalities.

9. You should of course avoid such actions as background briefing on increased infiltration until situation clarifies. We are proceeding with Barrel Roll mission tonight.

10. Since above drafted, we have received your 1928 and also MACV 240448Z.7 Former correctly handles problem in pare 8 above but could be amplified later as required. Latter raises question whether tactics proposed pares 3–6 above as likely to succeed as we had supposed, but we still believe this is line we must follow. Naturally, MACV contacts could shoot down idea of Big Minh’s return and also indicate that Dalat generals could be handled. Key question is whether military would stick to position they entitled intervene whenever they do not like what government does, and believe you have been following best line to counter this.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared with McGeorge Bundy and Secretary Rusk. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 206F.

2 Presumably the cable described in footnote 3, supra.

3 At this point in the source text, the following paragraph was deleted before transmission:

“c. If Huong still persists, you should as last resort insist that if there is any implication of deadline in demand for PNG action, Huong must insist such deadline be removed to permit fullest consultation.”

At 12:10 p.m., December 24, Rusk had talked with McGeorge Bundy who told him that the President agreed to paragraphs 2a and 2b, but did not want 2c sent to Taylor. (Department of State, Rusk Files: Lot 72 D 192, Telephone Conversations)

4 Document 457.

5 At 6 p.m. on December 24, a bomb exploded in the Brink Hotel in Saigon, which was being used as a bachelor officers’ quarters by the United States, killing 2 and injuring 50.

6 Document 435.

7 Telegram 1928, December 24, received in the Department of State at 9:14 a.m., reported on Zorthian’s briefing of the foreign press in Saigon that day, during which he stated that Taylor had not asked, requested, or ordered Khanh to give up his post or take a trip. (Ibid., Central Files, POL 15 VIET S) Telegram 240448Z, also December 24, received in the Department of Defense at 4:48 a.m., reported that MACV contacts with Vietnamese officers showed they did not regard the illegality of their actions as important, that the army was the final authority in Vietnam, that there was no alternative to Khanh, and that the four Generals who talked to Taylor on December 20 (see Document 451) were still smarting from that encounter. (Washington National Records Center, RG 319, HQDA Message Center, Reel 12056)

466. Memorandum From Edward G. Lansdale to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 466. Memorandum From Edward G. Lansdale to the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, December 24, 1964.

SUBJECT

Vietnam

Have you considered that Dean Rusk’s press statement yesterday2 about the Vietnamese might be rather sound advice if applied to Americans, as well? I pass this notion along to you as a little Christmas remembrance.

Rusk said: “What is important is unity, the setting aside of personal rivalries or lesser issues in the interest of maintaining the strength and the unity of the country. Unity would be worth many, many divisions.”

Aside from my own case, since I don’t want to have anyone mistake national interest for self interest, isn’t it about time that some of the fine do-ers among the Americans were permitted to return to Vietnam and lend their skilled help to resolving a critical situation, waiving “personal rivalries and lesser issues”? A Lou Conein liaisoning with a Khanh at this moment would be worth at least one of the “many, many divisions.” There are others, known to you, such as Rufe Phillips and John Vann who have rare rapport with the Vietnamese and whose help has been denied by fellow Americans.

It would be a wonderful and appropriate gift to the nation this Christmas season if you could cause “good-will” among Americans making the decisions about Vietnam and open the way past personal feelings so that some of these priceless working Americans can go to work in Vietnam again, meaningfully.

Ed

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIV, Memos. Personal. At this time, Lansdale was a Consultant to the White House on Food for Peace.

2 See footnote 2, Document 463.

467. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 467. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 25, 1964—9 p.m.

1939. CINCPAC for POLAD. Deptel 1347; Embtel 1929; Embtel 1940.2 The action of General Khanh in forwarding to Huong the complaint of Generals against US Amb makes what was initially personal vendetta of a few thin-skinned Generals major issue between our two govts. In consultation with Alex Johnson, Westmoreland and Throckmorton, I have decided to take action along the following lines:

To set record straight and to smooth military feathers as much as possible, I have asked Throckmorton to see individually four Young Turk Generals with whom I met last Sunday3 (Throckmorton was present) to see what aspects of this meeting are now grievance. Some of reports we get indicate possible language misunderstanding. (For example, it is alleged I implied regret that General Westmoreland “wasted money” to give them dinner since they had not supported US policy.)4 Throckmorton is also to kill the canard that I ever asked Khanh to resign and leave country so that “Big” Minh could be installed in his place. I have authorized him to say that I am willing to meet with any one or all four to clear up any misunderstanding but there is no misunderstanding involved in my disapproval of coup and my concern over consequences.

Foregoing action may do some good but real difficulty lies in pressures Khanh is putting on Huong. As reported in Embtel 1929, he is refusing to give on HNC issue and is in fact hardening his position by limiting his agreement on liberation of political prisoners taken by army last Sunday. (Only HNC prisoners to be released and they must be kept in house arrest.) Beyond this hard-nose attitude he has now filed his complaints against me in way which places painful dilemma before Huong. One cannot avoid impression that Khanh wants to force Huong to withdraw in order to get back into power on popular slogan such as “freedom from US vassalage.”

I have not seen text of Khanh’s paper5 but will try to get copy from Huong at our next meeting (I am seeking an appointment tomorrow). Rather than utilizing at outset authority contained in Deptel 1347 to press him for immediate rejection, if demand is about as we think it is, I am inclined to recommend to Huong following course of action. He and I would agree to form an ad hoc committee consisting of rep of PriMin (hopefully Vien), rep of General Khanh and rep of US Emb (I would nominate Alex Johnson) to look into complaints of Generals. This course of action would have advantage of relieving PriMin of immediate requirement to choose between offending Generals or us, of gaining time to allow tempers to drop, moderating indignation by requiring formulation of its causes, and offering possibility that issue might be finessed in end as result of correctable misunderstandings. The principal disadvantage is creation of impression putting US Amb on trial and distorted reports which are likely reach public. I am not prepared to recommend this course until I see text of Generals’ bill of particulars but would like to get Dept’s tentative reactions ASAP.

A few comments on Deptel 1347 follow as postscript to foregoing.

Word is already about town, indeed about country, of feud between Generals and Amb. You have noted US adviser reports that Khanh has already carried war to field and is getting petitions signed among officers of divisions demanding withdrawal of Amb (Embtel 1934).6 The Emb is preparing so-called white paper enumerating events relating to coup for possible use in rebuttal of Khanh’s allegations. Our advisers in field are being kept informed in order to spike rumors and distortions of fact.

With regard to questions 2a and b, quick answer is that responsible leaders of GVN do not desire to break relations with us and know they cannot win without us. However, they cannot control Generals who for moment seem completely irresponsible. In this recklessness they are undoubtedly urged on by Khanh who needs anti-US campaign to stay alive. Generals who control situation could not care less about internal US problem of retaining popular support for SVN. That is not their department.

With regard to suggestions in pare 4, Huong take on Armed Forces Council personally, unfortunate fact is that Huong has neither moral nor physical stamina to undertake such an assignment. He knows few of Generals personally and is very diffident in their presence. His physical condition is matter of constant concern.

As to pare 6, Ky and other Generals are thoroughly aware of US policy line. It was in conveying that line at now famous Westmoreland dinner on December 8 that I laid groundwork for my falling-out with Generals. As for proper response to bombing of BOQ under current circumstances, I shall make that subject of septel.7

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 15 VIET S. Top Secret; Flash; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 8:46 a.m.

2 Telegram 1347 is printed as Document 465. Telegram 1929 from Saigon, December 24, reported that Johnson had lunch with Vien who stated that Khanh refused to release the arrested members of the High National Council unless they were kept under house arrest and refused to reinstate the Council. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S) Telegram 1940 from Saigon, December 25, 9 p.m., reported that Huong had received a communication from Khanh reciting Taylor’s “misdeeds” and asking Huong to investigate them and take appropriate action. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXIV, Cables) The text of the communication is published in Declassified Documents, 1978, 433E.

3 See Document 451

4 See footnote 8, Document 448.

5 The communication mentioned in footnote 2 above.

6 Dated December 25, 1 p.m. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S)

7 Infra.

468. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 468. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 25, 1964—9 p.m.

1941. CINCPAC for POLAD. The bombing of the Brink BOQ offers us opportunity to initiate reprisal bombing if we so desire. It was major terrorist attack directed squarely at US personnel and fact that there were only two fatalities among some 66 casualties was providential.

If we retaliate by bombing attack on an appropriate target in DRV, probably barracks, there are clear gains to be anticipated. Hanoi will get word that, despite our present tribulations, there is still bite in tiger they call paper, and US stock in this part of world will take sharp rise. Some of our local squabbles will probably disappear in enthusiasm which our action would generate.

Other side of argument is, first, present absence of clear proof that bombing is work of VC. A common sense view would seem to be that it is regarded as VC act unless contrary evidence is forthcoming. An investigation is in progress and we should know outcome in another 24 hours. We are closely watching Liberation Radio and Radio Hanoi to see whether they give us any help by claiming credit for VC.

Another question arises as to the timeliness of initiating reprisals in view of our sorry relations with RVNAF. I would get around this point by excluding Vietnamese from participation and by using SEA based US aircraft for strike. We can tell our military opposite numbers that it is kind of operation we would have liked to conduct jointly but could not in present state of our relations.

I am withholding recommendation to execute reprisal attack pending outcome of investigation of source of Brink bombing. This cable is sent in hope of conditioning addressees for favorable action on such recommendation if made.2

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis; Ivory. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 9:27 a.m.

2 On December 26, Admiral Sharp sent a similar telegram to the JCS, but concluded with the specific recommendation that the Vit Thu Lu barracks in North Vietnam be attacked as soon as possible. The attack, he said, should also be accompanied by a statement relating it to the Brink Hotel bombing. (Telegram 262150Z; Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXV, Cables)

469. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 469. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 25, 1964—4:56 p.m.

1355. State-Defense message. Embtels 1939, 1940, and 1941, and two messages by separate channel.2

1. If document by generals is along lines reported by Ky in separate channel and does not include deadline element, press conference, or PNG request stated or inescapably implied, believe that proposal for ad hoc deputies group in your 1939 makes excellent sense. You have properly flagged point that this might be distorted to appear group had you personally on trial, but believe this negated by fact that reps would all be deputies. We do feel that terms of reference should be discussion all possible sources of misunderstanding and not merely “complaints of generals.” We also feel that idea of such group should not appear to be something Washington has put you up to, thus implying lack of confidence in you, but that you could personally present it as reasonable action with some real hope that Khanh and Ky, in moods reflected separate channel messages, would not take advantage. We believe our statements here have made amply clear our full support for you, but we can add more if you wish. Obviously such notions as sending out Washington mediator are nonsense.

2. If PNG or other extreme points do appear in document, or are being publicized by generals as what they really after, then you authorized go as far as you like along lines Deptel 13473 both to Huong and Vien and through other contacts with Khanh and generals. We must shoot this down hard but also get issue away from personalities on both sides and on to finding reasonable solution.

3. If ad hoc group does meet, most important steps toward solution appear to be restoration HNC or establishment some equivalent group as act of GVN, preferably Suu. Real importance such group is not so much constitutional legitimacy (which blurred in any event) but rather to serve as forum for sentiment and instrument of unity. These elements may call for substantial reconstitution and possible enlargement. Generals must also make clear in some form they accept government in full control. Rather than seeking adamantly to get generals to accept as doctrine that they never have right to intervene, believe we should focus on point that military role must be related to national unity and cannot be exercised as it was in this instance, to undermine power of government. Maximum flattery for past role of military in creating HNC structure may be useful to preserve face here. Beyond these points we can afford to be very flexible, and of course solution should appear to be Vietnamese and should be stated in strongest terms of national unity and resolve.

4. We note and accept your other comments on Deptel 1347. As for your “white paper” on recent events, we believe you should have record fully organized but that we should not be considering publication except in most extreme circumstances. Believe backgrounds have made point that Khanh himself talked to you about his leaving.

5. As to your 1941 on using BOQ bombing as occasion for reprisal, we recognize this might give lift and needed distraction in Saigon and would also be useful signal to Hanoi to lay off any more such incidents. On other hand, Hanoi would hardly read into it any strong or continuing signal in view of overall confusion in Saigon, and Hanoi might well share what would certainly be strong reaction in US opinion and internationally that we were trying to shoot our way out of an internal political crisis. Under present circumstances of Saigon disunity, it would be hard for American people to understand action to extend war. Moreover, unless evidence crystal clear, there might be some suspicion at least internationally that BOQ bombing was not in fact done by VC. For these reasons, we are not convinced reprisal action desirable as of now, but we are prepared to make quick decision if you make recommendation with different assessment of above factors or with other factors not covered above. FYI. In event of reprisal we believe target should be Vit Thu Lu barracks short distance across border, using US aircraft. End FYI.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 23–9 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by William Bundy and cleared with Rusk, Vance, and McGeorge Bundy. Repeated to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC.

2 Telegrams 1939 and 1941 are printed as Documents 467 and 468. Regarding telegram 1940, see footnote 2, Document 467. One of the two messages was CIA telegram 2503225Z which reflected the moderation shown by Khanh and summarized in telegram 1355. (Declassified Documents, 1979, 312B) The other message has not been identified.

3 Document 465.

470. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 470. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 26, 1964—7 p.m.

1952. CINCPAC for POLAD. Embtel 1949.2 Alex Johnson and I called upon PriMin Huong at 1045 immediately after Johnson’s visit to Vien, reported in Embtel 1949. PriMin looked tired and said that he had not slept for two nights for worrying about situation with Generals.

He then gave his version of dinner which he held last night with Khanh and eleven other Generals which coincides with Vien’s story to Johnson. He felt that little had been accomplished and progress was hung up on issue of honor which Generals are raising over my inconsiderate treatment of General Khanh. Huong apparently tried to talk Generals into reasonable frame of mind, arguing that matter of “amour propre” should not be inflated into serious affair between govts. He says that he gave Generals some straight talk on subject of absence of legal status of Armed Forces Council and on need to release HNC prisoners at once before he could talk about other issues such as future status of HNC. He showed concern over danger of publicity arising from these internal troubles.

I told him that, unfortunately, publicity was inevitable since General Khanh had scattered news of our divergencies widely throughout armed forces. Also press was picking up rumors about Saigon which they were reporting with varying degrees of accuracy.

Since neither Huong nor Generals seemed to have any idea of where to turn, I surfaced proposal of an ad hoc deputies group mentioned in Embtel 19393 and approved by Deptel 1355.4 Huong jumped at idea with visible eagerness and said he would discuss it shortly with Suu and Vien.

We then fell to discussing Khanh’s motives and aspirations, Huong describing latter as being far from clear. He does not think Khanh really wants to take over govt but prefers to manipulate it from wings for time being. But supposing Khanh does move in and take over, he asked, what guarantee can I have of US support? I said that I personally doubted the USG would feel that it could cooperate with military govt headed by Khanh and asked whether this was kind of assurance he would like to have. He replied that he was asking nothing at this time but would discuss matter later with Suu and Vien.

While Huong takes liberation of HNC prisoners most seriously, he apparently is making no issue of other prisoners taken by army in last Sunday’s round-up. He smilingly said that army claimed that it was helping him by locking up some of politicians and student agitators who had been bedeviling his govt. But it was to be noted, he pointed out, there was not member of Buddhist Institute among prisoners, another allusion to his suspicion of some kind of alliance between Khanh and Buddhists.

Reverting to possible request from Huong for some guarantee of protection against military coup, I suggest consideration be given to authorizing me to communicate following to Huong if he requests some assurance (I should also be able to pass orally to other selected individuals, including Generals): “The United States Government would find it impossible to cooperate with any govt headed or controlled by General Khanh.”

You will note in Embtel 1949 that Vien seems to be thinking of broader guarantee to cover any military coup. I do not think we should rule out possibility of having to support military govt (not headed by Khanh) if civilian govt fails. Although this matter of some additional US assurance is not presently before us, I feel reasonably sure that it will arise shortly and would appreciate any preliminary comment from Dept.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US–VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC. According to another copy, this telegram was drafted by Taylor and cleared with Johnson. (Ibid., Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8) Received at 9:21 a.m.

2 Telegram 1949, December 26, 2 p.m., reported that Johnson had seen Vien at 10 a.m. that day, and that Vien had described the dinner that Huong had given for the Generals along lines similar to that reported in telegram 1952. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXV, Cables)

3 Document 467.

4 Supra.

471. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 471. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 26, 1964—1:05 p.m.

1357. Ref: Embtels 1949, 1952, 1955.2 In light Huong’s apparent acceptance your proposal for deputies’ meeting and Throckmorton’s somewhat encouraging report of his conversation with officers in Embtel 1955, believe we should allow these processes of conciliation to go forward for next few days. Specifically you should discourage Huong and Vien from making declaration against generals in terms Embtel 1949 at this time.

We agree with you that we should not rule out possibility having support military government if civilians fail. We also believe we should continue our efforts remove personality issue which Khanh appears to be turning to his own purposes. Therefore we doubt that US assurances should now take form of declaration against Khanh.

At present time our best bet seems be preservation of Suu, Huong, Vien team while we work younger generals back to some form of cooperation with civilians.

We are of course prepared to give rapid response if issue of new assurances becomes critical.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL US–VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Drafted by Forrestal, cleared with McGeorge and William Bundy, and initialed by Rusk. Reported to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 1952 is supra. Regarding telegram 1949, see footnote 2 thereto. Telegram 1955, December 26, 7 p.m., reported that Throckmorton had called separately on Ky, Cang, and Thieu on December 25 to correct any misunderstandings they might have had from the December 20 meeting and to make certain they understood the consequences of Khanh’s communication to Huong (see footnote 2, Document 467). The telegram concluded that the meetings appeared to have helped open the road for further dialog. (Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Vol. XXV, Cables) A copy of Throckmorton’s memorandum to Taylor, December 26, reporting on the meetings, is ibid., Westmoreland Papers, History Backup.

472. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 472. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 28, 1964—9 p.m.

1975. For Secretary Rusk. DOD for McNamara. CIA for McCone. White House for Bundy. CINCPAC for Sharp. Embtels 1941, 1962 1956, 1964, 1970 and CINCPAC 262150Z.2 Although we will probably never have evidence which will stand up in court of VC complicity in the Brink bombing, no one in this part of the world has slightest doubt of VC guilt. This conviction is reinforced by the broadcasts of SVN National Liberation Front Radio which rejoice over this act of terrorism, praise the perpetrators and anticipate with pleasure similar acts in the future.

As Embtel 1970 indicates, the National Liberation Front is clearly claiming the credit for Brink affair so that the question of whether they can be proved responsible becomes academic. They say that they did it and we should treat them accordingly.

The US Mission Council has just reviewed all aspects of this matter and joins me in a unanimous recommendation that a reprisal bombing attack be executed ASAP on Vit Thu Lu military barracks accompanied by statement relating this action to Brink bombing. The attack should be primarily a US operation but General Westmoreland would like to include some VNAF.3 I do not feel strongly on latter point. As US relations with RVNAF seem to be improving at the moment and since there were 43 Vietnamese casualties in the Brink bombing, I am prepared to recede from the view expressed in Embtel 1941 and accept inclusion of VNAF.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC.

2 Telegram 1941 is printed as Document 468. Regarding 262150Z, see footnote 2 thereto. Telegrams 1962 and 1956, December 26; 1964, December 27; and 1970, December 28, all reported National Liberation Front broadcasts on the bombing of the Brink Hotel. (Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S)

3 On December 28, the Joint Chiefs of Staff also supported this proposal in a memorandum to McNamara. (JCSM–1076–64; Washington National Records Center, RG 330, OSD/ISA(Admin) Files: FRC 69 A 7425, Vietnam 381)

473. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) 473. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)1

Washington, December 28, 1964–16:43 p.m.

JCS 5458. 1. Retaliation attack on target 362 as recommended by Ambassador Taylor and CINCPAC discussed at high level meeting presided over by Secretary Rusk at 1130 hours EST.3 There is some disagreement as to mounting attack in view of time elapsed since Brink incident and political situation in Saigon. Decision reached to discuss matter with highest authority by telephone today and in person at Ranch by Secretary Rusk and McGeorge Bundy tomorrow.

2. In view of foregoing, no decision can be anticipated prior to approximately 1400 hours EST 29 December.

3. For CINCPAC: During discussion it was agreed that weight of effort will be held to forty strike sorties and that no napalm will be used. Also agreed that participation by approximately 12 VNAF sorties would be desirable, if practicable. Request that you be prepared to mount attack in accordance with foregoing guidelines; however, VNAF pilots should not be briefed prior to receipt of Washington authorization to strike target 36.

4. For COMUSMACV: Please inform Ambassador Taylor of content this message.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Westmoreland Papers, Message File, 1964. Secret. Also sent to CINCPAC for Sharp.

2 The Vit Thu Lu Barracks.

3 According to Rusk’s Appointment Book, Wheeler, Vance, Solbert, William and McGeorge Bundy, Forrestal, Greenfield, and Read attended the meeting. No record of the meeting has been found. (Johnson Library)

474. Paper Prepared by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy) 474. Paper Prepared by the President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs (Bundy)1

Washington, December 28, 1964.

PROS AND CONS OF A REPRISAL RAID AGAINST NORTH VIETNAMESE BARRACKS AT VIT THU LU (TARGET 36)

I. Considerations against the operation

1. Six days will have elapsed since the Christmas Eve raid and the reprisal element will be blurred.

2. The political confusion in Saigon will give this signal a very mixed meaning both to Vietnamese and to the world.

3. A confusing response which may lead to escalation by the other side is not in our interest at this time.

4. It seems unwise to escalate merely because security control in a U.S. BOQ is bad.

5. The central problem is and remains the establishment of political stability in South Vietnam, and a major decision of this sort should await progress toward stability. At the least it should not be taken while the situation is more unstable then ever.

II. Considerations in favor of the operation

1. Target 36 is a military barracks, and the fact that this is a reprisal will be evident to Hanoi and to others. Six days of delay in this reprisal is not significant, since the close parallel of one barracks against another will be apparent to all.

2. The delay was justified by the need to pinpoint Viet Cong responsibility, which is now clear, on the basis of Hanoi radio broadcasts.

3. We decided in December that we would execute reprisals from now on, and this decision was not tied, as other possibilities were, to increased political stability in Saigon. We have communicated this decision to those Allies who are closest to us on Vietnam—the Lao, the Thai, the British, the Australians, the Canadians, and the New Zealanders. We have said the same thing to the senior military and civilian officials of Saigon. They are now waiting to see whether we mean what we say.

4. The operation is rated as a very low risk by General Wheeler, and because its character as a reprisal will be clear, it should not lead to escalation (but see separate intelligence estimate).2

5. Seaborn’s report from Hanoi3 suggests that the Communists very much need a reminder of our will and determination.

6. While a reprisal will not produce political stability in Saigon, it does seem likely that specific, firm action now will be somewhat helpful in assisting us to continue to make progress in resolving the impasse of last week.

7. A firm reprisal will do wonders for the morale of U.S. personnel in South Vietnam.

8. The theory of our policy of reprisal is that it can help to prevent gradual Viet Cong escalation in South Vietnam. This theory seems as sound now as it was when we decided to follow it.

9. Ambassador Taylor and his entire country team are unanimous, and they are the people on the spot. One more consideration against:

It was Winston Churchill who said that you should never trust the judgment of the man on the spot.

Or, to put it another way, it is easy for advisers to be brave, but it i5 the President who must live with the decision.

1 Source: Johnson Library, National Security File, Aides File, McGeorge Bundy, Memos to the President. Top Secret. The source text bears the handwritten notation: “This package went w/Mr. B to Texas 12/29/64.” Also published in Declassified Documents, 1979, 108A.

2 Not further identified.

3 [Footnote (4 lines of text) not declassified]

475. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam 475. Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in Vietnam1

Washington, December 29, 1964—5:36 p.m.

1365. Highest levels today2 reached negative decision on proposal your 19753 for reprisal action for BOQ bombing. We will be sending fuller statement of reasoning and considerations affecting future actions, after Secretary’s return from Texas tonight.

Rusk

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Top Secret; Immediate; Exdis; Ivory. Drafted by William Bundy, cleared with Bromley Smith, and initialed by Ball. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, CINCPAC, Bangkok, and Vientiane.

2 Secretary Rusk left Washington at 9 a.m. for the Texas White House to discuss Vietnam and other topics with the President and McGeorge Bundy. (Johnson Library, Rusk Appointment Book) No record of the meeting has been found.

3 Document 472.

476. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 476. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 30, 1964—10 p.m.

1999. Following is Alex Johnson’s report of his two and one-half hour meeting this afternoon with Oanh, General Thieu and Admiral Cang:

We had what I feel was quite a satisfactory session, at least as an opener, but with the crunch issue left open by how military are going to establish that they will not again irresponsibly intervene in governmental affairs. PriMin Huong informally spoke to us briefly at the beginning on importance he attached to our work in restoring effective relations between our two countries, etc. Oanh did a surprisingly good job as chairman.

In opening both Oanh and Thieu made it immediately clear that they considered working out a solution to governmental question arising from Dec 20 Armed Forces Council actions an integral part of the job and I accepted this. We discussed questions in order of: (A) our Dec 20 meeting with four Generals; (B) our Dec 21 meeting with Khanh; and (C) governmental question.

While it took some pulling and hauling, I finally got Thieu and Cang to state what was bothering them with respect to Dec 20 meeting by pleading that we had only heard rumors and indirect reports and I wanted facts directly from them. They raised only the issues of the “wasted dinner”, “do you speak English” and Amb Taylor’s general manner at beginning of Dec 20 meeting. I patiently went into the “wasted dinner” issue at great length, it being evident that both of them had interpreted, or chose to interpret, the remark as indicating the Amb’s regret at the waste of money on the Westmoreland dinner. I of course explained this furthest from Amb’s mind, he intended no such offensive connotation. He was simply stating evident fact that what he had said there was evidently not understood or accepted. Thus what he had said was “wasted”. I explained that question with respect to speaking English had simply been straightforward query as to what language they preferred.

With respect to manner I said that both Amb Taylor and myself were understandably upset and felt ourselves offended at action they had taken and we made no apologies for this. I then recounted at considerable length Amb Taylor’s deep personal involvement in and responsibility for our policy with respect to Vietnam, going back to 1961 and reviewing events since his arrival here. I explained in general terms the great efforts he had made [during] his last trip to Washington, the policy decisions that were reached there, the subsequent discussions on his return, including those with Vien, Huong and Khanh, the reasons in the background for his meeting with the Generals at Gen Westmoreland’s dinner, his sense that progress was being made and moving toward the goals he had been seeking for Vietnam only to be awakened early Sunday morning and told that during the night their actions had dashed all of these hopes without even the courtesy of informing the Amb until hours after everything was done, etc., etc. Thus he had deep reason for both personal and official offense at their actions. He had talked to them man to man and I felt no apology was necessary or required from his side. In fact as both men recalled I was so concerned that the very sympathetic and understanding attitude he had taken later in the conversation would be misinterpreted by them as not indicating the real depth of our concern that I had intervened to make certain that they understood the fundamental issue involved. I also recalled my own pleading with them not to “close doors” if they nevertheless went ahead with a press conference but leave open the question of the dissolution of the institution of the High National Council.

They listened carefully and sympathetically and acquiesced in Oanh’s observation that they should pass on my remarks as they considered them appropriate to other members of the Armed Forces Council and unless we heard otherwise from them the matter would be considered closed.

On the Amb-Khanh issue, they recounted Khanh’s report of the conversation along lines that we had previously heard, that is, Amb first questioning Khanh on who was responsible for the coup, that is, Khanh or the Armed Forces Council, and Khanh’s accepting responsibility as C-in-C. They then quoted Khanh as reporting that Amb Taylor had said, “In this case you must leave your post of C-in-C and leave the country”, this allegedly confirmed by a telephone conversation between the two the following day. This was “gross interference in internal affairs, etc., etc.” I replied that, “They faced me with a very deep dilemma.” As they knew, I was the only other person present at the conversation. While the substance of the first part relating to responsibility was generally correct, I could firmly and emphatically say that the last part relating to Amb Taylor’s alleged statement was not correct. In response to their obviously eager questions as to what was actually said, I replied that I did not feel I should say because this would put me in a position of calling Khanh a liar, or he, in turn, calling me a liar and this would only exaggerate the situation. I told them that I had taken careful notes and we had gone directly from General Khanh’s office to that of the PriMin and had recounted conversation to PriMin in detail from my notes (Oanh interjected that yes, he knew, because he was in next room when we were meeting with PriMin). However, could categorically say to them that Amb Taylor at no time had ever made any demand of any kind on Khanh and that if he was understood to have done so it was a misunderstanding. I then passed over a copy of Dec 24 Beverly Deepe interview with Khanh, as well as her interview with him last August, and a Stars and Stripes article directly quoting Gen Ky as stating that Amb Taylor had said that he was a General while Khanh was still a cadet.2 I said as long as we were clearing the air I thought we should clear the air all about and, although these direct quotes were deeply and personally offensive for him, Amb Taylor has refrained from replying or engaging in public vendetta.

I also noted the portion of Dec 24 Beverly Deepe article reporting that Gen Khanh and the Generals were going to undertake an anti-American campaign. I feel that all this served to clear the air somewhat and to shock Thieu and Cang. It resulted in a vigorous exchange in Vietnamese between the three, apparently over who was going to beard Khanh with all this, the conclusion being that this prickly job was left to Oanh.

As a footnote to this portion: Thieu and Cang said that “they had heard that Amb Taylor was going to Vung Tau to see Khanh this evening. I said that I was sure that Amb Taylor “did not know this” and this, in turn resulted in considerable Vietnamese exchange between Cang and Thieu (in fact, as reported through CAS channels, there was an apparent feeler from Khanh today on a meeting with Amb Taylor and/or myself to which no reply thus far has been made).

On governmental issue, I went to great pains at length to explain the whole rationale of our position, the problem presented for us in our cooperation with Vietnam (particularly in seeking to move ahead with greater support, in face of the “two govt” situation resulting from the Dec 20 act of AFC). I explained that we were not taking a legalistic view but rather a practical view, using as an illustration our call on PriMin on the morning of Dec 20 when PriMin knew only what he had been told by some military officers at 0200 that morning and when he had obviously been put in a position where he could not speak for Vietnam and had no control over military forces. A situation in which this could recur was not tolerable for USG. We were not seeking to dictate what Vietnam should do and did not allege that there was any single answer although all we had been able to think of was a reversal of the dissolution of the HNC either by the AFC or by the military acquiescing in a statement by the govt not recognizing the legality of the Dec 20 action. I deliberately took a hard line on this in not further introducing the possibility of other compromises, as at this phase I felt it best to let them wrestle further with the problem they have created.

Discussion of this was amicable, straightforward and if they did not do so before, I believe that at least Cang and Thieu now appreciate the problem in terms of our ability to work with them. I emphasized that the two essentials from our standpoint were “stability”, that is, a govt that is not arbitrarily going to be upset and “effectiveness”, that is, a govt that could speak authoritatively to us on behalf of all the country, including the armed forces, and which was able to carry out its commitments including those involving the armed forces.

There was some discussion at Thieu and Cang’s initiative of the proper role of the Armed Forces Council vis-à-vis the military, they explaining its creation as an effort to prevent coups by various elements within the armed forces in an effort to keep the armed forces united. I praised them for this effort and discussed with them in light of our own experience the difference between various advisory groups and committees and attempting to run the armed forces by committee.

No firm date was set for the next meeting, it being left that Cang will get in touch with me after he has seen Khanh. I made it clear that I was available at all times.

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Central Files, POL 27 VIET S. Secret; Priority; Exdis. Repeated to CIA, the Department of Defense, the White House, and CINCPAC for POLAD. Received at 12:20 p.m. and transmitted to the Texas White House as CAP 64378.

2 Presumably a reference to the article in Pacific Stars and Stripes, December 25, 1964, pp. 1–2; the other references have not been identified.

477. Telegram From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor) 477. Telegram From the President to the Ambassador in Vietnam (Taylor)1

Washington, December 30, 1964—11:15 a.m.

CAP 64375. For Amb Taylor only at opening of business day from the President of the United States.

1. I talked at length with Dean Rusk and Mac Bundy about your recommendation of reprisal for the Brink bombing.2 While I fully recognize the force of your feeling, which was strongly supported by a number of good men here, I myself concurred with Dean Rusk and Bob McNamara, who for overlapping reasons felt that we should not now make an air reprisal in North Vietnam. In reaching this decision, we were guided by a number of considerations peculiar to this episode. First and foremost, of course, is the continuing political turmoil in Saigon. If we ourselves were uncertain for several days about the source of the Brink’s bombing, we cannot expect the world to be less uncertain. I know that “the Liberation Front” has claimed the credit, but we all know that radio claims are not the most persuasive evidence of what has actually happened. This uncertainty is just one sign of the general confusion in South Vietnam which makes me feel strongly that we are not now in a position which justifies a policy of immediate reprisal.

2. What I want to do in this message is to share my own thinking with you and to ask for your full comment so that we can lay a basis of understanding that will give us a base-line not only for prompt reprisals but for other actions, mainly within South Vietnam, which can help to turn the tide.

3. I continue to feel very strongly that we ought not to be widening the battle until we get our dependents out of South Vietnam. I know that you have not agreed with this view in the past, and I recognize that there are some agencies which may face recruiting difficulties if dependents are removed, but no argument I have yet heard overrides the fact that we are facing a war in Saigon and we are considering actions which may bring strong communist reaction, if not by air, at least by a concentrated VC effort against Americans; this last is estimated by intelligence community as the very likely enemy reaction to a reprisal like air attack on target 36. In this situation I simply do not understand why it is helpful to have women and children in the battle zone, and my own readiness to authorize larger actions will be very much greater if we can remove the dependents and get ourselves into real fighting trim. Neither this nor any other part of this message is intended as an order, but I do wish you to understand the strength of my feeling and the fact that I have not been persuaded by arguments I have heard on the other side.

4. I also have real doubts about ordering reprisals in cases in which our own security seems, at first glance, to have been very weak. I notice in your last talk with Huong that he seems to have the same worry. I do not want to be drawn into a large-scale military action against North Vietnam simply because our own people are careless or imprudent. This too may be an unfair way of stating the matter, but I have not yet been told in any convincing way why aircraft cannot be protected from mortar attacks and officers quarters from large bombs.

5. I am still worried, too, by our lack of progress in communicating sensitively and persuasively with the various groups in South Vietnam. I recognize the very great problems which we face in dealing with groups which are immature and often irresponsible. But I still do not feel that we are making the all-out effort of political persuasion which is called for.

In particular, I wonder whether we are making full use of the kind of Americans who have shown a knack for this kind of communication in the past. I do not want to pick out any particular individual because I do not know these men at first hand. But I do think that we ought to be ready to make full use of the specialized skills of men who are skillful with Vietnamese, even if they are not always the easiest men to handle in a country team. In this, again, I recognize that you must have the final responsibility for the selection and management of your country team, and I am giving no order but only raising a question which is increasingly insistent in my own mind.

To put it another way, I continue to believe that we should have the most sensitive, persistent, and attentive Americans that we can find in touch with Vietnamese of every kind and quality, and reinforced by Englishmen, and Buddhists, and labor leaders and agricultural experts, and other free men of every kind and type, who may have skills to contribute in a contest on all fronts. I just do not think we should leave any stone unturned, and I do not have the feeling that we have yet done everything that we can in these areas.

6. Every time I get a military recommendation it seems to me that it calls for large-scale bombing. I have never felt that this war will be won from the air, and it seems to me that what is much more needed and would be more effective is a larger and stronger use of Rangers and Special Forces and Marines, or other appropriate military strength on the ground and on the scene. I am ready to look with great favor on that kind of increased American effort, directed at the guerrillas and aimed to stiffen the aggressiveness of Vietnamese military units up and down the line. Any recommendation that you or General Westmoreland make in this sense will have immediate attention from me, although I know that it may involve the acceptance of larger American sacrifice. We have been building our strength to fight this kind of war ever since 1961, and I myself am ready to substantially increase the number of Americans in Vietnam if it is necessary to provide this kind of fighting force against the Viet Cong.

7. I am not saying that all this has to be done before there can be any reprisals. Indeed, as I say, I am not giving any orders at all in this message. But I am inclined to offer this suggestion:

I would like to see you move more strongly in four directions: (1) The removal of dependents.

(2) The stiffening of our own security arrangements to protect our own people and forces.

(3) A much wider and more varied attempt to get good political relations with all Vietnamese groups.

(4) An intensified US stiffening on-the-ground by Rangers and Special Forces or other appropriate elements.

If you can give me either progress or persuasive arguments on these matters, I would look with favor on the execution of immediate and automatic reprisal against targets like No. 36 in the event of further attacks. I myself believe that such reprisals should have a Vietnamese component whenever possible, but I hope that the necessary consultation for such a component can be kept down to a very few hours so that we could react with a speed which will show beyond any question what caused our action.

8. Let me repeat once more that this whole message is intended to show you the state of my thinking and to ask for your frankest comments and responses. I know that you are the man on the spot and I know what a very heavy load you are carrying. I am grateful for it and I want you to know in turn that you have my complete confidence in the biggest and hardest job that we have overseas. But in this tough situation in which the final responsibility is mine and the stakes are very high indeed, I have wanted you to have this full and frank statement of the way I see it.

1 Source: National Defense University, Taylor Papers, T–157–69. Top Secret; Immediate; Nodis. Drafted in Texas and sent to Washington for transmission to Taylor during the morning of December 30. Sixteen corrections were phoned to Bromley Smith for inclusion, all but two of which were of one or two words. The two of substance were the addition of “if not by air…target 36” in paragraph 3 and “and I want you to know…overseas” in paragraph 8. A list of the corrections and a marked-up draft are in the Johnson Library, National Security File, Vietnam Country File, Pres/Taylor Nodis Clores and Codeword Messages.

2 The meeting referred to in footnote 2, Document 475.

478. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State 478. Telegram From the Embassy in Vietnam to the Department of State1

Saigon, December 31, 1964—8 p.m.

2010. Alex Johnson and I send the following reflections on the politico-military situation as it appears at the moment. General Westmoreland concurs.

As we contemplate the possible course of future political events in SVN, it is apparent that we may be faced with any one of the following possible outcomes arising from the current situation: a. The generals may acquiesce in the demands of the government and undertake to restore the status quo ante December 20, 1964 coup. This outcome seems very unlikely without a break between Khanh and the generals with the consequent departure of Khanh from the scene. Given Khanh’s present mood, such a break could be accompanied by some violence between individuals or elements of the Armed Forces.

b. The government and the generals may reach a compromise on the issues at stake. These issues are the future status of the High National Council, the disposition of the prisoners taken by the Armed Forces in the course of their coup, acceptance by the military of responsibility for and participation in the Huong government, and the vendetta of the generals with Ambassador Taylor. For each one of these issues, there are several possible compromises. With regard to the High National Council, one might be to change its name and retain its present functions. Or another might be to retain its name but change its membership. With regard to the prisoners, the Armed Forces might release all to the government or only the prisoners who are members of the High National Council (Prime Minister Huong does not seem to be much interested in the fate of the others). The release to the government might be unconditional or be based upon acceptance of some commitment by the government that the prisoners be kept out of political activity. The issue of military support and participation in the Huong government could in part be met by an announcement by the generals of specific support to the Huong government and of willingness to accept certain positions in the cabinet and in the HNC (or its successor). At a minimum, the position of Minister of Defense should go to a military man or a civilian representing the Armed Forces, and one or more other posts might be considered depending upon the merits of the military candidates. As to the ambassadorial issue, it appears less and less likely that the generals will seriously press for the recall of Ambassador Taylor, but Khanh might remain adamant on the point. Thus someone might suggest that both the Ambassador and General Khanh withdraw in order to clear the atmosphere. The most likely proposal is that both individuals remain in place and try to live together, at least for the time being.

c. A third possible development could be the resignation of Huong, a victim of the current pressures directed at him, to be followed by a new civil government (possibly containing military representation). The auguries for such a government would not be favorable since Huong would presumably have been defeated by the generals and forced from his post. It is very doubtful that any strong civilian could be persuaded to be Prime Minister under such circumstances.

d. A fourth situation resembling the preceding would be the case of the resignation by Huong, followed by a military government. It would make considerable difference to the USG whether this military government were headed by Khanh or some more acceptable officer.

e. A final possible development is a straight military coup which, as in the foregoing case, might be headed by Khanh or someone else.

Now let us take up each one of these possible situations and consider what the U.S. attitude should be towards it if it occurs.

In the case of a capitulation by the generals, we have nothing to do but rejoice and anticipate increased strength and performance on the part of the Huong government.

In the case of a compromise, much will depend on the form the compromise takes and we should reserve final judgment until we see its full dimensions. If the overall outcome is a stronger civilian government, then we have cause for much the same rejoicing as in the former case. If, however, the result is a weaker Huong government, virtually a straw government under military domination incapable of controlling its Armed Forces, then we are in for real trouble. Although there will be a strong temptation to try to rock along in this unhappy situation, there can be no real hope for ultimate success through U.S. cooperation with such a line up. The question will be whether the line up seems indefinitely fixed or whether it may be subject to early change. Even in the latter case, the thought of further change is a discouraging one. Much would also depend on whether Khanh remained or whether he left sooner or later. Given their experience with the consequences of their December 20 action, with Khanh out of the picture, the other generals are not likely soon to repeat the experiment.

Our attitude toward a military government following a resignation by Huong will necessarily depend upon the character and apparent promise of the new government. While we will regret conceding the failure of civilian government and accepting a return of the military, we cannot for that reason alone refuse to cooperate with it, although the long term prognosis for Viet-Nam under a strictly military government is not good. If the latter were headed by Khanh, I would feel that it would be impossible for us to do business with it. Khanh has too many strikes against him and is too clearly unreliable for us to try to get into bed with him once more.

The foregoing consideration leads me to conclude that since it is unlikely that the generals will cede on all points, the U.S. effort should be toward effecting the best possible compromise, hoping that there-from will come a stronger civilian government than the present one. We should encourage a cabinet reshuffle to include the inclusion of some military representation without thereby creating the impression of military domination. If possible, we should get Khanh out of his present post or even better out of the country, although we may have to agree to live with him somewhat longer. I feel that his own facility for getting into trouble will drive him from the scene later if not sooner.

In conditioning the military for a satisfactory compromise, we will draw heavily upon the Department advice contained in paragraph 6 of Deptel 1347,2 pointing out to the generals that the sure way to get in Phase II is to line up with Huong, intensify the campaign against the Viet-Cong, push pacification and help the government to get going again. Of course, the more definite we can be, the more leverage we will have. Considering the Vietnamese capacity for misinterpretation, there is danger of creating misunderstandings and of raising expectations which are not subsequently realized.

If worse comes to worst and a straw civilian government unable to control the military with Khanh at their head is the outcome, we are in for a bad time. Under these circumstances we could try to carry on about as we are now, hoping time and his own ineptitude will eliminate Khanh from the scene and that a sounder government-military relationship will eventually evolve. But I doubt that we have this kind of time.

Alternatively, we might seek to disengage from the present intimacy of relationship with the GVN, withdrawing the bulk of our advisers and turning over a maximum number of functions now performed by Americans and, while continuing sufficient economic and MAP support to keep GVN operating at present levels, shrink MACV to the status of a MAAG and USOM to an economic-budgetary advisory group. At the same time, we would continue to accept responsibility for the air and maritime defense of SVN against the DRV. By this means we might hope somewhat to disengage ourselves from an unreliable ally and give the GVN the chance to walk on its own legs and be responsible for its own stumbles. The hope would be that, having to accept full responsibility, SVN would rise to the challenge and “pull up its political socks”. The danger is that, panicked by what could be interpreted as abandonment, the leaders here would rush to compete with each other in making a deal with the National Liberation Front. This danger could be offset if at the time we were engaged in reprisal attacks or had initiated Phase II operations against DRV.

With regard to the occasion for initiating Phase II operations against North Viet-Nam, such operations could be considered under three possible conditions: [unknown amount of source text missing] initiation of Phase II operations. Without Phase II operations, we see slight chance of moving toward a successful solution.3

Taylor

1 Source: Department of State, Saigon Embassy Files: Lot 68 F 8. Top Secret; Priority; Exdis. Drafted by Taylor and Johnson. Repeated to CIA for McCone, to the Department of Defense for McNamara, to the White House for Bundy, and to CINCPAC for Admiral Sharp.

2 Document 465.

3 At 8:06 p.m. on December 31, the Department of State cabled Taylor that with regard to this last paragraph, NSAM 314 (Document 345) had been superseded by the December 7 policy statement (Document 440), and that, while the policy statement remained in force, the Department did not envisage that this action was automatic. (Telegram 1380 to Saigon; Department of State, Central Files. POL 27 VIET S)

479. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland) 479. Telegram From the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (Wheeler) to the Commander, Military Assistance Command, Vietnam (Westmoreland)1

Washington, December 31, 1964—2:53 p.m.

JCS 5485. 1. I still have not received information as to the factors which influenced highest authority to disapprove recommendations of Ambassador Taylor, CINCPAC, AND JCS to undertake reprisal for Brink bombing. While reasons are no doubt numerous, on reflection recalling meetings on Vietnamese problem in general and BOQ bombing in particular, I surmise that the following items might have exerted a strong influence: a. The presence of U.S. dependents in South Vietnam. This has been a matter of continuing concern to highest authority and was specifically referred to by Secretary Rusk at out meeting on 28 December.2 There is concern in Washington, amounting almost to conviction, that our dependents are liable to attack as VC/DRV reprisal to a U.S. attack against the DRV. While our dependents remain in South Vietnam, I consider that forceful action by the U.S. outside the borders of South Vietnam is practically precluded.

b. Doubt in some Washington sectors that security measures of critical installations in Saigon and elsewhere are adequate. While you may question the bearing that U.S./South Vietnam security arrangements have on whether or not we should execute reprisals, the fact remains that there is an attitude of mind here in some areas to the effect that lax security not only invites but in some curious way justifies a VC attack and thereby inhibits us from retaliatory action.

c. A widespread and strong belief, shared by some DOD senior officials, that reprisals must be executed within 24–36 hours. In discussing this the other day, I was confronted with the view that delay beyond the upper limit cited effectively removed a U.S. military act against the DRV from the reprisal to the offensive area. In other words, the hypothesis is that a reprisal action undertaken subsequent to 36 hours would be, in effect, an escalatory act based upon a desire to “shoot our way out of a political difficulty.” While I myself do not accept this rationale, it is a hard fact of life that many people in positions of policy importance do accept it.

d. The fact the U.S. policy determination currently is limited to the decision to exert a limited squeeze on the DRV; no decision has yet been taken to move militarily against the North. This being so, the GVN disarray on Christmas Eve did not permit an affirmative decision to execute a reprisal for the Brink bombing. To express this another way, the political confusion in Saigon does not encourage nor, indeed, permit the U.S. to increase the stakes in Southeast Asia.

2. As a sidelight to c. and d. above, one of the principals who opposed on 23 December the proposed attack on target 36 expressed the view that we should continue to maintain the capability to execute a reprisal action within 6 hours subsequent to a VC/DRV provocation which justified action by the U.S. I pointed out then and later that, under current relationships with the GVN and ARVN, an additional 24 hours would be needed to crank into a reprisal action VNAF participation. My observation, based on COMUSMACV’s cable on this subject,3 was accepted without comment.

3. The foregoing represents sort of a year-end wrap-up of Washington views on the problem of South Vietnam and North Vietnam. While I would be hard put to document in detail each of the above items, they reflect my analysis of Washington attitudes and provide a degree of guidance as to what, lacking changes in the situation, can be expected from Washington in future months. Of this, I anticipate during the forthcoming session of Congress sharp inquiries into U.S. policy in South Vietnam, the conduct of the war and the reasons for our lack of success. The Congress and the American people are increasingly concerned about the situation in Southeast Asia. While many people may not realize it, I believe that their concern is not that we are engaged in a war but are frustrated that we are not winning the war.

4. This message does not require a reply, of course, unless either or both of you desire to do so. I have tried to lay out for your consideration certain vexing aspects of the over-all problem which gall our policymakers and inhibit them from action. It is obvious to me that we must continue to maintain our retaliatory capabilities as specified above, with and without VNAF participation; that we must continue to press the military and the civilians in Saigon to submerge their differences and fabricate a reasonably sound governmental structure; and that we must somehow convince the Washington policymakers that our security arrangements are as good as the type of war we are fighting will permit. As to dependents, I add nothing to what I have set out above except to assure you that, in my opinion, their continued presence in South Vietnam is a hurdle which trips decisions.

5. Happy New Year.

1 Source: Johnson Library, Westmoreland Papers, Message File, 1964. Secret. Also sent to CINCPAC for Admiral Sharp.

2 See Document 473.

3 Not further identified.

Index Index

Note: In this index, the Republic of Vietnam is listed as Vietnam (RVN) or RVN; the Democratic People’s Republic of Vietnam is listed as Vietnam (DRV) or DRV.

Agency for International Development (AID), 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 124], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 177], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178] director for Vietnam, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100]

Agricultural situation in Vietnam, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214]

Aiken, George, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Air Force, RVN, aircraft upgrades for, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 101]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

Akalovsky, Alexander, 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 443]

Alliance for Progress, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

Alphand, Herve, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 73], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115] international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 237]-557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

Laos, regional settlement and, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 227], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 227]

Southeast Asia, French policy toward, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 227], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

strategic importance of Vietnam, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 227]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 227]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 227]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 237]

Ambassador to Saigon, selection of, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212] McG. Bundy’s recommendations, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 204]

Lodge’s recommendations, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 133], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 207]-477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Lodge’s resignation, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 218]

Taylor-Johnson team, appointment of, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 225]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 225]

Amnesty (Chieu Hoi) program, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10]-21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28]

Anderson, Robert B., 469n [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 202]

Anthis, Brig. Gen. Rollen H., 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 99n [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 89]

Anti-American sentiment in Vietnam, 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 366], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 368]

Armstrong, Willis C., 68n [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN). See Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces.

Asbjornson, Mildred, 57n [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]

Australia, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 839 [Pg. 839 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 433], 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 437]

Ayub Khan, Mohammed, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 249], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]

Ball, George W., 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 698n [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 914n [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 1052n [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475] civilian government of Vietnam: Buddhist opposition, 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]-997 [Pg. 997 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

minority groups, relations with, 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]

congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 169]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 169]

communist infiltration evidence, release of, 1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]-1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

De Gaulle, meeting with, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 185], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 202] preparations for, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 193], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 196]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 610n [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 296], 651n [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304] Maddox, attack on (Aug. 2), 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 602n [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Morton and Edwards, possible attack on (Sept. 18), 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 202]

Khanh coup, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Khanh government, 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 190], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416], 938n [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 424], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]-1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against: Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

communist insurgency, impact on, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 185]

Johnson’s doubts about, 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

naval operations, 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]

U.N. response, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]

U.S. consultations with allies re, 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]-981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

U.S. protection of RVN against reprisal, 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 185]-404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]

Vietnam (RVN), impact on, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 185]-403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 185]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 230]-544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 651n [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

war game on Vietnam, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]

Beaumarchais, Jacques de, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113]

Beech, Keyes, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 70]

Belgium, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Belk, Samuel E., 330n [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156]

Bell, David E., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 124], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 129], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156], 337n [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

Berry, Lt. Col. Sidney, Jr., 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Bien Hoa airfield attack, U.S. retaliation for, 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 393]-882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 402]-886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

Binh, Archbishop, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]

Binh Long, fighting at, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 234]-550 [Pg. 550 is part of Doc. 234]

Bligh, Sir Timothy, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41]

Blouin, Rear Adm. F.J., 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28], 53n [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 101]-206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 337n [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160], 602n [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Board of National Estimates, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Bohannan, Charles T.R., 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

Bohlen, Charles E., 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 60], 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 69], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202], 470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 202] neutral solution for Vietnam, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 73]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 76]-141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77] De Gaulle’s clarification of French policy, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 96]-195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 106]

Bolton, Frances P., 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 280]

Breckon, M. Lyall, 709n [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 329]

Brent, Joseph L., 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Brink Hotel bombing, 1038 [Pg. 1038 is part of Doc. 465], 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 1049 [Pg. 1049 is part of Doc. 472]

Brubeck, William H., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Bruce, David K.E., 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

Brunn, Robert, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 250]

Buddhist-Catholic conflict, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 152]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 152], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 154], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 165], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 178], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 187], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 229]-541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 306]

Buddhist opposition. See under Civilian government of Vietnam; Khanh government.

Bunche, Ralph, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]

Bundy, McGeorge, 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 5n [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 16n [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37], 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56], 107n [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 132n [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 73], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]-173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 89], 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 214n [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103], 232n [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 128], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 330n [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]-351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181], 396n [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 450n [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 214], 520n [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 576n [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 249], 583n [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 721n [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 787n [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 359], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]-812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 1060n [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 478] ambassador to Saigon, selection of, 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212] recommendations re, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 204]

Taylor-Johnson team, appointment of, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 225]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 225]

anti-American sentiment in Vietnam, 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 366]

China, People’s Republic of: nuclear capability, 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

U.S. contacts with, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

civilian government of Vietnam, 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

communist insurgency, 297n [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 143]

congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy: early resolution, decision against, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 210], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 210], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 210]

opposing arguments, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 211]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

supporting arguments, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 211]-495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 211], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

timing of presentation to Congress, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 173], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S. firmness, demonstration of, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 214]

counterinsurgency operations: conventional tactics issue, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 99]-198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99]

covert checking of reporting on, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

psywar-civic action program in provinces, 997n [Pg. 997 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Geneva Accords, 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 651n [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304] Maddox, attack on (Aug. 2), 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Maddox and C. Turner Joy, attack on (Aug. 4), 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

Morton and Edwards, possible attack on (Sept. 18), 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 356]

retaliations for attacks, 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290]

U.S. public statements on, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290]

Vietnamese (DRV) intentions in attacking U.S. ships, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290]

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution: administration discussions re, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290]

hearings on, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

Hilsman’s parting memoranda, 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313]

Johnson’s television appearance re Vietnam, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 81]-150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82]

Khanh government, coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 349]

Khanh’s political skills, 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

Laos: conference on, proposed, 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 214]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 313]-679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

military situation, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]

settlement in, possible, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172]

U.S. policy toward, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 212], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 214]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into: airstrikes, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 214], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313]

ground operations, 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313]

guidelines for, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104]

U.S. firmness, demonstrations of, 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 214]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214]

Lodge-Harkins relationship, 298n [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 144]

MACV command change, 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

McNamara-Taylor mission (March 1964), 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 83]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

National Security Action Memorandum 314: administration review of, 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 343], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

courses of action report, 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-747 [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 342]

text of, 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]-760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 345]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 8], 191n [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 96], 193n [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 96]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 403], 938n [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423] meetings, 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 424], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

negotiations option, omission of, 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 417]

Rusk-Khanh meeting, 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 186]

Rusk mission (April 1964): Lodge, meeting with, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 116]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

preparations for, 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111]

Southeast Asia, U.S.-U.K. consultation re, 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 41]

Sullivan Committee, 80n [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 46]

Taylor-Johnson reports, quality of, 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Taylor-Khanh relationship, 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 367]

Taylor’s conflict with generals, 1036n [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 1037n [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 465], 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Taylor’s visits to Washington, 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Thailand, U.S. military deployments in, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214]

third country assistance for Vietnam: U.K. contribution, 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]-982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]

U.S. promotion of, 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam, 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139] force increase to 22,000, 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 233], 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

ground forces, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 335]-724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]

marines to guard installations, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 335]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: administration meetings with congressional leaders, 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 179]

checklist of progress, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210]

courses of action report, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]-679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

“domino effect” issue, 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

funds and personnel for, 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 272n [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

manager in Washington for, 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Mansfield’s policy suggestions, 2n [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 8]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 1009n [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449], 1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 449]-1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

official visits to Vietnam, 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]

options available without congressional resolution, 516n [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

U.S. veterans of Vietnam, use of, 1040 [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 466]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 27n [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34] Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

covert operations, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 172], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313]

economic initiatives, 270n [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127]

military options, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 313]

naval operations, 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]-797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

nuclear weapons issue, 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

political moves in support of military actions, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 1051 [Pg. 1051 is part of Doc. 474]-1052 [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]

scenarios for, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 173]

target selection, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172]

tit-for-tat military actions, 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313]

U.N. actions by U.S. re, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 173]

U.S. consultations with allies, 394n [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 281n [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 214], 651n [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

war footing for Vietnam, 287n [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 291n [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

war game on Vietnam, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]

Bundy, William P., 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 89n [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 97n [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57], 99n [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 120n [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 176n [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90], 235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 113]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120]-251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 532n [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 226], 533n [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227], 558n [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 562n [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 587n [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 673n [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 313], 709n [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 329], 721n [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 782n [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 357], 830n [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 895n [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 407], 909n [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 1013n [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 450], 1052n [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475] civilian government of Vietnam, 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372] “Young Turks” coup attempt, 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 1023n [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 1025n [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 456], 1028n [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 1035n [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 463]

congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy: draft resolutions, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 210]

supporting arguments, 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 214]-516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

coordination of Vietnam programs, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

counterinsurgency operations, 126n [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 193], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 193]

Far Eastern Affairs post, appointment to, 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 610n [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 279], 651n [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189] summary of, 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 193]-446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Khanh government: Buddhist opposition, 700n [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347], 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 349]

reorganization program, 670n [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Laos: settlement in, possible, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

U.S.-RVN incursions into, 574n [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

Lodge-Harkins relationship, 298n [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 144]

McNamara-Taylor mission (March 1964), 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 84]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

media coverage of Vietnam, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 193]-444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 193]

National Security Action Memorandum, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151], 747n [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 342], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 403] basic issues between options, 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]-939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 423]

“continue present policies” option, 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 423]-941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 423]

“Courses of Action” paper, 916n [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

“fast, unyielding pressure” option, 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 423]

immediate actions, 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 423], 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

meetings, 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 424], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

negotiations option, omission of, 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 417]

policy options paper, 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

progress reports on deliberations, 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 417]

“progressive pressure and talk” option, 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 423]-942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 423]

Project Outline, 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

Rusk-Khanh meetings, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118], 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 186]

Rusk mission (April 1964), 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118]

Rusk-Quat meeting, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 114]

Taylor’s conflict with Generals, 1036n [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465], 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Taylor’s visits to Washington, 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

third country assistance for Vietnam, 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 437]

U.S. commitment to Vietnam, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against: Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 878n [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

contingency planning, 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108]-229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]

covert operations, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 163]

cross-border operations and, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108]

military timing factors, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 193]

political moves in support of military actions, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108]-226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]

public awareness issue, 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 163]

reaction fumes for operations, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108]

target selection, 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 163]

tit-for-tat military actions, 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108]

U.S. consultations with allies, 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 193], 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]-981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 108]

warnings of attacks, 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 163]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 158], 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 651n [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 978n [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

war footing for Vietnam, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 137]

Burchette, Wilfred, 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 168]

Burchinal, Lt. Gen. David A., 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 163], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 276]

Burma, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 68], 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 209], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]

Butler, R.A., 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]

Buu. See Tran Quoc Buu.

Byroade, Henry A., 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 45]

Caccia, Sir Harold, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

Cam Ranh Bay naval base, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135]-284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 143], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214]

Cambodia, 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 8]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 68] Communist infiltration through, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 84]-155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 84]

Communist victory in Vietnam, consequences of, 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418]

Communists, dealings with, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]

“domino effect” and, 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 209]

Khanh government, negotiations with, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86]

neutral solution for, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 41], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]

U.N. border patrol, possible, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156]

U.S.-RVN incursions into, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156] Chantrea incident, 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-214n [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103]

JCS positron, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 65]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 65], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82]

Khanh’s positron, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]

Mansfield’s position, 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 449]

McCone’s position, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68]

Taylor’s position, 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 401]

U.S. authorization for, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 85]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 101]

U.S. operations against DRV and, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108]

war footing for Vietnam and, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 140], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145]

Can. See Ngo Dinh Can.

Canada (see also Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts), 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 433] Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 250]

U.S. operations against DRV, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Cang, Adm., 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 451], 1048n [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476], 1056 [Pg. 1056 is part of Doc. 476]

Cao Dai party, 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28], 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 448]-1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 448]

Cao Hoai Sang, 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 448]

Carroll, Lt. Gen. Joseph F., 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 42], 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 706n [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326]

Carter, Lt. Gen. Marshall S., 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 356]

Castro, Fidel, 74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 43]

Cater, S. Douglass, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]-525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290]-632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290]

Catholics (see also Buddhist-Catholic conflict), 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Central Intelligence Agency, U.S. (CIA) (see also McCone, John A.), 727n [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337] civilian government of Vietnam, 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]

counterinsurgency operations: assessment of, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]-66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 38], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

covert checking of reporting on, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

Khanh government, 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326], 801n [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 365]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Saigon station chief, appointment of, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16] covert operations, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

positive inducements for DRV, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 31n [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Chadbourn, Philip H., 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

Chen Yi, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 237]

Chiang Kai-shek, 247n [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 186], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 209], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 309]

Chieu Hoi (Amnesty) program, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10]-21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28]

China, People’s Republic of: Chinese Nationalist invasion, possible, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124]

communist insurgency, support for, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

communist movements abroad, assistance for, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]

conflict with U.S., attitude toward, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120]

“domino effect” and, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 209]-487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

free world operations against, Khanh’s plan for, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 309]

French policy toward, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 202], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 227]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291]

influence in Southeast Asia, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

military capabilities, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 66]-113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 66]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 27], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113]-235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 113]

nuclear capability, 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

U.N. admission issue, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

U.S. contacts with, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 227], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 227], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 249], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299] Mansfield’s suggestion for, 1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, position on, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 227], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 237]-556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 237], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

Vietnam (DRV), relations with, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 47]-82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 157n [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84]

China, Republic of, 247n [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124] “domino effect” and, 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 209]

invasion of the mainland, possible, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124]

troops for Vietnam, proposed, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68], 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120]

Chinese minority in Vietnam, 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 448]-1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 448]

Civil Guard: army status for, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 78]

force increases, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154]

period of service, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

reconstitution of, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84]

recruiting for, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]

Civilian government of Vietnam, 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 368] alternatives to, 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426]

Buddhist opposition, 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 405], 936 [Pg. 936 is part of Doc. 421], 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 444]-995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 447], 1032 [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 461] U.S. program of reconciliation, 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445]-997 [Pg. 997 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]-1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 448]

Catholics’ support for, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

charter for, 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385]-843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 386]

civil servants and, 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 448]

formation of (see also High National Council), 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373] Khanh-Minh conflict re, 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]-836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]-841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Khanh’s views on, 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 338], 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]-830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 379]-834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]-838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385], 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]-845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Minh’s views on, 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]-833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 379], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 381]-838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385]-843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]

U.S. policy re, 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 389]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]-819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 373], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 375]-830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]-834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]-838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

Huong’s assessment of, 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]-892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

installation of, 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 389]-859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 389]

Khanh’s pledge of support, 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 389]

Khanh’s plotting against, 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415], 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 448]

life expectancy, 945 [Pg. 945 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]-946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 425]

military, relations with (see also “Young Turks” coup attempt below), 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390]-861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 448]-1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

ministerial appointments, 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390]-861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

minority groups, relations with, 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415], 935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]-936 [Pg. 936 is part of Doc. 421], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]-1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

National Assembly, 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415]

objectives, short-term, 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]-899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

power struggle, potential for, 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

press relations, 1004 [Pg. 1004 is part of Doc. 448]

resignations of officials, 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 405]-892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

Suu’s selection as Chief of State, 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 389]

Taylor’s assessment of, 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]-890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 426]-950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 426]

U.S. efforts to strengthen, 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 426]-952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]-959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 428], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]-966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 432], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 432] progress reports, 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]-995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]-1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]

Taylor’s instructions re, 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 435]-976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 435]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]-984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 442]-989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 442]

U.S. integration into, 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]-911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415]

U.S. operations against DRV, support for 947

U.S. protection from coup, request for, 1047 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 470], 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471]

weaknesses of, 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 426]-950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 426]

“Young Turks” coup attempt: Generals’ defense of, 1039n [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 465]

Khanh’s defense of, 1027 [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]-1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]

Khanh’s leadership, 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460]

negotiations to resolve, 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]-1032 [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 461], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 462]-1034 [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 462], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 467]-1042 [Pg. 1042 is part of Doc. 467], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470]-1047 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 470], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476]-1056 [Pg. 1056 is part of Doc. 476]

Taylor-Johnson speculations on outcome, 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 478]-1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

Taylor’s initial reactions, 1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]-1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

U.S. guidance for Taylor, 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]-1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]-1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 463], 1038 [Pg. 1038 is part of Doc. 465]-1039 [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 465], 1042 [Pg. 1042 is part of Doc. 467]-1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]-1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam and, 1025 [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 456]-1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457]

U.S. official statements on, 1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457]-1027 [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 1034n [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 462], 1039n [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 465]

Civilian Irregular Defense Group (CIDG) program, 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 358]

Cleveland, Harlan, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 184], 628n [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 294]-636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 296], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]

Cline, Ray S.: Khanh government, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 80]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 430]-964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

Co. See Nguyen Huu Co, Gen.

Coffin, Frank M., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Colby, William, 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 322n [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 830n [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

Communist insurgency: area controlled by, 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 50], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 58] Bien Hoa airfield, attack on, 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 393], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]-880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 398]

Brink Hotel bombing, 1038 [Pg. 1038 is part of Doc. 465], 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 1049 [Pg. 1049 is part of Doc. 472]

casualties suffered, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 67]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68], 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

Chinese People’s Republic support for, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

civil disorder, focus on, 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 368]-811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

ground attacks from DRV, possible, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 318]

infiltration of troops, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 64], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 84]-155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 84], 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 392]-872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 392], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]-1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

intensification in July, 548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

major offensive, possible, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 210]

Montagnards and, 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 358]

political discord in RVN, role in, 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 341]

popular attitude toward, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 231]

propaganda activities, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320]

psychological impact of successes, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125], 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 229]

quasi-governmental organization, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 208]

recruits for, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 187]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]

recuperative powers, 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 426], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 426]

reserve forces, 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186]-408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]

terrorism, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 55], 241n [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 116]

training for troops, 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 392]-868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 392]

troop strength, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 68], 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 233], 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 306], 871 [Pg. 871 is part of Doc. 392]-872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 392]

urban capabilities, 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

U.S. operations against DRV, effect of, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 185]

U.S. personnel, attacks on, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 55], 289n [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 393], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]-880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 398], 1038 [Pg. 1038 is part of Doc. 465], 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468], 1049 [Pg. 1049 is part of Doc. 472]

victory in Vietnam, possible, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 8], 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 42]-72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 143], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418]-919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 418]

Vietnam (DRV), relation to, 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 68], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 84]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145]-302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145]

weaponry for, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 58], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 65], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 68], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 84]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84]

withdrawal of forces, proposed, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 69]

Conein, Col. Lucien, 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 126], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 367], 1040 [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 466]

Congress, U.S. (see also Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy): Gulf of Tonkin events, briefings on, 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280]-621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution: administration consultations with leadership, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280]-618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

hearings on, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

passage of, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 304]

members’ visits to Vietnam, 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343]

Taylor’s meetings with leadership: Sept. 1964, 754n [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343]

Dec. 1964, 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, administration consultations with leadership re, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 107]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 179]

Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy (see also Gulf of Tonkin Resolution), 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 43], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 201] draft resolutions, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 356 [Pg. 356 is part of Doc. 169]-358 [Pg. 358 is part of Doc. 169], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 210], 513 [Pg. 513 is part of Doc. 214]-515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 214]

early resolution, decision against, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 210]-492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 210], 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 212]

opposing arguments, 495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 211]-496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212]

options available without resolution, 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

requirements for, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

supporting arguments, 493 [Pg. 493 is part of Doc. 211]-495 [Pg. 495 is part of Doc. 211], 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212], 515 [Pg. 515 is part of Doc. 214]-516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]

timing of presentation to Congress, 377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 173], 512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S. firmness, demonstration of, 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214]-512 [Pg. 512 is part of Doc. 214]

Cooper, Chester, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 99], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210], 993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]-995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 1013n [Pg. 1013 is part of Doc. 450]

Coote, Wendell B., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Corcoran, Thomas B., 602n [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 367]

Counterinsurgency operations (see also Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into; Strategic hamlet program; Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against; War footing for Vietnam; U.S.-RVN incursions under Cambodia): air support, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]

airfield security, 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]-681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 402]

Americanization of, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 51], 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 68], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 68]

An Long offensive, proposed, 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

border control, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 51]

Chinese Nationalist troops for, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68], 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120]

CIA assessment of, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]-66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 38], 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Harkins’response, 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

civil advisers for, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151]

command and control system, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 187], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 208]-484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 362]-796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]-814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 371]

communications security, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152]

conventional tactics issue, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 99]-198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 309], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 309]

covert checking of reporting on, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35], 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

critical provinces, focus on, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 188]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 193], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 193], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 201], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214]

crop destruction and defoliation, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 51]

defense against ground attacks, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 318], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 318]

deterioration of RVN position, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 84]-156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 84], 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 159], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189], 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]-949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 426]

disbursement of funds problem, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152]

Do Xa operation, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

Farmgate operation, 163n [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84]

Goldwater’s comments on, 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 182]

government stability in RVN, relation to, 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 426], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426]

ground operations, U.S. evaluation of, 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 366]

guerrilla tactics, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 90]-181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 90], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Hop Tac operation. See Saigon-area initiative below.

improvements in, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124], 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 425]-947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 425]

infiltration evidence, accumulation of, 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]

JCS recommendations for actions, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]-853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 388], 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 401]

Khanh government policy on, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 24], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 25]

National Pacification Plan, 87 [Pg. 87 is part of Doc. 51], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 84], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 154], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187], 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 214]

Nes’ assessment of, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

night operations, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10]

operational effectiveness, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 187]

political orientation, 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 36]

popular attitude toward, 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 75], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 165]

populated areas, attacks on, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 75]

population control, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 306]-662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

provincial troubleshooting, 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 371]-815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 373]

psywar-civic action program in provinces, 997 [Pg. 997 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]-998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

reconnaissance flights, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120]

Saigon-area initiative (Hop Tac plan), 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 306], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 340], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355]-777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 355], 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 371], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 389]

Taylor-L. B. Johnson meeting re, 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 432]-967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 432]

timetable for, 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]

U.S. ambassadors’ meeting re, 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 374]-821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 374]

U.S. de facto responsibility for, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 68]

Vietnamese (RVN) responsibility for, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 84]

Village security, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 90]-181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 90]

Westmoreland’s assessment of, 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

Coup against Diem, Minh’s account of, 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]

Coup against Minh. See Khanh coup.

Coup attempt by “Young Turks.” See under Civilian government of Vietnam.

Coups against Khanh. See under Khanh government.

Couve de Murville, Maurice, 1On, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 106], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124], 465 [Pg. 465 is part of Doc. 202], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 237] French-RVN relations, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115]

Laos, possible settlement in, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113]

U.S.-Communist mutual withdrawal, proposed, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 69]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115]

Cox, Gordon E., 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134]

Craig, U.S.S., 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260]

Creel, Robert, 621n [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Cuba, 105n [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 61], 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Dai Viet party, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 333], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 333], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 336]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336]

Dang-Sy, Maj., 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 165]

Dang Van Sung, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 229]

Davies, Richard T., 633n [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291]

Davis, Rear Adm. J. W., 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 191]-440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

De Gaulle, Charles, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 91 [Pg. 91 is part of Doc. 52]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53], 107n [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 83], 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218] Ball, meeting with, 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 185], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 202]

Bohlen, meeting with, 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 106]

coup plot against Minh, alleged, 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 202]-469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 202], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 31], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 32], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 76] Chinese People’s Republic’s role in, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 27]

clarification of French policy, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 96]-196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 106]

consultations with Lodge re, proposed, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 91]-184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, assessment of, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 105]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 105], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105]

Vietnamese, attitude toward, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106]

De Leusse, Bruno, 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

De Silva, Peter, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 19], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38]-66 [Pg. 66 is part of Doc. 38], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 328]

Deepe, Beverly, 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476]

Defense, U.S. Department of (see also Joint Chiefs of Staff; McNamara, Robert 5): U.S. policy in Vietnam, summary statement on, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 67]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against: covert operations, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

scenario for, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 171]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 171]

Defense Intelligence Agency, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 42]-72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

Defferre, Gaston, 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]

Denmark, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Denney, George C., Jr., 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 20]-41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20], 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Depuy, Col., 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 188]

Diem. See Ngo Dinh Diem.

Dillon, C. Douglas, 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 210], 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276]

Dingeman, Maj. James W., 25n [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Dirksen, Everett M., 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 107], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 280]

Do Cao Tri, Maj. Gen., 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 20], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338]

Do Lenh Tuan, 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]

Do Mau, Gen., 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 170], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 320]

“Domino effect” in Southeast Asia, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Don. See Tran Van Don, Gen.

Dong. See Pham Van Dong.

D’Orlandi, Giovanni, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 30]

Douglas-Home, Sir Alec, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 69n [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 41]

Duc. See Duong Van Duc, Brig. Gen.

Duke, Angier Biddle, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]

Dulles, John Foster, 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Dunn, John M., 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Duong Van Duc, Brig. Gen., 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 352], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 360], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 360]

Duong Van Minh, Lt. Gen. (see also Minh government), 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 8], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 337], 800 [Pg. 800 is part of Doc. 365] arrest of, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

civilian government of Vietnam, 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366], 817 [Pg. 817 is part of Doc. 372], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]-819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 373], 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 377], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]-833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 379], 834 [Pg. 834 includes portions of Doc. 379 and Doc. 380]-835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 380], 837 [Pg. 837 is part of Doc. 381]-838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385]-843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 386], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

counterinsurgency operations, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 75]

coup against Diem, 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]

economic situation in Vietnam, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 10]

field trips, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 229]

generals’ arrest and trial, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 75], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Khanh, assessment of, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75]

Khanh coup, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 75]-137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75]

Khanh government, 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 341] assessment of, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Buddhist opposition, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 123]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 348], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 352], 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]

coup led by Minh, possible, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

popular attitude toward, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 123]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 123]

reorganization program, 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 328]

role in, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 123]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 123], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 338], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 341], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385]

Khanh’s campaign against, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 330]-711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 330], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

military, return to, 889 [Pg. 889 is part of Doc. 404]-890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]

money appropriated by, 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125]

Ngo Dinh Can’s death sentence, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 126]

political ambitions, 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Stromberg’s interview with, 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 75]

Taylor’s assessment of, 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

U.S. dissociation from, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14]-31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14]

Duzer, Roger, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Economic situation in Vietnam; taxation, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 10], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 51]

U.S. Mission’s assessment of, 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 306]

Eggeman, Capt., 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 163]

Ehrlich, T., 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]-914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]

Eisenhower, Dwight D., 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 81]

Ellsberg, Daniel, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290]

Felt, Adm. Harry D., 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 101], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 101], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127] Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 188], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16]

war footing for Vietnam, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 142]-296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Fishel, Wesley R., 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33]

Fitzgerald, Desmond, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100]

Flooding in Vietnam, 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 410]-902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413]-909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

Flott, Frederick W., 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 186]

Ford, Harold, 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 403]

Forrestal, Michael V., 16n [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 42n [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33]-60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37]-65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 89n [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]-94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 132n [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 73], 176n [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]-214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 128], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 450n [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 562n [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 603n [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 706n [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326], 709n [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 329], 721n [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 782n [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 357], 793n [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 361], 795n [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 362], 895n [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 407], 909n [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450] AID director for Vietnam, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100]

ambassador to Saigon, selection of, 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100]

civilian government of Vietnam, 815n [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 840n [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384] “Young Turks” coup attempt, 1025n [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 456], 1028n [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 1035n [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 463]

counterinsurgency operations: conventional tactics issue, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 99]-198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99]

covert checking of reporting on, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

French-RVN relations, 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 112]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 614n [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 279] Maddox, attack on (Aug. 2), 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 266]-600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 602n [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

retaliations for attacks, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 266]

U.S. rules of reconnaissance and engagement, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 266]-599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 266]

Vietnamese (DRV) attacks as defensive actions, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 266]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Khanh coup, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]-43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Khanh government, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 178] Buddhist opposition, 700n [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323] instability of, 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]

personnel for, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37]

reorganization program, 670n [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312]

Khanh’s political skills, 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]-832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 574n [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248] guidelines for, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104]-216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

intelligence operations, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 130]

limited air and ground operations, 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

Lodge, assessment of, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 178]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 178]

MACV command change, 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May, 1964), 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

political situation in Vietnam, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

Rusk mission (April 1964), 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 112]

Special Assistant for Vietnam post, 543n [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 230]

strategic hamlet program, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 45]

Sullivan Committee, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 46]

Taylor-Khanh relationship, 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 367]

third country assistance for Vietnam, 527n [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]-388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 178], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: force increase to 22,000, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

naval presence, 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

overflights of RVN territory, 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

U.S. Mission in Vietnam: Chief of Staff for, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100]

Deputy Chief of Mission, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

management problem, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]

rural Operations minister, proposed, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 45]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: “domino effect” issue, 484n [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

funds and personnel for, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 178]

manager in Washington for, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against: harbors, airstrikes against, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 266]

political moves in support of military actions, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]-213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 117]

psychological benefits, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]

U.S. presidential politics and, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 89]-175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 254]

Vietnamese (RVN) pressure on U.S. for, 558n [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 978n [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

Vietnam visit, report on, 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 178]

war footing for Vietnam, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138]-290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Fraleigh, Albert S., 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 208]

France (see also French policy under Neutral solution for Vietnam), 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301] China, People’s Republic, relations with, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 202], 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 227]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 294]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 202]-469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 202], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 237]-557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

Laos, policy toward, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313]

negotiations policy for Vietnam, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124]

operations against RVN, alleged, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 32], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia and, 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 433]

SEATO and, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115]

Southeast Asia policy, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64] Rusk-Alphand consultations re, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 227], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

U.S.-Communist mutual withdrawal, proposed, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 69]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, position on, 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 418]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115], 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Ball-De Gaulle meeting re, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 193], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 196]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 202]

Vietnam (RVN), relations with, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 24]-47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 94], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 112], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 119]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]

Fulbright, J. William, 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 280], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Furness, George A., Jr., 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Gard, Richard A., 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 448], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 448], 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 448]

Gaud, William, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 204]

Gaulle, Charles de. See De Gaulle, Charles.

Geneva Accords, 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 443]-992 [Pg. 992 is part of Doc. 443]

Germany, Federal Republic of, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 418]

Gillet, Robert, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113]

Gilpatric, Roswell L., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 99n [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 204]

Giscard d’Estaing, Valery, 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]

Go, Gen., 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338]

Goldwater, Barry, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 178], 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 182], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 242], 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

Goodpaster, Lt. Gen. Andrew S., 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 838n [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Gore, Sir David Ormsby, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

Green, Marshall, 42n [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28], 53n [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35]-62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35], 89n [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 108n [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 592n [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260] Gulf of Tonkin events, 602n [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 621n [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291]

Khanh coup, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Greene, Lt. Gen. Wallace M., Jr., 149n [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 243n [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 117], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Gromyko, Andrei, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 8]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8], 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 443]-993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Gulf of Tonkin events: congressional leaders, briefings for, 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280]-621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

evidence for U.S. version of events, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290], 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Maddox, attack on (Aug. 2), 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256] administration meetings re, 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268]-602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Johnson informed of, 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]

U.S. official version, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260]

U.S. protest to DRV, 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258]-591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 266]-600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Maddox and C. Turner Joy, attack on (Aug. 4), 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278] confusion about course of events, 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 276]

initial reports of, 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]-605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Morton and Edwards, possible attack on (Sept. 18), 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 356]

policy consequences for U.S., 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 296]-642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

retaliations for attacks, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 320]-695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320] administration consultations with

congressional leaders, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280]-621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

authorization for, 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Forrestal’s recommendations, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 266]

international reaction, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 294]-636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

reports on, 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291]

restrikes issue, 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290]

Sharp’s recommendations, 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 284]-625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

target selection, 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]-610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 278]

Taylor’s recommendations, 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 296]-641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 296], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 309]

Soviet reaction, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 294], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 295], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302]

U.N. actions re, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280]-617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285] Security Council meeting, 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 294]-636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

U.S. strategy, 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

U.S.-DRV communications re, 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 304]

U.S. notification of other countries, 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

U.S. patrols, resumption of (Aug. 2), 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259], 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

U.S. public statements on, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 278], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290]

U.S. rules of reconnaissance and engagement, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 266]-599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 266], 601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 268]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 279], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287]-628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

U.S. satisfaction with outcomes, 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 307]

Vietnamese (DRV) intentions in attacking U.S. ships, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 266], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290], 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 296]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 296]

Gulf of Tonkin resolution: administration discussions re, 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290]-632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290] congressional leaders, consultations with, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280]-618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

draft resolution, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 278]-613 [Pg. 613 is part of Doc. 278]

hearings on, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Johnson’s request for, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

passage of, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 304]

signing of, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 308]

Ha Thuc Ky, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]

Halleck, Charles A., 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Hamlets of New Rural Life. See Strategic hamlet program.

Hanes, Art, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

Harkins, Gen. Paul D., 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 134n [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 108], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120] communist insurgency: area controlled by, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 58]

Vietnam (DRV), relation to, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120]

weaponry for, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 58]

counterinsurgency operations: air support, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]

CIA assessment of, 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58]-102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]

Khanh, assessment of, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Khanh coup, 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 19], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Khanh government: counterinsurgency policy, 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

coups against, possible, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

transition period, U.S. recommendations for, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]

Lodge, relationship with, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 144]-299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

political situation in Vietnam, 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 58]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 58]

replacement as MACV commander, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 107]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: effectiveness, U.S. advisers to report on, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 149]

intelligence organization, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

manpower situation, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 149]

U.S. military advisers, lengths of tours for, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 149]

war footing for Vietnam, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 78]

Harriman, W. Averell,, 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 42n [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28], 53n [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 47], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56], 176n [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90], 385n [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 184], 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450] counterinsurgency operations, 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 602n [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into: guidelines for, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104]

intelligence operations, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

retaliatory air strikes, 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 30n [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 44], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]-979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]

war footing for Vietnam, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]

Helms, Richard, 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]-86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]

Hickenlooper, Bourke B., 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280]-618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280]

High National Council, 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366], 816 [Pg. 816 is part of Doc. 372]-817 [Pg. 817 is part of Doc. 372], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]-819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 373], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 375]-823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 375], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 380], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 389], 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405] Khanh-Minh meeting, 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

Taylor’s criticism of, 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

Taylor’s meetings with, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]-827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 838n [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

Hilsman, Roger, Jr., 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 47], 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52] counterinsurgency operations: An Long offensive, proposed, 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

guerrilla tactics, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 90]-181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 90]

village security, 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 90]-181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 90]

parting memoranda, 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]-182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

removal from State position, 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

strategic hamlet program, 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 90]

Thailand, 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 90]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: Asians’ doubts about U.S. intentions, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90]-179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 90]

official visits to Vietnam, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 27n [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 29n [Pg. 29 is part of Doc. 14], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 44], 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 90]

Ho Chi Minh, 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 241n [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 116], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134], 353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 168], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 232], 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 309], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427] Thant’s assessment of, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]

Ho Van Nhut, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

Hoa Hao party, 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28], 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 448]

Hoan. See Nguyen Ton Hoan.

Hoang Co Thuy, 1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 448]

Hoang Van Lac, Col., 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 170]

Holyoake, Keith J., 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 437]

Hon, Gen., 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 188]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 173] agenda for, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 184]-400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

first session, 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

preparations for, 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

second session, 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

summaries of, 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 193]-446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

third session, 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

Hop Tac operation. See Saigon-area military initiative:

Huan, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136]

Hughes, Thomas L., 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 592n [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291], 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 296], 698n [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 782n [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 357]

Humphrey, Hubert H., 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 525n [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 914n [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432] Quat, meeting with, 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 208]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, memorandum on, 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Huong. See Tran Van Huong.

Huong-Suu government. See Civilian government of Vietnam.

Huynh Van Cao, Brig. Gen., 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]

Imhof, Johannes V., 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

India, 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 433]

Indonesia, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 209]

Intelligentsia of Vietnam, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 114], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187]-415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]

International conference on Laos, proposed, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 214]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 305]-656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 313]-679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

International conference on Vietnam, proposed: country positions, 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]-574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

French proposal for, 468 [Pg. 468 is part of Doc. 202]-469 [Pg. 469 is part of Doc. 202], 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 237]-557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

U.S. preconditions for, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313]

International Control Commission (ICC) (see also Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts), 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131], 355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 168], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 230], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231] Gulf of Tonkin events and, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 266]-600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Iran, 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418]

Italy, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Japan, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 209], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418]

Jenkins, Walter, 615n [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280]

Jensen, Ben F., 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156]

Johnson, Lady Bird, 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Johnson, Lyndon B., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 119n [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 67], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167], 385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 576n [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 249], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 335], 787n [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 359] Alliance for Progress, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

ambassador to Saigon, selection of, 496 [Pg. 496 includes portions of Doc. 211 and Doc. 212] McG. Bundy’s recommendations, 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

Taylor-Johnson team, appointment of, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 225]

anti-American sentiment in Vietnam, 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 366]

Ball-De Gaulle meeting, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 196]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

W. Bundy’s appointment to Far Eastern Affairs post, 106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

Cambodia, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 85]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85]

China, People’s Republic of, U.S. contacts with, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]

CIA station chief, appointment of, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

civilian government of Vietnam, 935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421] installation of, 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 389]

U.S. efforts to strengthen, 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]-966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 432], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 432], 995n [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

counterinsurgency operations: Chinese Nationalist troops for, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85]

meeting with Taylor re, 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 432]-967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 432]

psywar-civic action program in provinces, 997n [Pg. 997 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]

Gulf of Tonkin events: congressional leaders, briefings for, 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 280], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Maddox, attack on (Aug. 2), 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Maddox and C. Turner Joy, attack on (Aug. 4), 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276]

Morton and Edwards, possible attack on (Sept. 18), 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 356]

public statements on, 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286], 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

retaliations for attacks, 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 276], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 278]

Soviet reaction, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302]

U.S. notification of other countries re, 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]-623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

U.S. patrols, resumption of (Aug. 2), 597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283]

U.S. satisfaction with outcomes, 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 307]

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution: congressional leaders, consultations with, 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280]

hearings on, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

request for, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

signing of, 664 [Pg. 664 is part of Doc. 308]

Hilsman’s parting memoranda, 175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181]-394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Humphrey-Quat meeting, 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 208]

Khanh, attitude toward, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 70]

Khanh coup, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Khanh government: counterinsurgency policy, 48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 25]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 349]

instability of, 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Khrushchev, exchange of letters with, 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 295], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into: air strikes, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

intelligence operations, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 130], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

planning and training for, 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

U.S. authorization of, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 85]

Lodge, relations with, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 73]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

McNamara-Taylor mission (March 1964), 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79] McNamara’s report, 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86], 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

preparations for, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 70]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

National Security Action Memorandum 314: administration review of, 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 343], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 343], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

courses of action report, 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

neutral solution for Vietnam: De Gaulle’s clarification of French policy, 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 96]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 96], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 97], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

French policy, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 60], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 73]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 140n [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 76], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

Lippmann’s position, 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

U.S. policy, 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 31], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 96]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 96]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 417], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

political situation in Vietnam, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia, 969n [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Quat, meeting with, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 195]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces, 93n [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Rusk-Khanh meeting, 405n [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 186]

Rusk mission (April 1964), 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110], 231 [Pg. 231 includes portions of Doc. 110 and Doc. 111], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 116]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

Southeast Asia, U.S.-U.K. consultations re, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 41]

Sullivan Committee, appointment of, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 46]

Taylor’s ambassadorial instructions, 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 228], 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]-978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

Taylor’s conflict with generals, 1037n [Pg. 1037 is part of Doc. 465]

Taylor’s visits to Washington: Sept. 1964, 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Nov.-Dec. 1964, 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]-969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

Television appearance re Vietnam, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 81]-150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82]

Thant, meeting with, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

third country assistance for Vietnam: Lodge’s European trip to promote, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

meeting with Taylor re, 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432]

progress reports on, 839 [Pg. 839 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

U.K. contribution, 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 441]

Vietnamese (RNV) efforts re, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 195]

U.S.-Communist mutual withdrawal, proposed, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 69]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam: construction projects, 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

funding increases, 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 172]

U.S. information programs and policies in U.S., 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 177] communications czar, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 203]

psychological warfare campaign, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 122], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 129], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]

rural opinion, studies re, 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: force increase to 22,000, 547n [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 233]

ground troops, 1058 [Pg. 1058 is part of Doc. 477]-1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 477]

legal basis for sending forces to Vietnam, 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 226]

U.S. Mission in Vietnam, Chief of Staff for, 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: administration consultations with congressional leaders, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 107], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 390 390

McG. Bundy’s courses of action report, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]

funds and personnel for, 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 129], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343], 1058 [Pg. 1058 is part of Doc. 477]

Mansfield’s policy suggestions, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]-1010 [Pg. 1010 is part of Doc. 449]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91] air strikes, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 157]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 157]

application of power issue, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 200]

Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

contingency planning, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93]

covert operations, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 172]

doubts about, 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

French position, 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 196]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

naval operations, 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 356], 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85], 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]. 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]-1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 477]

scenearios for, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

U.S. consultations with allies, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam and, 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]-1058 [Pg. 1058 is part of Doc. 477]

U.S. protection of RVN against reprisal, 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts: instructions for intermediary, 281n [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134]

Lodge’s recommendations, 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 157]

Pearson contacted about, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

war footing for Vietnam, 287n [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

Johnson, Robert, 75n [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 44], 673n [Pg. 673 is part of Doc. 313]

Johnson, U. Alexis, 15n [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 47], 401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 210], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 249], 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 249], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 646n [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 669n [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 310], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 333], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 874n [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 394], 945 [Pg. 945 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 425], 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 442], 1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470] civilian government of Vietnam: formation of, 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 375]-825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 828 [Pg. 828 is part of Doc. 377], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476]-1056 [Pg. 1056 is part of Doc. 476], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 478]-1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

communist insurgency, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 210]

deputy ambassador, appointment as, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 225]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 225]

Khanh government, coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 348], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 350]-769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 352]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206]

reports from Vietnam, quality of, 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Taylor’s conflict with Generals, 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 467], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476]-1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476]

U.S. Mission in Vietnam, assessment of, 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 422]-938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 44]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 978n [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) (see also Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D.; Wheeler, Gen. Earle G.): Cambodia, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 65]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 65], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82]

counterinsurgency operations: Americanization of, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17]

An Long offensive, proposed, 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

recommendations for actions, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]-853 [Pg. 853 is part of Doc. 388], 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 401]

Gulf of Tonkin events: Maddox and C. Turner Joy, attack on (Aug. 4), 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 276]

Morton and Edwards, possible attack on (Sept. 18), 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356]

retaliations for attacks, 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 276]-610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into: air strikes, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 252]-585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 254], 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

ground operations, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 252]-585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 254], 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

planning and training for, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 224]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 225]

position on, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 65]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 65]

McNamara report (March 1964), 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]-150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82]

National Security Action Memorandum 314, 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 343]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam: “Continue present policies” option, 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 420], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 420]

“Courses of Action” paper, 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]-935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

“Fast, unyielding pressure” option, 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 420], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 420]-935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

“Progressive pressure and talk” option, 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 420], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 420]

U.S. naval presence in Vietnam, 283n [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 36], 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 70], 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]-150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82] accelerated program of actions, 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 331]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

air strikes, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 252]-585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 254], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 343]

Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]-876 [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]

contingency planning, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57]-99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 66]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 66], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 101]

covert operations, 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

destruction of DRV will and capabilities, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 191]-440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 331]

military options, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 66], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 66]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 66], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

objectives and courses of action, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

political moves in support of military actions, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103]

recommendations for actions, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]-850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 388], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 388]-857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 388], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]-884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 401]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 1049n [Pg. 1049 is part of Doc. 472]

Soviet response, 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 66]

target selection, 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 66]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 66], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 191], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 331]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 66]-113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 66], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 66]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 66], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 101], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]-906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

war game on Vietnam, 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99]

Jorden, William, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120]

Kennedy, John F., 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8], 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 91], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 228]

Kennedy, Robert F., 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 41], 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 204], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 210]

Kent, Sherman, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

Khanh. See Nguyen Khanh, Maj. Gen.

Khanh coup, 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84] accounts of, 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 20]-41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20], 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]-44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23]

events leading to, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 19], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22]

Lodge’s assessment of, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 30]-55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30]

Minh’s account of, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 75]-137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces, impact on, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 75]

U.S. response, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 44 [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23]-45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Khanh government: administrative problems, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187]

alliance with Republic of China and Republic of Korea, proposed, 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

alternatives to Khanh, U.S. consideration of, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]-432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189], 706 [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326], 744 [Pg. 744 is part of Doc. 341]-745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 341]

ambassadors, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 229]

Buddhist opposition, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 123], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 359] anti-Americanism of, 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 368]

communist influence, 792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 360]

coup by, possible, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 341]

demands of, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

demonstrations, 698n [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323]

Khanh’s relations with, 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 322], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 325], 712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330]

Lodge’s assessment of, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

moderation of, 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]-831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378]

Ngo Dinh Can issue, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125]-265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

Taylor’s advice for Khanh, 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324]

Taylor’s assessment of, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 330]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330]

Cambodia, negotiations with, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86]

counterinsurgency policy, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 24], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 25]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347]-772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353] punishment of coup leaders, 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 354]

Taylor’s report on, 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 360]

coups against, possible, 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 68], 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84], 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 84], 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 84], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 359]-789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 368] Buddhist coup, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 341]

colonels as leaders, 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 341]

generals as leaders, 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Minh as leader, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

U.S. contingency planning, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

U.S. protection against, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 68], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 80]

Dai Viet threat to, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 333], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 333], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 336]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336]

Diemist leanings, alleged, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75]

Forrestal’s assessment of, 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 178]

future prospects, Taylor’s assessment of, 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 339]-734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 339]

generals’ pledge of support, 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 337], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

information programs, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 231]

instability of, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84], 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84], 396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]-397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 242], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]-746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 359]-789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 801n [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 365], 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 368]

intellectuals, policy toward, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 114]

Khanh’s absence from Saigon, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 333]-722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 334], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]-729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

land for veterans program, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213]

McCone’s assessment of, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 68], 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84]

military-civilian friction, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 114]

Minh’s assessment of, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Minh’s role in, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 123], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 338], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 341], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385]

ministers’ roles, 391n [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180]

National Front Committee, 718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 332], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 333], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 338], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338]

neutralist sympathizers in, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

personnel for, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 24], 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68]

politics, preoccupation with, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 180]

popular attitude toward, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68], 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 123]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 123], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]-545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 231], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 306]

press policy, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 114]

Prime Minister selection, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]

provincial administration, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 84], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 119], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 368]

public relations efforts, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210]

religious issues, committee for, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338]

reorganization program, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 213], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213] achievements of, 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 336]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

cabinet structure, 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 320]

constitution, proposal for, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 329], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 330]

failure of, 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]-725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 336]

Khanh’s resignation offer, 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 332]

military and, 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]

presidency for Khanh, proposed, 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]-694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 320], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 328]

proclamation on, 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]-705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 325]

Quat and Oanh, proposed removal of, 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312]

summary of events, 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 330]-713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

U.S. position, 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 170], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 329], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 339]

retention of power, chances of, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]

state of emergency, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

state of war declaration. See War footing for Vietnam.

strengths of, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84]-158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 84]

succession issue, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287]-628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

successor government. See Civilian government of Vietnam.

supporters of, 799 [Pg. 799 is part of Doc. 365]

Taylor’s proposals for dealing with, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 319]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

transition period, U.S. recommendation for, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28]-52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]

triumvirate leadership, 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 338], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 341], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385]

unity concerns, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 186]-407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

U.S. Mission’s assessment of, 657 [Pg. 657 is part of Doc. 306]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 306]

U.S. political adviser for Khanh, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68]

U.S. policy toward, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 70], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364] Cline’s assessment of, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80]-147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 80]

Taylor’s positron, 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]-801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 365]

U.S. recognition of, 44n [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]

Vietnam (DRV), contacts with, 595n [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 368]-810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 368]

Khiem. See Tran Thien Khiem, Lt. Gen.

Khrushchev, Nikita S., 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118] Gulf of Tonkin events, 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 295], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302]

Killen, James S., 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345], 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366]-804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 366], 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 422]

Kim. See Le Van Kim, Brig. Gen.

Kitchen, Jeffrey C., 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Kohler, Foy D., 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 443]

Komer, Robert W., 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99]

Korea, Republic of, 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418]

Koren, Henry L. T., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]-26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28], 53n [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]

Krebs, Max V., 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]

Krulak, Maj. Gen. Victor H., 4n [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4], 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 27n [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 49n [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Kuchel, Thomas H., 615n [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280]

Ky. See Nguyen Cao Ky, Air Vice Marshal.

Labor movement in Vietnam, 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 359], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 448]-1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 448]

Laking, George R., 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 437]

Lam, Gen., 566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Lam, Lt. Col. See Tran Dinh Lam, Lt. Col.

Lam Van Phat, Gen., 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 348], 768 [Pg. 768 is part of Doc. 350], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 360], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 360]

Lan, Col., 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136]

Land reform, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213]

Lansdale, Edward G., 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 208], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 1040 [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 466]

Lao Dong Party, 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 392], 867 [Pg. 867 is part of Doc. 392], 868 [Pg. 868 is part of Doc. 392]

Laos (see also Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into), 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 68] communist infiltration to RVN through, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 64], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 84]-155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 84]

communist victory in Vietnam, consequences of, 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418]

conference on, proposed, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 214]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 305]-656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313], 678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 313]-679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

French policy toward, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313]

Mansfield’s suggestions re, 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 449]

military situation, 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]

Pathet Lao forces, 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 42], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 90], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131]

regional settlement and, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

settlement in, possible, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172]-370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 185]

Thai concerns re, 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156]

U.S. operations against DRV through, 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172]-370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

U.S. policy toward, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 212], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 214]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214], 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into (see also Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy), 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 112] air strikes: effectiveness, evaluations of, 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]-893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 406]

fixed targets, 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 374]-821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 374]

infiltration routes, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 252]-585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 254], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 406]-894 [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 406]

limited operations, 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 342], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 345], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 346]-763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 346], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 361], 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

retaliatory strikes, 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210], 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 214]

supply lines, 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 248], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]

bridgeheads, establishment of, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 318]

communist insurgency, impact on, 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]

ground operations, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 248] JCS positron, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 252]-585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 254], 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

limited operations, 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 342], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 345], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 346]-763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 346], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 361], 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]

planning for, 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 406]

guidelines for, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104]-216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]

intelligence operations, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 130], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131]-277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

JCS position, 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 65]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 65]

Khanh’s positron, 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]

Laotian requests for, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

McCone’s position, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68]

McNamara’s positron, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

options available without congressional resolution, 517 [Pg. 517 is part of Doc. 215]

parachute drops, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 318]

planning and training for, 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 225], 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 248], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 406]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia statements on, 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 433], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 433]

reconnaissance flights, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 214]

Soviet response, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

timetable for, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. ambassadors’ meeting re, 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 374]-821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 374]

U.S. assistance for Laotian aircraft, 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 374]

U.S. authorization for, 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 85], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101]-205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 101]

U.S. firmness, demonstrations of, 510 [Pg. 510 is part of Doc. 214]-511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S.-Laotian consultations re, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. operations against DRV and, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108]

U.S. public position, 763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 346]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119], 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 318], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 318]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

Le Khac Quyen, 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 373], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378], 1021 [Pg. 1021 is part of Doc. 454]

Le Van Hoach, 595n [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263]

Le Van Kim, Brig. Gen., 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 10]-20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 119], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 242], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313] Amnesty (Chieu Hoi) program, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10]-21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10]

arrest and trial of, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 75], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 186], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186]

counterinsurgency operations, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10]

coup against Diem, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]

coup against Khanh, possible, 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

neutralist sympathies, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15], 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 19], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 30], 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 75]-137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14]

Le Van Nghiem, Maj. Gen., 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]

Le Van Tat, Brig. Gen., 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 448]

Le Van Thu, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

LeMay, Gen. Curds E., 149n [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82], 150n [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 117], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356] Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

Lippmann, Walter, 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214]

Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr., 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]-94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56], 134n [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 700 [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332] ambassador to Saigon, recommendations for, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133]-280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 133], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 207]-477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]

anti-communist groups in RVN, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187]

Buddhist-Catholic conflict, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 152], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187]

Cambodia, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83]

CIA station chief, appointment of, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

communist insurgency: popular support for, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187]

victory in Vietnam, possible, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 143]

congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

counterinsurgency operations, 21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 52] Chinese Nationalist troops for, 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

civil advisers for, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151]

deterioration of RVN position, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188]

popular attitude toward, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 165]

Forrestal’s assessment of, 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 178]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 178]

France, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85] operations against RVN, alleged, 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

relations with RVN, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 24]-47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 53n [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]

Harkins, relationship with, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 144]-299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181], 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

intelligentsia of Vietnam, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187]-415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]

Johnson, L. B., relations with, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 73]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Khanh, assessment of, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 187]

Khanh coup, 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19]-39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 19], 40n [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 20], 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 44n [Pg. 44 is part of Doc. 23], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 30]-55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30]

Khanh government: administrative problems, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187]

alternatives to Khanh, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]

ambassadors, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186]

Buddhist opposition, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 123], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

counterinsurgency policy, 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24]-46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 24], 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]

coups against, possible, 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 190] land for veterans program, 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213]

Minh’s role, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 123], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125], 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127]

ministers’ roles, 391n [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180] personnel for, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 24]

popular attitude toward, 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 123]-257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 123]

reorganization program, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 213], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 329], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 330]

transition period, U.S. recommendation for, 52n [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28]

Laos: settlement in, possible, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120]

U.S.-RVN incursions into, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131]

managerial shortcomings, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 178]-389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 178]

McNamara-Taylor mission (March 1964), 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79] McNamara’s report, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Minh government, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

neutral solution for Vietnam: De Gaulle’s clarification of French policy, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 192n [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 96]

French policy, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 59], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 60], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63]

Lodge-De Gaulle consultation re, proposed, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 91]-184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

objections to, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

neutralization of DRV, plan for, 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

Ngo Dinh Can’s death sentence, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 123], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 126]

political situation in Vietnam: Councils of Notables in villages, 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 213]-499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213]

precinct organization, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 10]

presidential ambitions, 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 178]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: communist penetration of, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125]

generals’ trial, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 391n [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180]

pay increase, 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

resignation, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218]-522 [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 218]

Rusk mission (April 1964), 232n [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 116]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

third country assistance for Vietnam, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152] European trip to promote, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

military forces, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 200]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 341n [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 162]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam: “brain trust” advisers, 24n [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11]

control capacity, 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 165]

integration into government structure, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192], 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 201]

Khanh’s request for, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132]

Rusk’s request for suggestions, 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

support for, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177] communications czar, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189]

psychological warfare campaign, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: ground forces, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 136], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141]

naval presence, 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135]-284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 143], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

U.S. Mission in Vietnam: Deputy Chief of Mission, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

lavish lifestyle, 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, funds and personnel for, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 124], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

Vietnam (DRV), military situation in, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 55], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108] air strikes, 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 91], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 148], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 148]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 157]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 157]

application of power issue, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 200]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

carrot-stick approach, 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]

communist insurgency, impact on, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120]

contingency planning, 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]

covert operations, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 120], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 148]

deniability issue, 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 148]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 148]

French position, 470n [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 202]

Khanh’s position, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

naval operations, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

nuclear weapons issue, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120]

political moves in support of military actions, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 102], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 148]

psychological benefits, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 198]

tit-for-tat military actions, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

U.S. protection of RVN against reprisal, 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 157]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]-31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts: instructions for intermediary, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134], 282n [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 348n [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166]

Khanh not informed of, 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141]

recommendations re, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 120]-250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 148], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 148], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 157]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 157], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 158]

Seaborn’s meetings with DRV officials, 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]-526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

war footing for Vietnam, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 78], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79] Khanh’s proposal for, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

Lopez, Salvador P., 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115]

Lucas, Jim, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177]

Luong Trong Tuong, 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 448]

MacArthur, Gen. Douglas, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 136]

Macmillan, Harold, 622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

Maddox, U.S.S. See under Gulf of Tonkin events.

Maechling, Charles, Jr., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Magnuson, Warren G., 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]

Mai Huu Xuan, Maj. Gen., 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313] arrest and trial of, 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 75], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 186], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186]

coup against Diem, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]

coup against Khanh, possible, 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

neutralist sympathies, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 19], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136]

Mai Tho Truyen, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 448], 1002 [Pg. 1002 is part of Doc. 448]

Malaysia, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113], 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 209], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]

Manfull, Melvin L., 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 323 [Pg. 323 is part of Doc. 154], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 317], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 375], 1OOOn

Manning, Robert J., 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 32], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 210], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 210], 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343]

Mansfield, Mike, 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107] Gulf of Tonkin events, 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 280], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]-15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]-1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

Martin, Graham A., 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 374]

Martin, Paul J., 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134], 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 182]

Mau, Gen., 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84]

McAfee, William, 592n [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260]

McCloskey, Robert, 603n [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

McCone, John A., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 65 [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]-121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 155n [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 84], 157n [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84], 166n [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 84], 176n [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 307], 742n [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341], 806n [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368], 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369], 914n [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 1060n [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 478] Cambodia, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156]

China, People’s Republic of, 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

CIA station chief, appointment of, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]

civilian government of Vietnam: U.S. efforts to strengthen, 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 432]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453]

communist insurgency, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 68] major offensive, possible, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210]-490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 210]

congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 210]

counterinsurgency operations: Americanization of, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 68], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 68]

covert checking of reporting on, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]-6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6], 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

deterioration of RVN positron, 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 159], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189]

Taylor-Johnson meeting re, 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 432]

U.S. de facto responsibility for, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 68]

Gulf of Tonkin events: congressional leaders, briefings for, 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280]-616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280]

evidence for U.S. version of events, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

retaliations for attacks, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278]

Vietnamese (DRV) attacks as defensive actions, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 188], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]-432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]

Khanh government: Assessment of, 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68]-122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 68], 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 349]

coupe, U.S. protection against, 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 68]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83] intelligence operations, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

McNamara-Taylor mission (March 1964), 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

National Security Action Memorandum 314, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 343], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 343]-572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 246], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 68]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 938n [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 424], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

political situation in Vietnam, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia, 969n [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces, 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 68]

strategic hamlet program, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68]

Taylor’s ambassadorial instructions, 974n [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Taylor’s visits to Washington, 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

third country assistance for Vietnam, 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam: integration into government structure, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 172]

political adviser for Khanh, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 68]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: “domino effect” issue, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

funds and personnel for, 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

strategic importance of Vietnam, 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against: covert operations, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

infiltration lines, focus on, 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 430]

military options, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172]

position on, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 68]-126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 68]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

war footing for Vietnam, 287n [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]

McCormack, John W., 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280]

McDonald, Adm. David L., 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 89]

McNamara, Robert S. (see also McNamara-Taylor mission headings), 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 36], 65n [Pg. 65 includes portions of Doc. 37 and Doc. 38], 71n [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 42], 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 99n [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 119n [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 67], 134n [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 176n [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90], 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 327n [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 214], 520n [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 576n [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 249], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 721n [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 1060n [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 478] Air Force, RVN, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156]

ambassadorship for, proposed, 473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 204]

Cambodia, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 65], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156]

Civil Guard, Army status for, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 78]

civilian government of Vietnam: formation of, 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453]

communist insurgency, DRV support for, 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 84]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84]

congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 201], 491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 210], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 210]

counterinsurgency operations, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 8], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51] covert checking of reporting on, 7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7]-8 [Pg. 8 includes portions of Doc. 7 and Doc. 8]

critical provinces, focus on, 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188], 461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]-462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 201]

deterioration of RVN position, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 84]-156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 84], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188]

guerrilla tactics, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84]

JCS recommendations for actions, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]

National Pacification Plan, 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 84], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152]

Taylor-Johnson meeting re, 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 432], 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 432]

Vietnamese (RVN) responsibility for, 155 [Pg. 155 is part of Doc. 84]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 651n [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304] congressional leaders, briefings for, 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 280]

Maddox, attack on (Aug. 2), 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Maddox and C. Turner Joy, attack on (Aug. 4), 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 276], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278]

Morton and Edwards, possible attack on (Sept. 18), 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 356], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]

retaliations for attacks, 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]-606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 276], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278], 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 278], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286]

U.S. satisfaction with outcomes, 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 307]

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187], 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 187], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]-428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189] agenda for, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 184]-400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Khanh government: alternatives to Khanh, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

counterinsurgency policy, 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 25]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 349]

coups against, possible, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]

instability of, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84]

strengths of, 157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84]-158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 84]

Laos, possible settlement in, 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172]-370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 65], 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85] air strikes, 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

intelligence operations, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

planning and training for, 527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]-528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 224]

timetable for, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S.-Laotian consultations re, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

Lodge-Harkins relationship, 298n [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 144], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

MACV command change, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100]

media coverage of Vietnam, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107]

National Security Action Memorandum 314, 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345] administration review of, 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 343], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343]

National Service Act for Vietnam, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 84], 191n [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 96]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 938n [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423] Courses of Action paper, 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]

meetings, 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 424], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428], 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 428]

policy options papers, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

progress reports on deliberations, 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 417], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

partitioning of RVN, proposed, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 8]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 8]

political situation in Vietnam, 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia, 969n [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433], 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: force increases, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152]

generals’ trial, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

incompetents, replacement of, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152]

paramilitary forces, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84]

training for, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 154]

Self-Defense Corps, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

strategic hamlet program, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84]

Taylor’s ambassadorial instructions, 974n [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Taylor’s visits to Washington, 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

third country assistance for Vietnam, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 84]-166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 84], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 172], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 172]-374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188]

U.S. information programs and policies in U.S., 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam: communications czar, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

peace offensive, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 201]

radio broadcasts into DRV, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84]-164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: combat exposure for troops, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156]

force increase to 22,000, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 233]

marines to guard installations, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 335]

Saigon area secured with U.S. troops, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 84]

training programs, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156]

U.S. Mission in Vietnam, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: administration consultations with congressional leaders, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 107]-223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 107], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156]

basic posture, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 84]-161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 84]

commitment to Vietnam, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210]

funds and personnel for, 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 124]-262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 129], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 129], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

Mansfield’s policy suggestions, 2n [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 8]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 8]

objectives of, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 84]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17] air strikes, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

contingency planning, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57]-99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 66], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 84], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 201]

covert operations, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 83], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86], 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]

deniability issue, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57]-98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 57]

harbors, mining of, 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

implications of, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 198], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

JCS recommendations for actions, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]

Laotian route, 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172]-370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

military options, 118n [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 66], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 84], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]

military pressures short of combat operations, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 201]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

objectives and courses of action, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 191], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 199]

political objectives, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 84]-160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 84]

reaction times for operations, 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 84], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 881n [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 1049n [Pg. 1049 is part of Doc. 472], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]

surrender terms issue, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 184]

target selection, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 57]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam and, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172]

U.S. public statements on, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 95]

Vietnamese (DRV) air defenses, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57], 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 57], 114n [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 66], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 906n [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 651n [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

war footing for Vietnam, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 287n [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 152] national mobilization proposal, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 84]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84]

McNamara-Taylor mission (March 1964), 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56] Johnson’s message for Lodge, 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 73]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

Khanh, meeting with, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

McNamara’s instructions to members, 133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]-134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]

McNamara’s report, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 147 [Pg. 147 is part of Doc. 80] administration discussions of, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83]-152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 83], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86]-172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

JCS reaction, 149 [Pg. 149 includes portions of Doc. 81 and Doc. 82]-150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82]

Lodge’s assessment of, 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]-169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85]

text of, 153 [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 84]-167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85]

members of, 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

preparations for, 129 [Pg. 129 is part of Doc. 70]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

return to U.S., 145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140] country team, meeting with, 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151]

Khanh, meeting with, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 152]-321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152]

Lodge, meeting with, 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]

MACV, meeting with, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

McNamara’s report, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156]

Minh, meeting with, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]-313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

preparations for, 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 145]

purpose of, 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]

McNaughton, John T., 190n [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 95], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 101], 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 436n [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 562n [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 651n [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 700n [Pg. 700 is part of Doc. 323], 793n [Pg. 793 is part of Doc. 361], 830n [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450] civilian government of Vietnam, “Young Turks” coup attempt against, 1023n [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 1025n [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 456], 1035n [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 463]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356]

Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

Honolulu meetings (rune 1964), 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 574n [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]

MACV command change, 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100]

McNamara-Taylor mission (March 1964), 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

National Security Action Memorandum 314, 747n [Pg. 747 is part of Doc. 342]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371], 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 403], 916n [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

Taylor’s visits to Washington, 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 117], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 184]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 978n [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

Media coverage of Vietnam, 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 51], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 197], 552n [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 306] leaks to press, 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 249]-577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 249]

unfavorable developments, bias toward, 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 193]-444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 193]

Vietnamese (RVN) media, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 58], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 152]

Meeker, Leonard C., 532n [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 226]

Mendenhall, Joseph A., 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 36n [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 37n [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 42n [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 43n [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23], 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28], 53n [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 61n [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 63n [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 36], 190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 95]

Menzies, Robert G., 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 437]

Military Assistance Command, U.S. (MACV) (see also Harkins, Gen. Paul D.; U.S. military involvement in Vietnam; Westmoreland, Gen. William C.): change of commend, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100]-200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100], 213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 107]

commander’s responsibilities, 280 [Pg. 280 is part of Doc. 133]

communist infiltration report by, 864 [Pg. 864 is part of Doc. 392]-872 [Pg. 872 is part of Doc. 392]

coordination with U.S. agencies, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]

criticisms of, 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-90 [Pg. 90 is part of Doc. 52]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), meeting with, 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149]-312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

Military cordon for Southeast Asia, proposed, 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 208]

Minh. See Duong Van Minh, Lt. Gen.

Minh government, 1 [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1]-2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2] Minh’s assessment of, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]-136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 75]

neutralist coup against, possible, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 30]

overthrow of. See Khanh coup.

political programs, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10]-22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]

Montagnards, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 45] civilian government of Vietnam and, 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 448]

guerrilla operations, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214]

revolt against RVN authority, 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 358], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 366], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 368]-809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 368]

Montgomery, James M., 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Moore, Maj. Gen. Joseph H., 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 451]

Morgan, Thomas E., 615n [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280]

Morozov, P. D., 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 294]

Morse, Wayne, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 107]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214]

Moyers, William, 47n [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]

Murrow, Edward R., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177]

Mustin, Vice Adm. Lloyd M., 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]

Nam Dong, fighting at, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 234]

National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam. See Communist insurgency.

National Police, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84]

National Security Action Memoranda: 280, Feb. 14, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 46]

284, Feb. 11, 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

288, Mar. 17, 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]-173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

308, June 22, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

314, Sept. 10: administration review of, 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

courses of action report, 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]-749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

politico-military coordination on, 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 353]

text of, 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]-760 [Pg. 760 is part of Doc. 345]

National Security Council (NSC) (see also NSC Working Group on Vietnam): Executive Committee meeting (May 24), 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172]-374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

meetings: 523d, Mar. 5, 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72]

524th, Mar. 17, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86]-172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87]

526th, Apr. 3, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 107]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107]

528th, Apr. 22, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124]-264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125]

529th, Apr. 29, 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131]-277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

532d, May 15, 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156]

537th, Aug. 4, 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276]

538th, Aug. 4, 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278]-612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 278]

541st, Aug. 25, 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]

Navy, RVN, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

Ne Win, Gen., 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 209], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]

Nes, David G., 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 45], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 298n [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 144], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 158] counterinsurgency operations, 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52]-92 [Pg. 92 includes portions of Doc. 52 and Doc. 53]

Khanh government, possible coups against, 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 170]

Netherlands, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Neutral solution for Vietnam: China, People’s Republic’s role in, 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]-50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 27], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113]-235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 113]

communists’ interpretation of, 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 94]

Defense Department positron, 120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

doubts about U.S. intentions and, 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 90]

French policy, 30n [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14] De Gaulle’s clarification of, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 96]-196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 216 [Pg. 216 includes portions of Doc. 104 and Doc. 105]-219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106]-221 [Pg. 221 is part of Doc. 106]

Lodge-De Gaulle consultation re, proposed, 183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 91]-184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

Rusk-Alphand consultation re, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 227], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 227]

Rusk-Couve consultation re, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113]

U.S. request for clarification, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 59], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 60], 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 132 [Pg. 132 is part of Doc. 73]-133 [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 140 [Pg. 140 is part of Doc. 76]-141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77]

Lippmann’s position, 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]

Lodge’s objections to, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]-189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]

Lodge’s plan for neutralization of DRV, 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

McCone’s positron, 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 68]

McNamara’s positron, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 84]

Minh government and, 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 30]

negative consequences for U.S., 14 [Pg. 14 is part of Doc. 8], 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

Soviet positron, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 8]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8]

Thant’s positron, 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

U.S. policy, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 56 [Pg. 56 is part of Doc. 31], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 32], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 64], 191 [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 96]-193 [Pg. 193 is part of Doc. 96], 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 105]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]-33 [Pg. 33 is part of Doc. 15]

Vietnamese (DRV) position, 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Vietnamese (RVN) position, 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59]-103 [Pg. 103 is part of Doc. 59], 745 [Pg. 745 is part of Doc. 341]

New York Times, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214]

New Zealand, 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 433], 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 437]

Ngo Dinh Can, 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 123], 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]-267 [Pg. 267 is part of Doc. 126]

Ngo Dinh Diem, 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 865 [Pg. 865 is part of Doc. 392]

Ngo Gia Hy, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Nguyen Cao Ky, Air Vice Marshal, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 249], 765 [Pg. 765 is part of Doc. 348], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 352], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 360]-791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 360], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476] civilian government of Vietnam: pledge of support for, 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 451]

Commander in Chief, consideration as, 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 455]

Taylor’s conflict with generals, 1048n [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471]

Nguyen Chanh Thi, Gen., 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 352], 791 [Pg. 791 is part of Doc. 360], 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 451], 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 455]

Nguyen Dinh Luyen, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Nguyen Duy Lien, 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]

Nguyen Huu Chau, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320]

Nguyen Huu Co, Gen., 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460]

Nguyen Khanh, Maj. Gen. (see also Khanh coup; Khanh government), 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 55], 102 [Pg. 102 includes portions of Doc. 58 and Doc. 59], 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107] Buddhist-Catholic conflict, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 152]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 152], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 154], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 187], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 229]-541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]

Cambodia, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]

China, People’s Republic of: free world operations against, plan for, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 309]

U.S. contacts with, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 249]

Civil Guard, Army status for, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 78]

civilian government of Vietnam: formation of, 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 338], 817 [Pg. 817 is part of Doc. 372], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]-819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 373], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 375], 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 375], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 376], 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377]-830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 379]-835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 380], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]-838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385], 843 [Pg. 843 includes portions of Doc. 385 and Doc. 386]-845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

military, relations with, 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390]-861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

ministerial appointments, 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390]

pledge of support to, 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 389]

plotting against, 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415], 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 448]

U.S. efforts to strengthen, 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]-984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 442]-989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 442]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 451], 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 453], 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]-1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 1027 [Pg. 1027 includes portions of Doc. 457 and Doc. 458]-1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460], 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]-1032 [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 461], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 462], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 467]-1042 [Pg. 1042 is part of Doc. 467], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 1047 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 470]

Commander in Chief position, 829 [Pg. 829 is part of Doc. 377], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 386], 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 428], 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 447], 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 448]

communist insurgency: Bien Hoa airfield, attack on, 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]-880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 398]

psychological impact of successes, 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 229]

reserve forces, 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186]-408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]

counterinsurgency operations: command and control system, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 187]

communications security, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152]

conventional tactics issue, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 309], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 309]

disbursement of funds problem, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152]

improvements in, 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 425]-947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 425]

National Pacification Plan, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152]

provincial troubleshooting, 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 373]

Saigon-area initiative, 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355]

coup against Diem, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]

field trips, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 229], 594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263]-595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263]

France: operations against RVN, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

relations with RVN, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 119]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]

Gulf of Tonkin events, U.S.-RVN consultations re, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 279], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287]-628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

Harkins’ assessment of, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Health problems, 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125]-263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 333]

Laos: conference on, proposed, 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 305]

U.S.-RVN incursions into, 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186], 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]

Lodge’s assessment of, 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 187]

McNamara-Taylor mission (March 1964), 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 152]-321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152]

media of RVN, 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 152]

military colleges, standing with, 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]-1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460]

Minh, campaign against, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 330]-711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 330], 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Minh’s appropriation of money, 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Minh’s assessment of, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75]

Neutral solution for Vietnam, 192n [Pg. 192 is part of Doc. 96], 194 [Pg. 194 is part of Doc. 97]

Ngo Dinh Can’s death sentence, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125]

political adviser for, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68]

political skills, 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]-832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]

press officer for, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 177]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: command structure, 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 309]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338]

desertions, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 229]

generals’ trial, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 391n [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 186], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186]

incompetents, replacement of, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152]

intelligence organization, 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

morale problems, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 242], 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 425]

period of service issue, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

recruiting for, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]

reorganization proposals, 1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

U.S. schooling for officers, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338]

resignation offers, 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 332], 1022 [Pg. 1022 is part of Doc. 454]-1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]

Rusk, meetings with, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118]-248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 186]-412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

Self-Defense Corps, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

self-perception, 666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 309], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 309], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309]

Taylor, relations with, 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 367]

Taylor’s conflict with generals, 1041n [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 467], 1042 [Pg. 1042 is part of Doc. 467], 1054 [Pg. 1054 is part of Doc. 476]-1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476]

third country assistance for Vietnam, 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152] SEATO countries, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 442]-989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 442]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: force increase to 22,000, 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 249]

ground forces, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 136], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145]-303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 145]

U.S. presidential letter to, 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 334], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 337]-729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 352]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 154] civilian government’s position, 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 425]

covert operations, 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 83], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86]

governmental stability in RVN and, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152]

nuclear weapons issue, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 186]

political moves in support of military actions, 208 [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 102]

psychological benefits, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186]

support for, 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186]

tit-for-tat military actions, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 249]-578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249]

U.S. protection of RVN against reprisal, 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 303], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 303]-651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

Vietnamese (RVN) pressure on U.S. for, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-566 [Pg. 566 includes portions of Doc. 242 and Doc. 243]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN penetration of government, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

war footing for Vietnam, 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186] abandonment of, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

national mobilization proposal, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79]

proposal for, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 152]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152]

Nguyen Luu Vien, Gen., 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 354], 777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 355], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 359], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 379], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 386]-845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 405]-892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415], 945 [Pg. 945 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 425], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 442], 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447], 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 452], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 462], 1041n [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 467], 1046n [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 1047 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 470]

Nguyen Ngoc Bich, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320]

Nguyen Ngoc Tho, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 10], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 20], 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 24]

Nguyen Ton Hoan, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84], 257 [Pg. 257 is part of Doc. 123], 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 170], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 180], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213], 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 325], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 336]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336], 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 338]

Nguyen Van Hinh, Gen., 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320]

Nguyen Van Huyen, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Nguyen Van Luc, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Nguyen Van Thieu, Brig. Gen., 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78], 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 303], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336] civilian government of Vietnam, “Young Turks” coup attempt against, 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 451], 1056 [Pg. 1056 is part of Doc. 476]

Commander in Chief, consideration as, 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 455], 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460]

Khanh government: Buddhist opposition, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 360]

reorganization program, 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 328]

Taylor’s conflict with generals, 1048n [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476]

Nguyen Van Vinh, Lt. Gen., 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Nguyen Van Vy, Gen., 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 186], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186], 435 [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 190]

Nguyen Van Xuan, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320]

Nguyen Xuan Chu, 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 405]

Nguyen Xuan Oanh, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37], 121 [Pg. 121 is part of Doc. 68], 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 101], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154], 391n [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 333], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 354], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 359]-788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 359], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 1054 [Pg. 1054 is part of Doc. 476], 1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476]

Nhut. See Ho Van Nhut.

Nielsen, Sivert A., 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]

Nittis, Monsignor de, 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 165]

Nixon, Richard M., 389 [Pg. 389 is part of Doc. 178]

North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 41], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278], 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 418]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 407] appointment of, 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

basic issues between options, 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]-939 [Pg. 939 is part of Doc. 423], 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 424]-944 [Pg. 944 is part of Doc. 424]

“continue present policies” option, 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 418], 921 [Pg. 921 is part of Doc. 418]-922 [Pg. 922 is part of Doc. 418] issues concerning execution, 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 423]-941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 423]

JCS positron, 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 420], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 420]

“Courses of Action” paper, 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]-929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 418] JCS positioon, 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]-935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

“fast, unyielding pressure” option, 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 418], 923 [Pg. 923 is part of Doc. 418]-925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 418], 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 423], 944 [Pg. 944 is part of Doc. 424] JCS positron, 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 420], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 420]-935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

immediate actions, 928 [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 418]-929 [Pg. 929 is part of Doc. 418], 940 [Pg. 940 is part of Doc. 423], 944 [Pg. 944 is part of Doc. 424], 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431] thirty-day action program, 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 433]-974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

meetings, 910n [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 424]-945 [Pg. 945 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]-960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]-965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

members of, 886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]-887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 403]

negotiations option, omission of, 912 [Pg. 912 includes portions of Doc. 415 and Doc. 416]-914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 417]

policy options: Ball’s paper on, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]-813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

W. Bundy’s paper on, 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia, 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]-974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

progress reports on deliberations, 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]-916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

“progressive pressure and talk” option, 920 [Pg. 920 is part of Doc. 418], 925 [Pg. 925 is part of Doc. 418]-928 [Pg. 928 is part of Doc. 418] discussions on, 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 428]-960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]

issues concerning execution, 941 [Pg. 941 is part of Doc. 423]-942 [Pg. 942 is part of Doc. 423], 944 [Pg. 944 is part of Doc. 424]-945 [Pg. 945 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]

JCS position, 933 [Pg. 933 is part of Doc. 420], 934 [Pg. 934 is part of Doc. 420]

Project Outline, 887 [Pg. 887 is part of Doc. 403]-888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]

Taylor’s meetings with, 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]-960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Taylor’s questions about options, 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]-961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 429]

Nu, U, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]

Nuclear weapons issue, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 174], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 186], 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

Oanh. See Nguyen Xuan Oanh.

O’Brien, Lawrence, 6n [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]

Pakistan, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115]

Partitioning of RVN, proposed, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 8]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 8]

Peace Corps, RVN, 24n [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11]

Peace Corps, U.S., 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 129]

Pearson, Lester B., 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127], 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

Pham Dang Lam, 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 30n [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14], 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 45 [Pg. 45 includes portions of Doc. 23 and Doc. 24], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 328], 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 375]-824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 375], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

Pham Khac Rau, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]-696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]

Pham Khac Suu, 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 375], 936 [Pg. 936 is part of Doc. 421], 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 425], 948n [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426] civilian government of Vietnam: Chief of State post, 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387], 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 389]

formation of, 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 375], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 826 [Pg. 826 is part of Doc. 376], 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 380], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 386], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

installation of, 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 389]-859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 389]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 453], 1021 [Pg. 1021 is part of Doc. 454], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 462]-1034 [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 462]

popular attitude toward, 889 [Pg. 889 is part of Doc. 404]

Pham Ngoc Thao, Col., 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336], 732 [Pg. 732 is part of Doc. 338], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 341]

Pham Thai, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 122], 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 180]

Pham Van Dong, 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 230], 653n [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 304], 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460]

Pham Xuan Chieu, Gen., 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14]

Phan Ba Cam, 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 448]

Phan Huy Quat, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210], 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 229], 775n [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 354], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 359], 841n [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 405] counterinsurgency operations, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 195]

French-RVN relations, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]

Humphrey, meeting with, 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 208]

Johnson, L. B., meeting with, 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]-448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 195]

removal from office, proposed, 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312]

Rusk, meetings with, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 114], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

Rusk-Khanh meetings, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118]

Phan Van Giao, 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320]

Phat. See Lam Van Phat, Gen.

Philippines, 486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 209], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 433]

Philips, Richard I., 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41]

Phillips, Rufus, 477n [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208], 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 1040 [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 466]

Phnoc, Col., 256 [Pg. 256 is part of Doc. 123]

Pinay, Antoine, 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106]

Plei Krong, fighting at, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 234]

Poats, Rutherford M., 22n [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 51n [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28], 337n [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

Political settlement in Vietnam, U.S. consideration of, 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

Political situation in Vietnam (see also Civilian government of Vietnam; Khanh government; Minh government), 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68] civil administrative services, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 101], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 129], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151]

Councils of Notables in villages, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10], 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 213]-499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213]

Peace corps program, 24n [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11]

precinct organization, 6 [Pg. 6 includes portions of Doc. 5 and Doc. 6]-7 [Pg. 7 includes portions of Doc. 6 and Doc. 7], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10]-19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 10]

propaganda efforts, 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 50], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 51], 100 [Pg. 100 is part of Doc. 58]-101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 58]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia: approval of, 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

draft paper, 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

text of, 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]-974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Powell, Herbert B., 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

Proctor, Carolyn J., 173n [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 606n [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 625n [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 645n [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Pye, Lucian W., 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33]

Quyen. See Le Khac Quygen.

Read, Benjamin, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 61], 107n [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]

Reedy, George, 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces (RVNAF) (see also Khanh coup): Air Force, aircraft upgrades for, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 101]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

capabilities of, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 214]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 214]

civilian government, relations with, 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390]-861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391], 1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 448]-1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

command structure, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 187], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 208]-484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 309]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309], 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338], 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 362]-796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363], 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]-814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 371]

communist penetration of, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125]

coup attempt of Sept. 13, 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347]-772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 354], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 360]

coup plots against Khanh, 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 68], 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191], 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 743 [Pg. 743 is part of Doc. 341]

desertions, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 149], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 229], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 306]-661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 306], 808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 368]

effectiveness, U.S. advisers to report on, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 149]-310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 149]

force increases, 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 101], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154]

generals’ arrest and trial, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75]-138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 75], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 186], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186]

housing problem, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]

intelligence organization, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 306], 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-666 [Pg. 666 is part of Doc. 309], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

Khanh’s successor as Commander in Chief, 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 455], 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460]-1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

logistic system, 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 340]

manpower situation, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 149], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 340], 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366]

materiel for, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101]

McCone’s assessment of, 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 68]

morale problems, 122 [Pg. 122 is part of Doc. 68], 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 187], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187], 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 242], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 306]-661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 306], 807 [Pg. 807 is part of Doc. 368]-808 [Pg. 808 is part of Doc. 368], 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 425] Westmoreland’s assessment of, 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 340]

national mobilization proposal, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 84]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 101]

Navy, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

paramilitary forces (see also specific forces), 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84]

pay increases, 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

people, relations with, 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 208]-480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 208], 481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 208]

period of service issue, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

recruiting for, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 187]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]

regional forces, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]

reorganization proposals, 1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

resource management, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 187]

training for, 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154]-325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 154]

unity concerns, 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 186]-407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186]

U.S. advice, rejection of, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

U.S. integration into command structure. See Integration into government structure under U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam.

U.S. schooling for officers, 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338]

“Young Turks” coup attempt. See under Civilian government of Vietnam.

Robinson, June M., 634n [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293]

Rostow, Walt R., 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34] Gulf of Tonkin events: policy consequences for U.S., 641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 296]-642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Vietnamese (DRV) intentions in attacking U.S. ships, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 296]-640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 296]

Vietnamese (DRV) response to U.S. reprisals, 640 [Pg. 640 is part of Doc. 296]-641 [Pg. 641 is part of Doc. 296]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam, 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]-907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 412]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against: contingency planning, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 44]

Cuban situation and, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 61]

implications of, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 357]-785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]-907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 412]

support for, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 43]

tit-for-tat military actions, 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic perception of U.S. intentions, 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic relations and, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 47]-82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Rowan, Carl T., 172 [Pg. 172 includes portions of Doc. 86 and Doc. 87], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450] Gulf of Tonkin events, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 278], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290]

Honolulu meetings June 1964), 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. information programs and policies in U.S., 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam: communications czar, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 197]

coordination of operations, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177]

credibility concerns, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189]

heroism awards, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 197]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 197]

information advisers in military units, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 197], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 197]

media coverage of Vietnam and, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 197]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 197]

press officer for Khanh, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 177]

psychological warfare campaign, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 122]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 122], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 129], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 197]

radios for villages, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 197]

rural opinion, studies re, 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]-545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 231]

song for RVN, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 197]

Vietnam (DRV), broadcasts into, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 177], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 177], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 197]

Vietnamese (RVN) cooperation with, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177]-385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Vietnamese (RVN) leaders, promotion of, 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 197]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 197]

youth programs, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 197]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: checklist of progress, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210]

funds and personnel for, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]

Rowen, Henry, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]

Rusk, Dean (see also Rusk mission), 1n [Pg. 1 is part of Doc. 1], 42n [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71], 167n [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 184n [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92], 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 305n [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180]-392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 180], 393n [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181], 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185], 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217], 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306] Alliance for Progress, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

ambassador to Saigon, selection of, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 207]

Cambodia: communists, dealings with, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]

U.S.-RVN incursions into, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156]

China, People’s Republic of: Conflict with U.S., attitude toward, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120]

U.S. contacts with, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 227], 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 227]

U.S. policy on Vietnam, position on, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 227], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

civilian government of Vietnam: formation of, 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]-818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]-841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

U.S. protection from coup, request for, 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453], 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455]-1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459]-1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460], 1035 [Pg. 1035 is part of Doc. 463], 1038 [Pg. 1038 is part of Doc. 465]-1039 [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 465], 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]-1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471]

communist insurgency, 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy, 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172] early resolution, decision against, 490 [Pg. 490 is part of Doc. 210]-491 [Pg. 491 is part of Doc. 210], 492 [Pg. 492 is part of Doc. 210]

requirements for, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]

counterinsurgency operations: airfield security, 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]

Chinese Nationalist troops for, 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120]

CIA assessment of, 84 [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50]

command and control system, 795 [Pg. 795 is part of Doc. 362]-796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]

covert checking of reporting on, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

deterioration of RVN position, 336 [Pg. 336 is part of Doc. 159], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188]

political orientation, 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 36]

Couve, meeting with, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113]

France: negotiations policy for Vietnam, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124]

Vietnam (RVN), relations with, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 112], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 119]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]

generals’ trial, 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 391 [Pg. 391 is part of Doc. 180]

Geneva Accords, election violation issue, 991 [Pg. 991 is part of Doc. 443]-992 [Pg. 992 is part of Doc. 443]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 639 [Pg. 639 is part of Doc. 296] congressional leaders, briefings for, 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268], 615 [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 280]

evidence for U.S. version of events, 644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Maddox, attack on (Aug. 2), 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 592 [Pg. 592 is part of Doc. 260], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]-603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

Maddox and C. Turner Joy, attack on (Aug. 4), 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276]

Morton and Edwards, possible attack on (Sept. 18), 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356], 779 [Pg. 779 is part of Doc. 356]-780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]

retaliations for attacks, 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278]

U.N. actions re, 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]-630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 294]

U.S.-DRV communications re, 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 304]

U.S. notification of other countries re, 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]-622 [Pg. 622 includes portions of Doc. 281 and Doc. 282]

U.S. rules of reconnaissance and engagement, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 266]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 279]

Gulf of Tonkin resolution, 612 [Pg. 612 is part of Doc. 278] hearings on, 634 [Pg. 634 includes portions of Doc. 292 and Doc. 293], 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

passage of, 653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 304]

Hilsman’s parting memoranda, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90], 179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 90]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188]-428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189], 442 [Pg. 442 is part of Doc. 193]

Humphrey-Quat meeting, 478n [Pg. 478 is part of Doc. 208]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 237]-557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237], 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Khanh, meetings with, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118]-248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 186]-412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

Khanh coup, 43 [Pg. 43 includes portions of Doc. 22 and Doc. 23]

Khanh government: ambassadors, 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186]

counterinsurgency policy, 47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25]-48 [Pg. 48 is part of Doc. 25]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347], 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 349]-767 [Pg. 767 is part of Doc. 349]

coups against, possible, 322 [Pg. 322 includes portions of Doc. 153 and Doc. 154], 435n [Pg. 435 is part of Doc. 190]

Khanh’s absence from Saigon, 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]-722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 334]

Minh’s role, 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]

neutralist sympathizers in, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]-563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]

politics, preoccupation with, 392 [Pg. 392 is part of Doc. 180]

provincial administration, 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 119]

reorganization program, 498 [Pg. 498 is part of Doc. 213], 499n [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213], 670 [Pg. 670 includes portions of Doc. 311 and Doc. 312], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 329]

transition period, U.S. recommendation for, 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28]-52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]

unity concerns, 405 [Pg. 405 is part of Doc. 186]-406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 186]

U.S. policy toward, 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]

Laos: communist infiltration, 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 64]

regional settlement and, 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

settlement in, possible, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120], 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172]

U.S. policy toward, 497 [Pg. 497 is part of Doc. 212]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 151 [Pg. 151 is part of Doc. 83], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119] air strikes, 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206]-475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248]-575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 248]

ground operations, 575 [Pg. 575 is part of Doc. 248]

U.S.-Laotian consultations re, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

Lodge-Harkins relationship, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 144]-299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]

Lodge’s resignation, 521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218], 522n [Pg. 522 is part of Doc. 218]

Minh’s appropriation of money, 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

National Security Action Memorandum 314, 758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345] administration review of, 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 343], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

neutral solution for Vietnam: China, People’s Republic’s role in, 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113]-235 [Pg. 235 is part of Doc. 113]

De Gaulle’s clarification of French policy, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 189n [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 191n [Pg. 191 is part of Doc. 96], 195 [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98]-196 [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 220 [Pg. 220 is part of Doc. 106]

French policy, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113]-236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227]-534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 227], 536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 227]

Soviet position, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 8]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8]

U.S. policy, 32 [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15], 57 [Pg. 57 is part of Doc. 32]-58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 32], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 64]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 407] basic issues between options, 938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

meetings, 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 424], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

negotiations option, omission of, 915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 417]

policy option papers, 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]

progress reports on deliberations, 914 [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]-915 [Pg. 915 is part of Doc. 417], 916 [Pg. 916 includes portions of Doc. 417 and Doc. 418]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia, 969n [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

Quat, meetings with, 237 [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]-238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 114], 447n [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

SEATO, 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113] Ministerial Council meeting, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115]

Southeast Asia: French policy toward, 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 227], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

U.S.-U.K. consultations re, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 41]

Sullivan Committee. 80n [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 46]

Taylor’s ambassadorial instructions, 974n [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

Taylor’s conflict with generals, 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]-1039 [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 465], 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]-1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 469], 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471]

Taylor’s Washington visits: Sept. 1964, 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

Nov.-Dec. 1964, 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]-910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

third country assistance for Vietnam: civil positions, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188]

NATO countries, 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

SEATO countries, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119]

Taylor-Johnson meeting re, 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432]

U.K. contribution, 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 441]-986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 441]

U.S. promotion of, 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156]

U.S.-Communist mutual withdrawal, proposed, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 69]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam: funding increases, 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

health programs, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124]

“progress after pacification” demonstration projects, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

rural development programs, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 162]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam: “brain trust” advisers, 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11]

integration into government structure, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

request for suggestions, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 164]-346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

U.S. information programs and policies in U.S., 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam: communications czar, 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 203]-472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

optimistic interpretation of events, 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 172]

psychological warfare campaign, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124]

Vietnam (DRV), broadcasts into, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: force increase to 22,000, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 233], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 245]

French position, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 227]

ground forces, 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

legal basis for sending forces to Vietnam, 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 226]

U.S. Mission in Vietnam: Deputy Chief of Mission, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

U. A. Johnson’s assessment of, 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 422]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: checklist of progress, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210]

commitment to Vietnam, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

funds and personnel for, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 124], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 273 [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 129], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

Mansfield’s policy suggestions, 2n [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415]

objectives of, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8]-11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 8]

sphere of influence issue, 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 237]

strategic importance of Vietnam, 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

U.S.-Soviet consultation re, 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 443]-993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 16n [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 27n [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 34n [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 35 [Pg. 35 is part of Doc. 17], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 61], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118]

Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 876 [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]-879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]-882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]

contingency planning, 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 36], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 44]

covert operations, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 307]

deniability issue, 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

French position, 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

governmental stability in RVN and, 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 407]-896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]

implications of, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 357], 906n [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

military options, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172]

naval operations, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120], 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]

nuclear weapons issue, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 186]

political moves in support of military actions, 208n [Pg. 208 is part of Doc. 102]

psychological benefits, 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 198]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 875n [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 876 [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396]-879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]-882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 469]-1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 1052 [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475]-1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam and, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172]

U.S. presidential politics and, 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 245], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

U.S.-U.K. consultations re, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 64]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic perception of U.S. intentions, 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic relations and, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 47]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172]

Vietnamese (RVN) pressure on U.S. re, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]-571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]

warnings of attacks, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 186]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 8] Canadian intermediary, decision on, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124]

Gulf of Tonkin events, messages re, 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 304]

instructions for intermediary, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]

Khanh not informed of, 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Lodge’s recommendations, 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 158]

Thant’s efforts re, 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

Vietnam visit in late 1964, proposed, 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]-812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370]

war footing for Vietnam, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Rusk mission (April 1964): Khanh, meeting with, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118]-248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Lodge, meeting with, 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 116]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121]

preparations for, 230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]-232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 112]

report on, 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124]-259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124]

Russell, Richard, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 620 [Pg. 620 is part of Doc. 280], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Saigon: communist activity in, 412 [Pg. 412 includes portions of Doc. 186 and Doc. 187]

communist air attack, possible, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

development program for, 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 264]

Saigon-area military initiative (Hop Tac), 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 306], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 340], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355]-777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 355], 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 371], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 389]

Saigon evacuation plan, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 140], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 142]

Salans, Carl F., 234 [Pg. 234 is part of Doc. 113], 532n [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 226]

Saltonstall, Leverett, 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 107], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206], 616 [Pg. 616 is part of Doc. 280], 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280], 618 [Pg. 618 is part of Doc. 280], 619 [Pg. 619 is part of Doc. 280], 621 [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281]

Schlie, Norb, 532n [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 226]

Seaborn, J. Blair, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182], 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 182], 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 230], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 232], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304], 653n [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 304], 1052 [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475] instructions for meetings with DRV officials, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 352 [Pg. 352 is part of Doc. 168]-353 [Pg. 353 is part of Doc. 168], 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]-979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]

meetings with DRV officials, 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]-526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 978n [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

Self-Defense Corps: force increases, 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154]

period of service, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

personnel requirements, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

reconstitution of, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84]

recruiting for, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]

Sharp, Vice Adm. Ulysses S. G., Jr., 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 142], 422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 689n [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 319], 1060n [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 478], 1063n [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479] airfield security, 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]-681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 402]

Gulf of Tonkin events: Maddox and C. Turner Joy, attack on (Aug. 4), 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276]

Retaliations for attacks, 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 284]-625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286]

U.S. patrols, resumption of (Aug. 2), 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against: Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 876n [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 402]-886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

governmental stability in RVN and, 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

graduated action plan, 930 [Pg. 930 is part of Doc. 419]-932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]

naval patrols, 669n [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 310]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 303]

Shenstone, Michael, 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 230], 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]

Shriver, Sargeant, 273n [Pg. 273 is part of Doc. 129], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 129], 472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]-473 [Pg. 473 is part of Doc. 204]

Sibley, Maj. Gen. Alden K., 665 [Pg. 665 includes portions of Doc. 308 and Doc. 309]-668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309]

Sihanouk, Prince Norodom, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 85], 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90]-177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 90], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103], 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 401]

Siho Lamphouthacoul, Gen., 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

Silver, Sol, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 170]

Smart, Gen. Jacob E., 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 142], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187]

Smith, Bromley, 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 60], 130 [Pg. 130 includes portions of Doc. 70 and Doc. 71]-131 [Pg. 131 includes portions of Doc. 71 and Doc. 72], 153n [Pg. 153 is part of Doc. 84], 170n [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86], 222n [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 107], 276n [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131], 328n [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 369n [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 487n [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 611n [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278], 632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 914n [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 1052n [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475], 1057n [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]

Smith, Walter Bedell, 279 [Pg. 279 includes portions of Doc. 132 and Doc. 133], 476 [Pg. 476 is part of Doc. 207]

Smith, Col. William Y., 174n [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 89], 196n [Pg. 196 includes portions of Doc. 98 and Doc. 99], 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 99], 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 163]-343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 163], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290]-632 [Pg. 632 is part of Doc. 290]

Solbert, Peter, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 266], 600 [Pg. 600 includes portions of Doc. 266, Doc. 267, and Doc. 268]-601 [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 268]

Southeast Asia: “domino effect” in, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

French policy on, 107 [Pg. 107 is part of Doc. 63]-108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 533 [Pg. 533 is part of Doc. 227]-537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 227], 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]-557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237]

military cordon proposal, 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 208]

U.S.-U.K. consultations re, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 41]

Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO), 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 236 [Pg. 236 is part of Doc. 113], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 208] Gulf of Tonkin events, 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277], 611 [Pg. 611 is part of Doc. 278], 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291]

military assistance for RVN, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119]

Ministerial Council meeting, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115], 258 [Pg. 258 is part of Doc. 124]

U.S. operations against DRV and, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 173]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 173]

Vietnamese (RVN) policy toward, 237n [Pg. 237 is part of Doc. 114]

Souvanna Phouma, 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35], 109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 64], 168 [Pg. 168 is part of Doc. 85], 205n [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 101], 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103], 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 185], 557 [Pg. 557 is part of Doc. 237], 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 580 [Pg. 580 is part of Doc. 250], 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 250], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 305], 674 [Pg. 674 is part of Doc. 313]-675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370], 1011 [Pg. 1011 is part of Doc. 449] Soviet Union: Gulf of Tonkin events, 633 [Pg. 633 is part of Doc. 291], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 294], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295]-638 [Pg. 638 is part of Doc. 295], 648 [Pg. 648 is part of Doc. 302]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

Laos: Conference on, proposed, 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313]

U.S.-RVN incursions, response to, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 8]-10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia and, 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 433]

U.S. operations against DRV, response to, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 61]-106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 66], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 171]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 171], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, consultations with U.S. re, 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 443]-993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

Spain, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

Special Group for Counterinsurgency, 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]-26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12]

Special Group on covert programs, 5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

Special National Intelligence Estimates: 50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 27]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37] (Feb. 22, 1964), 71 [Pg. 71 is part of Doc. 42]-72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]

50 [Pg. 50 is part of Doc. 27]-2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-64 (May 25, 1964), 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 174]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]

53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]-64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37] (Sept. 8, 1964), 742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]-746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]

53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29]-2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-64 (Oct. 1, 1964), 806 [Pg. 806 includes portions of Doc. 367 and Doc. 368]-811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

State of emergency in Vietnam, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Stevenson, Adlai E., 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 635 [Pg. 635 is part of Doc. 294], 636 [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298], 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299], 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 305], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

Stilwell, Maj. Gen. Richard G., 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 170], 552n [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235], 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 328], 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347]

Stoneman, Walter G., 53n [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 337n [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160], 340n [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184]

Strategic hamlet program, 18 [Pg. 18 is part of Doc. 10], 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12], 51 [Pg. 51 is part of Doc. 28], 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 231] deterioration of, 77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45]-78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 45], 85 [Pg. 85 is part of Doc. 50], 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51], 180 [Pg. 180 is part of Doc. 90], 479 [Pg. 479 is part of Doc. 208]

personnel requirements, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

revitalization of, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68], 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84], 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 187]

Stromberg, Brig. Gen. W. W., 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75]-139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 75]

Students in Vietnam, 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 448]-1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 448]

Sullivan, William H., 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 81n [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 47], 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 60], 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 61], 108n [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 195n [Pg. 195 includes portions of Doc. 97 and Doc. 98], 198n [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 255n [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 122], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 272n [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 337n [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160], 340n [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195], 487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]-488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210], 646n [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365], 804n [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 366], 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 367] agricultural situation in Vietnam, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214]

Air Force, RVN, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214]

civilian government of Vietnam, 823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 375]-825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381]

communist insurgency, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210]

congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

counterinsurgency operations: critical provinces, focus on, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214]

National Pacification Plan, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 214]

population control, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]-433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

Khanh government: coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347]

information programs, 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214]

Minh’s role, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127]

popular attitude toward, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127]

reorganization program, 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 317]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206]

MACV command change, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100]

McNamara-Taylor mission (March 1964), 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 304 [Pg. 304 includes portions of Doc. 146 and Doc. 147]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Montagnards, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214]

morale problem in Vietnam, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210]-489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 214]

political settlement in Vietnam, 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces, 505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 214]-506 [Pg. 506 is part of Doc. 214]

Sullivan Committee, appointment of, 80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 46]

third country assistance for Vietnam, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam, 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam, 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 170]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 170], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 172], 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 172], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214]-504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: ground forces, 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145]-303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 145]

naval presence, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214]

U.S. Mission in Vietnam, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210], 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

Vietnam assignment, 543n [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 230]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 44], 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 89], 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 145] air strikes, 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]

economic initiatives, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127]

“live plan” status, 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

naval operations, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127]

negotiations, relation to, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 216]-520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

political moves in support of military actions, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102], 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]

Soviet response, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 61]-106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

tit-for-tat military actions, 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 128]-272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

U.S. public statements on, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 95]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 182] instructions for intermediary, 281n [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134], 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 168]

Pearson contacted about, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127]

U.S.-Canadian consultations re, 544n [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 232]

Vietnam situation, assessment of, 500 [Pg. 500 is part of Doc. 214]-507 [Pg. 507 is part of Doc. 214]

war footing for Vietnam: diplomatic actions, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145]-302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145]

Khanh’s proposal for, 291n [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

urban centers, focus on, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145]

Sullivan Committee, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 46], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]

Suu. See Pham Khac Suu.

Sylvester, Arthur, 133n [Pg. 133 includes portions of Doc. 73 and Doc. 74], 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

Tam, Gen., 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338]

Tam Chau, 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 337], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 448]

Tanham, George, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 170]

Taylor, Gen. Maxwell D. (see also McNamara-Taylor mission headings), 84n [Pg. 84 includes portions of Doc. 49 and Doc. 50], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54], 99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 134n [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309], 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 335] Air Force, RVN, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]

ambassador, appointment as, 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]-524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221], 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 225]-531 [Pg. 531 is part of Doc. 225]

ambassadorial instructions, 530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 225], 538 [Pg. 538 is part of Doc. 228], 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]-978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

anti-American sentiment in Vietnam, 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 366]

Buddhist-Catholic conflict, 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 229]-541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]

Cambodia, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 65]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 65], 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82], 884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 401]

China, People’s Republic of, U.S. contacts with, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 249]

Civil Guard, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 78]

civilian government of Vietnam: alternatives to, 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426]

assessment of, 888 [Pg. 888 includes portions of Doc. 403 and Doc. 404]-890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405], 949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 426]-950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 426]

Buddhist opposition, 995 [Pg. 995 includes portions of Doc. 444 and Doc. 445], 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 447], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]-1003 [Pg. 1003 is part of Doc. 448], 1032 [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 461]

formation of, 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366], 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 818 [Pg. 818 includes portions of Doc. 372 and Doc. 373]-819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 373], 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 375]-830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378], 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379]-838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]-846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

Huong’s assessment of, 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]-892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

installation of, 858 [Pg. 858 is part of Doc. 389]-859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 389]

Khanh’s plotting against, 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415]

military, relations with, 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390]-861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

ministerial appointments, 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390]

minority groups, relations with, 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413], 935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]-936 [Pg. 936 is part of Doc. 421], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]-1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

National Assembly, 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415]

objectives, short-term, 896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408]-899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]

U.S. efforts to strengthen, 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 426]-952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]-959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 428], 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]-966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 432], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 432], 975 [Pg. 975 is part of Doc. 435]-976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 435], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]-984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 442]-989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 442], 998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]-1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448]

U.S. integration into, 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]-911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415]

U.S. protection from coup, request for, 1047 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 470]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]-1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457]-1028 [Pg. 1028 includes portions of Doc. 458 and Doc. 459], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 462]-1034 [Pg. 1034 is part of Doc. 462], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470]-1047 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 470], 1060 [Pg. 1060 is part of Doc. 478]-1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

communist insurgency: Bien Hoa airfield, attack on, 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 393], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]-880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 398]

casualties suffered, 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

intensification in July, 548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]-552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

recuperative powers, 950 [Pg. 950 is part of Doc. 426], 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 426]

troop strength, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 233]

congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy, 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189]

counterinsurgency operations: command and control system, 813 [Pg. 813 includes portions of Doc. 370 and Doc. 371]-814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 371]

communications security, 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152]

defense against ground attacks, 686 [Pg. 686 is part of Doc. 318], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 318]

deterioration of RVN positron, 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]-949 [Pg. 949 is part of Doc. 426]

government stability in RVN, relation to, 951 [Pg. 951 is part of Doc. 426], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426]

ground operations, U.S. evaluation of, 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 366]

guerrilla tactics, 554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

JCS recommendations for actions, 86 [Pg. 86 includes portions of Doc. 50 and Doc. 51]-89 [Pg. 89 includes portions of Doc. 51 and Doc. 52], 850n [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 388], 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 401]

L. B. Johnson, meeting with, 966 [Pg. 966 is part of Doc. 432]-967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 432]

provincial troubleshooting, 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 371]-815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372], 819 [Pg. 819 is part of Doc. 373]

psywar-civic action program in provinces, 997 [Pg. 997 includes portions of Doc. 445 and Doc. 446]-998 [Pg. 998 includes portions of Doc. 446 and Doc. 447]

Saigon-area initiative, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343], 776 [Pg. 776 is part of Doc. 355]-777 [Pg. 777 is part of Doc. 355], 814 [Pg. 814 is part of Doc. 371], 859 [Pg. 859 is part of Doc. 389]

U.S. ambassadors’ meeting re, 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 374]-821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 374]

Westmoreland’s assessment of, 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

generals, conflict with, 1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]-1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452], 1020 [Pg. 1020 includes portions of Doc. 453 and Doc. 454]-1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 1032 [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 461], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 462], 1036 [Pg. 1036 includes portions of Doc. 464 and Doc. 465]-1039 [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 465], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 467]-1042 [Pg. 1042 is part of Doc. 467], 1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]-1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471], 1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476]-1055 [Pg. 1055 is part of Doc. 476]

Gulf of Tonkin events: Maddox, attack on (Aug. 2), 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256]

retaliations for attacks, 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262]-594 [Pg. 594 includes portions of Doc. 262 and Doc. 263], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271], 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 614 [Pg. 614 is part of Doc. 279], 623 [Pg. 623 includes portions of Doc. 282 and Doc. 283], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287]-628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289]

High National Council, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]-827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 838n [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]-846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 187], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187], 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188], 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 188], 425 [Pg. 425 is part of Doc. 188], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 432 [Pg. 432 is part of Doc. 189], 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

Huong, assessment of, 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

U. A. Johnson’s assessment of, 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 422]

Khanh, relations with, 805 [Pg. 805 is part of Doc. 367]

Khanh government: ambassadors, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 229]

Buddhist opposition, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 322], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 325], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 330]-712 [Pg. 712 is part of Doc. 330]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 766 [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 349], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 352]-772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354]-775 [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 354], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]-792 [Pg. 792 is part of Doc. 360]

coups against, possible, 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 359]-789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360]

Dai Viet threat to, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 333], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 333]

future prospects, 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 339]-734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 339]

instability of, 565 [Pg. 565 is part of Doc. 242], 787 [Pg. 787 is part of Doc. 359]-789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360], 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366]

Khanh’s absence from Saigon, 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 333]-721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334], 727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337]-729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]

Minh’s expulsion from, 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263]

neutralist sympathizers in, 562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

proposals for dealing with, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 319]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320]

reorganization program, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]-705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 325], 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328]-708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 328], 710 [Pg. 710 is part of Doc. 330]-713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]-718 [Pg. 718 is part of Doc. 332], 724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336]-727 [Pg. 727 includes portions of Doc. 336 and Doc. 337], 729 [Pg. 729 includes portions of Doc. 337 and Doc. 338]-733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 339]

succession issue, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287]-628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

U.S. policy toward, 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 798 [Pg. 798 includes portions of Doc. 364 and Doc. 365]-801 [Pg. 801 is part of Doc. 365]

Khanh’s standing with military colleagues, 1029 [Pg. 1029 includes portions of Doc. 459 and Doc. 460]-1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460]

Laos, 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172] conference on, proposed, 654 [Pg. 654 is part of Doc. 305]-656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 110 [Pg. 110 is part of Doc. 65]-111 [Pg. 111 is part of Doc. 65] air strikes, 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250], 582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]-583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252], 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 346]-763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 346], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 374]-821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 374], 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]-894 [Pg. 894 is part of Doc. 406]

bridgeheads, establishment of, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 318]

ground operations, 761 [Pg. 761 is part of Doc. 346]-763 [Pg. 763 is part of Doc. 346], 893 [Pg. 893 is part of Doc. 406]

intelligence operations, 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

parachute drops, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 318]

planning and training for, 528 [Pg. 528 is part of Doc. 224]-530 [Pg. 530 is part of Doc. 225]

reconnaissance flights, 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149]

timetable for, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. ambassadors’ meeting re, 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 374]-821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 374]

U.S. assistance for Laotian aircraft, 821 [Pg. 821 is part of Doc. 374]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 685 [Pg. 685 is part of Doc. 318], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 318]

media coverage of Vietnam, 552n [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Minh, assessment of, 721 [Pg. 721 includes portions of Doc. 333 and Doc. 334]

Montagnards, revolt against RVN authority, 785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358]-786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 358], 802 [Pg. 802 is part of Doc. 366]

National Security Action Memorandum 314 administration review of, 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 343]-751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 343], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343]

politico-military coordination on, 772 [Pg. 772 includes portions of Doc. 352 and Doc. 353]-773 [Pg. 773 is part of Doc. 353]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 407] meetings with, 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]-960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

questions about options, 960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429]-961 [Pg. 961 is part of Doc. 429]

reports from Vietnam, quality of, 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]-553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces:

desertions, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]-542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 229] effectiveness, U.S. advisers to report on, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 149]

Khanh’s successor as Commander in Chief, 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460]-1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]

manpower situation, 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366]

morale problems, 564 [Pg. 564 is part of Doc. 242]

period of service issue, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

recruiting for, 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]

reorganization proposals, 1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

strategic hamlet program, 26 [Pg. 26 is part of Doc. 12]

third country assistance for Vietnam: flood relief, 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 411], 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

progress report on, 839 [Pg. 839 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]-840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

L. B. Johnson, meeting with, 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 442]-989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 442]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam: employment programs, 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366]-804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 366]

flood relief, 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 410]-902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413], 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

“progress after pacification” demonstration projects, 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 264]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

Socioeconomic action program, 757 [Pg. 757 is part of Doc. 344]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam, 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 172], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 343]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 172], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, preconditions for, 861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: command of U.S. ground forces, 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 318]

flood relief personnel, 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 410]-902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]

force increase to 22,000, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 233]-548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234], 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237], 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 249]

U.S. Mission Council, 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 229]

U.S. policy in Vietnam: courses of action reports, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 319]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 339]-736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

defeat, consequences of, 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 339]

funds and personnel for, 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

strategic importance of Vietnam, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 73 [Pg. 73 is part of Doc. 43], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 163], 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 435]-977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 435] accelerated program of actions, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 339]-736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

air strikes, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 199], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 318], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 318], 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 319], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 319]-692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319], 750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 343], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 393]-875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]-880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 398]

contingency planning, 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 66]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 66], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86]

“controlled escalation” scenario, 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426]-957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

covert operations, 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162], 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 408]

deniability issue, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 149]

destruction of DRV will and capabilities, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 199]

governmental stability in RVN and, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]-900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 409]

implications of, 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 398]

JCS recommendations for actions, 850n [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 388], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]-884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 401]

military options, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172], 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 193]

naval operations, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 310], 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 401]-884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 401]

objectives and courses of action, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 191], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 199]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 199]

political moves in support of military actions, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103]

psychological benefits, 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 408], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426]

reaction times for operations, 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 393]-875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397], 879 [Pg. 879 includes portions of Doc. 397 and Doc. 398]-880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 398], 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]-1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 1049 [Pg. 1049 is part of Doc. 472], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]

target selection, 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 243]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 243], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 245], 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 318], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 318]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156]

Vietnamese (RVN) pressure on U.S. for, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 243]

war footing for Vietnam and, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 544n [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 232], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 426]-954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 426]

war footing for Vietnam, 144 [Pg. 144 is part of Doc. 78], 287n [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 142], 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152]

Washington visit (Sept. 1964), 707 [Pg. 707 includes portions of Doc. 327 and Doc. 328], 733n [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 339] congressional leaders, meetings with, 754n [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343]

meetings, 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]

Washington visit (Nov.-Dec. 1964): congressional leaders, meetings with, 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

L. B. Johnson, meeting with, 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]-969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam meetings, 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]-960 [Pg. 960 includes portions of Doc. 428 and Doc. 429], 974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435]

preparations for, 945 [Pg. 945 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425]-948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]

report on Vietnam situation, 948 [Pg. 948 includes portions of Doc. 425 and Doc. 426]-957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

schedule for, 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]-910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]

Templer, Gen. Sir Gerald W. R., 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 90]

Thailand, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 68], 177 [Pg. 177 is part of Doc. 90], 439 [Pg. 439 is part of Doc. 191] communist victory in Vietnam, consequences of, 485 [Pg. 485 is part of Doc. 209]-486 [Pg. 486 is part of Doc. 209], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418]

Laos, concerns about, 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia and, 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 433]

U.S. military deployments in, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90], 178 [Pg. 178 is part of Doc. 90], 511 [Pg. 511 is part of Doc. 214]

Thanat Khoman, 240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115], 247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119]

Thang, Col., 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 303]

Thanom, 610 [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Thant, U, 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 186], 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]-958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428] Geneva Accords, 645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 625 [Pg. 625 includes portions of Doc. 284 and Doc. 285]

Ho Chi Minh, assessment of, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]-644 [Pg. 644 is part of Doc. 298]

Johnson, L. B., meeting with, 643 [Pg. 643 is part of Doc. 298]-645 [Pg. 645 includes portions of Doc. 298 and Doc. 299]

Thao. See Pham Ngoc Thao, Col.

Thi. See Nguyen Chanh Thi, Gen.

Thien Minh, 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]

Thieu. See Nguyen Van Thieu, Brig. Gen.

Third country assistance for Vietnam, 268 [Pg. 268 is part of Doc. 127], 320 [Pg. 320 is part of Doc. 152] civil positrons, 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 170], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188]

Flood relief, 903 [Pg. 903 is part of Doc. 411], 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

Lodge’s European trip to promote, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301]

military forces, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119], 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 200], 482 [Pg. 482 is part of Doc. 208]

NATO countries, 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia and, 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 433]-972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 433]

progress report on, 839 [Pg. 839 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]-840 [Pg. 840 includes portions of Doc. 383 and Doc. 384]

SEATO countries, 246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119]-247 [Pg. 247 is part of Doc. 119]

Taylor-L. B. Johnson meeting re, 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432]

Taylor’s instructions re, 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 435]-978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

U.K. contribution, 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]-982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 441]-986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 441]

U.S. promotion of, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156]-331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214], 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]-527 [Pg. 527 includes portions of Doc. 223 and Doc. 224], 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 437]

U.S. quid pro quos for, 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 442]-989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 442]

Vietnamese (RVN) efforts re, 448 [Pg. 448 is part of Doc. 195], 552 [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Thompson, Llewellyn, 561n [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240], 636n [Pg. 636 includes portions of Doc. 294 and Doc. 295], 782n [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 357], 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356], 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 443]

Thompson, R. G. K., 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84], 361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 170], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 441]-986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 441]

Thomson, James C., Jr., 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95], 706n [Pg. 706 is part of Doc. 326], 914n [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417]

Throckmorton, Lt. Gen. John L., 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451], 1015 [Pg. 1015 is part of Doc. 451], 1030 [Pg. 1030 is part of Doc. 460], 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 467], 1048 [Pg. 1048 is part of Doc. 471]

Thu, Gen., 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385], 842 [Pg. 842 is part of Doc. 385]

Ticonderoga, U.S.S., 589 [Pg. 589 includes portions of Doc. 255 and Doc. 256], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272], 601n [Pg. 601 is part of Doc. 268], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286]

Ton, Col., 726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336], 770 [Pg. 770 is part of Doc. 352], 774 [Pg. 774 is part of Doc. 354], 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 360]

Ton That Dinh, Maj. Gen., 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313] arrest and trial of, 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 75], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 186], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186]

coup against Diem, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]

coup against Khanh, possible, 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

Tran Ba Thanh, Col., 811 [Pg. 811 includes portions of Doc. 368 and Doc. 369]

Tran Chanh Thanh, 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

Tran Dinh Lam, Lt. Col., 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Tran Le Quang, 683 [Pg. 683 is part of Doc. 317]

Tran Ngoc Oanh, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37]

Tran Quang Vinh, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Tran Quoc Buu, 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 162], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 333], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 359]

Tran Thien Khiem, Lt. Gen., 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 40 [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 20], 41 [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20], 141 [Pg. 141 includes portions of Doc. 76 and Doc. 77], 164n [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84], _47, 362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 170], 381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288], 667 [Pg. 667 is part of Doc. 309], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 320], 728 [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 337], 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 359] coup against Diem, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]

Khanh government: Buddhist opposition, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321], 697 [Pg. 697 is part of Doc. 321], 702 [Pg. 702 is part of Doc. 324]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 790 [Pg. 790 is part of Doc. 360]

Defense Minister post, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37]

reorganization program, 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 328], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 330]

triumvirate leadership, 730 [Pg. 730 is part of Doc. 338]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces, 310 [Pg. 310 is part of Doc. 149]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 303], 650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 303]

Tran Van Do, 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 330], 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390], 891 [Pg. 891 is part of Doc. 405]

Tran Van Don, Gen., 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 119], 266 [Pg. 266 is part of Doc. 126], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 386] arrest and trial of, 42 [Pg. 42 includes portions of Doc. 21 and Doc. 22], 137 [Pg. 137 is part of Doc. 75], 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 139 [Pg. 139 is part of Doc. 75], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 346n [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176], 406 [Pg. 406 is part of Doc. 186], 411 [Pg. 411 is part of Doc. 186]

counterinsurgency operations, 136 [Pg. 136 is part of Doc. 75]

coup against Diem, 135 [Pg. 135 is part of Doc. 75]

coup against Khanh, possible, 434 [Pg. 434 is part of Doc. 190]-436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]

economic situation in Vietnam, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 10]

neutralist sympathies, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 37 [Pg. 37 includes portions of Doc. 18 and Doc. 19], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 19], 54 [Pg. 54 is part of Doc. 30]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27]

Tran Van Huang, 860 [Pg. 860 is part of Doc. 390], 901n [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 410] civilian government of Vietmam: assessment of, 890 [Pg. 890 includes portions of Doc. 404 and Doc. 405]-892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406], 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 425]

formation of, 832 [Pg. 832 includes portions of Doc. 378 and Doc. 379], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 844 [Pg. 844 is part of Doc. 386]-845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387]

Khanh’s plotting against, 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415]

minority groups, relations with, 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413], 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415], 935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]-936 [Pg. 936 is part of Doc. 421]

U.S. efforts to strengthen, 982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439]-984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 442]-989 [Pg. 989 is part of Doc. 442]

U.S. integration into, 911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415]

U.S. protection from coup, request for, 1047 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 470]

“Young Turks” coup attempt, 1014 1015, 1016 [Pg. 1016 includes portions of Doc. 451 and Doc. 452]-1017 [Pg. 1017 is part of Doc. 452], 1019 [Pg. 1019 is part of Doc. 453], 1021 [Pg. 1021 is part of Doc. 454], 1031 [Pg. 1031 includes portions of Doc. 460 and Doc. 461]-1032 [Pg. 1032 is part of Doc. 461], 1033 [Pg. 1033 is part of Doc. 462], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470]-1047 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 470]

counterinsurgency operations, 946 [Pg. 946 is part of Doc. 425]-947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 425]

popular attitude toward, 889 [Pg. 889 is part of Doc. 404]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces, reorganization proposals, 1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]

Taylor’s assessment of, 892 [Pg. 892 includes portions of Doc. 405 and Doc. 406]

Taylor’s conflict with generals, 1041n [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 467], 1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470]-1047 [Pg. 1047 is part of Doc. 470]

third country assistance for Vietnam, 988 [Pg. 988 is part of Doc. 442]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 425]

Tran Van Huu, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 695 [Pg. 695 is part of Doc. 320]

Tran Van Ly, 542 [Pg. 542 is part of Doc. 229]

Tran Van Que, 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Tran Van Van, 822 [Pg. 822 is part of Doc. 375]-823 [Pg. 823 is part of Doc. 375], 824 [Pg. 824 is part of Doc. 375], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376], 827 [Pg. 827 includes portions of Doc. 376 and Doc. 377], 835 [Pg. 835 is part of Doc. 380], 845 [Pg. 845 includes portions of Doc. 386 and Doc. 387], 846 [Pg. 846 is part of Doc. 387]

Trend, Sir Burke, 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41]

Tri. See Do Cao Tri, Maj. Gen.

Tri Quang, 263 [Pg. 263 is part of Doc. 125], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151], 314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229], 709n [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 329], 789 [Pg. 789 includes portions of Doc. 359 and Doc. 360] Buddhist-Catholic conflict, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 152], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154]

Buddhist opposition to Khanh: demands of Buddhists, 696 [Pg. 696 includes portions of Doc. 320 and Doc. 321]-698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]

meetings between Khanh and Buddhists, 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322]-699 [Pg. 699 is part of Doc. 322], 701 [Pg. 701 includes portions of Doc. 323 and Doc. 324]-703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325]

moderation of, 830 [Pg. 830 includes portions of Doc. 377 and Doc. 378]

civilian government and, 994 [Pg. 994 is part of Doc. 444], 999 [Pg. 999 is part of Doc. 447], 1000 [Pg. 1000 includes portions of Doc. 447 and Doc. 448], 1001 [Pg. 1001 is part of Doc. 448]

influence on Khanh, 705 [Pg. 705 is part of Doc. 325]

Ngo Dinh Can’s death sentence, 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125]-265n [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126]

political ambitions, 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331], 810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 368]

Trimble, William C., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12]

Trinquier, Roger, 197 [Pg. 197 is part of Doc. 99]

Trueheart, William C., 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184], 602n [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270], 610n [Pg. 610 includes portions of Doc. 276 and Doc. 277]

Truong Chin, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

Tyler, William R., 69 [Pg. 69 is part of Doc. 41], 104 [Pg. 104 is part of Doc. 60], 108n [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64], 621n [Pg. 621 includes portions of Doc. 280 and Doc. 281], 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 443]

Unger, Leonard, 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120], 402 [Pg. 402 is part of Doc. 185], 689n [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 319] Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 215 [Pg. 215 is part of Doc. 104], 820 [Pg. 820 is part of Doc. 374] air strikes, 574 [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]-582 [Pg. 582 includes portions of Doc. 250 and Doc. 251]

intelligence operations, 275 [Pg. 275 is part of Doc. 130], 276 [Pg. 276 is part of Doc. 131], 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]

U.S.-Laotian consultations re, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. See Soviet Union

United Kingdom, 647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 655 [Pg. 655 is part of Doc. 305] Advisory Mission, 526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223]

Laos: conference on, proposed, 675 [Pg. 675 is part of Doc. 313]

U.S.-RVN incursions into, 581 [Pg. 581 is part of Doc. 250]

military assistance to RVN, 981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]-982 [Pg. 982 includes portions of Doc. 438 and Doc. 439], 985 [Pg. 985 is part of Doc. 441]-986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 441]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia and, 971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 433]

Southeast Asia, consultations with U.S. re, 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]-70 [Pg. 70 is part of Doc. 41]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, position on, 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 418]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 64], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 102], 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 437]

United Nations, 224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 173], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185] Chinese People’s Republic admission issue, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9], 16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 32n [Pg. 32 is part of Doc. 15]

Gulf of Tonkin events and. See under Gulf of Tonkin events.

U.S. dependents in Vietnam, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 55], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 84]-166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 84], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 433], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]-1058 [Pg. 1058 is part of Doc. 477], 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 1065 [Pg. 1065 is part of Doc. 479]

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam: construction projects, 524 [Pg. 524 includes portions of Doc. 220 and Doc. 221]

employment programs, 803 [Pg. 803 is part of Doc. 366]-804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 366]

fertilizer Program, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84], 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101]

flood relief, 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 410]-902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413], 909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

funding increases, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

health programs, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214]

irrigation projects, 572 [Pg. 572 is part of Doc. 246]

“progress after pacification” demonstration projects, 571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246]-573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247], 596 [Pg. 596 is part of Doc. 264]-597 [Pg. 597 includes portions of Doc. 264 and Doc. 265]

rural development programs, 340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]-341 [Pg. 341 is part of Doc. 162], 480 [Pg. 480 is part of Doc. 208]-481 [Pg. 481 is part of Doc. 208], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214]

socioeconomic action program, proposed, 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344]-758 [Pg. 758 includes portions of Doc. 344 and Doc. 345]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam, 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145], 751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 343] “brain trust” advisers, 22 [Pg. 22 includes portions of Doc. 10 and Doc. 11]-24 [Pg. 24 is part of Doc. 11], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35]

control capacity, 346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 165]

integration into government structure, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 201], 502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214]-503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214] administration discussions re, 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 172]-374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173], 397 [Pg. 397 includes portions of Doc. 183 and Doc. 184]-398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184]

civilian government and, 910 [Pg. 910 includes portions of Doc. 414 and Doc. 415]-911 [Pg. 911 is part of Doc. 415]

Forrestal’s positron, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]-388 [Pg. 388 is part of Doc. 178]

joint operations committees, 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

personnel for, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 170]-361 [Pg. 361 is part of Doc. 170]

progress on, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188]-427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188]

Sullivan’s proposal, 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 359 [Pg. 359 is part of Doc. 170]-362 [Pg. 362 is part of Doc. 170]

U.S. hesitation re, 440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]-441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

Vietnamese (RVN) reservations, 398 [Pg. 398 is part of Doc. 184], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214]-504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214]

Khanh’s request for, 277 [Pg. 277 includes portions of Doc. 131 and Doc. 132]-278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132]

Lodge’s position, 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132]

political adviser for Khanh, 126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68]

Rusk’s request for suggestions, 344 [Pg. 344 is part of Doc. 164]-346 [Pg. 346 includes portions of Doc. 164 and Doc. 165]

U.S. Information Agency (USIA) (see also U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam; Voice of America), 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 122], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 177]

U.S. information programs and policies in U.S., 523 [Pg. 523 includes portions of Doc. 219 and Doc. 220]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10] communications czar, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 122], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 197], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 203]-472 [Pg. 472 includes portions of Doc. 203 and Doc. 204]

communist infiltration evidence. release of, 1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450]-1014 [Pg. 1014 includes portions of Doc. 450 and Doc. 451]

coordination of operations, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 229]

credibility concerns, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189]

heroism awards, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 197]-453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 197]

information advisers in military units, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 197], 455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 197]

media coverage of Vietnam and, 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177], 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 197]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 197], 660 [Pg. 660 is part of Doc. 306]

optimistic interpretation of events, 373 [Pg. 373 is part of Doc. 172]

peace offensive, 462 [Pg. 462 is part of Doc. 201]

press officer for Khanh, 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 177]

psychological warfare campaign, 254 [Pg. 254 is part of Doc. 122]-255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 122], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 129], 278 [Pg. 278 is part of Doc. 132], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189]-430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189], 450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197]-455 [Pg. 455 is part of Doc. 197]

radios for villages, 452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 197]

rural opinion, studies re, 544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231]-545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 231]

song for RVN, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 197]

Vietnam (DRV), broadcasts into, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 177], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 177], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 197]

Vietnamese (RVN) cooperation with, 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177]-385 [Pg. 385 includes portions of Doc. 177 and Doc. 178]

Vietnamese (RVN) leaders, promotion of, 451 [Pg. 451 is part of Doc. 197]-452 [Pg. 452 is part of Doc. 197]

youth programs, 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 197]

U.S. Information Service (USIS), 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 306]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam: aircraft upgrades, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84], 203 [Pg. 203 is part of Doc. 101]-204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101], 311 [Pg. 311 is part of Doc. 149], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214], 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

Army materiel, 204 [Pg. 204 is part of Doc. 101]

funding for, 163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84]-164 [Pg. 164 is part of Doc. 84], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86], 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156], 332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]

preconditions for assistance, 861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 391]

shortcomings of, 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 68]-124 [Pg. 124 is part of Doc. 68]

“Young Turks” coup attempt and, 1025 [Pg. 1025 is part of Doc. 456]-1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam (see also Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy; Gulf of Tonkin Resolution): advisory effort, 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 340]

combat exposure for troops, 330 [Pg. 330 is part of Doc. 156], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156]

flood relief personnel, 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 410]-902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]

force increase to 22,000, 661 [Pg. 661 is part of Doc. 306] casualties issue, 559 [Pg. 559 is part of Doc. 239]

deployments of personnel, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239]-561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]

public announcements re, 569n [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 245], 576 [Pg. 576 is part of Doc. 249]

Taylor’s positron, 553 [Pg. 553 includes portions of Doc. 235 and Doc. 236]-554 [Pg. 554 includes portions of Doc. 236 and Doc. 237]

Westmoreland’s recommendation for, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 233]-548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

French position, 534 [Pg. 534 is part of Doc. 227]

ground forces, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 335]-724 [Pg. 724 includes portions of Doc. 335 and Doc. 336], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]-907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 412] command issue, 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 318]

Johnson’s position, 1058 [Pg. 1058 is part of Doc. 477]-1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 477]

Khanh’s request for, 286 [Pg. 286 is part of Doc. 136], 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145]-303 [Pg. 303 is part of Doc. 145]

legal basis for sending forces to Vietnam, 532 [Pg. 532 is part of Doc. 226]

lengths of tours, 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150]

marines to guard installations, 723 [Pg. 723 is part of Doc. 335]

naval presence, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127], 283 [Pg. 283 is part of Doc. 135]-284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136], 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]-291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140], 297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 143], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214]

overflights of RVN territory, 290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139] Saigon area secured with U.S. troops, 166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 84], 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]

Special Forces, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

training programs, 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156], 331 [Pg. 331 is part of Doc. 156]

Vietnamese (RVN) attitude toward, 545 [Pg. 545 is part of Doc. 231]

U.S. Mission in Vietnam (see also Ambassador to Saigon, selection of; Military Assistance Command, U.S.): AID director, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99], 201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100]

Chief of Staff for, 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100]-201 [Pg. 201 is part of Doc. 100], 393 [Pg. 393 is part of Doc. 181]

CIA station chief, appointment of, 3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3]-4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]

Deputy Chief of Mission for, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

U. A. Johnson’s assessment of, 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 422]-938 [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423]

Lodge-Harkins relationship, 298 [Pg. 298 is part of Doc. 144]-299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154]-327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155]

management problem, 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]-314 [Pg. 314 is part of Doc. 151]

Mission Council, 539 [Pg. 539 is part of Doc. 229]

Rural Operations minister, proposed, 78 [Pg. 78 is part of Doc. 45]-79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]

situation report on Vietnam, 656 [Pg. 656 includes portions of Doc. 305 and Doc. 306]-662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307]

U.S. policy in Vietnam (see also Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy; Gulf of Tonkin Resolution; National Security Action Memoranda; NSC Working Group on Vietnam): administration consultations with congressional leaders, 222 [Pg. 222 is part of Doc. 107]-224 [Pg. 224 is part of Doc. 107], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156]-332 [Pg. 332 is part of Doc. 156], 390 [Pg. 390 is part of Doc. 179]

allies’ positions on, 919 [Pg. 919 is part of Doc. 418]

Asians’ doubts about U.S. intentions, 176 [Pg. 176 is part of Doc. 90]-179 [Pg. 179 is part of Doc. 90]

basic posture, McNamara’s recommendations re, 160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 84]-161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 84]

McG. Bundy’s courses of action report, 672 [Pg. 672 includes portions of Doc. 312 and Doc. 313]-679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]

checklist of progress, 489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210]

Chinese People’s Republic attitude toward, 537 [Pg. 537 is part of Doc. 227], 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 237]-556 [Pg. 556 is part of Doc. 237], 557commitment to Vietnam, 299 [Pg. 299 includes portions of Doc. 144 and Doc. 145]-301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145], 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210]-489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214], 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

De Gaulle’s assessment of, 217 [Pg. 217 is part of Doc. 105]-218 [Pg. 218 is part of Doc. 105], 219 [Pg. 219 is part of Doc. 105]

defeat, consequences of, 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 339]

Defense Department statement on, 119 [Pg. 119 is part of Doc. 67]-120 [Pg. 120 includes portions of Doc. 67 and Doc. 68]

“domino effect” issue, 484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]-487 [Pg. 487 includes portions of Doc. 209 and Doc. 210]

funds and personnel for, 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124], 260 [Pg. 260 is part of Doc. 124]-262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]-274 [Pg. 274 is part of Doc. 129], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154], 337 [Pg. 337 is part of Doc. 160]-338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 178], 474 [Pg. 474 includes portions of Doc. 205 and Doc. 206], 753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343], 1058 [Pg. 1058 is part of Doc. 477]

Humphrey’s assessment of, 477 [Pg. 477 includes portions of Doc. 207 and Doc. 208]-484 [Pg. 484 includes portions of Doc. 208 and Doc. 209]

Johnson’s television appearances re, 146 [Pg. 146 includes portions of Doc. 79 and Doc. 80], 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 81]-150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82]

manager in Washington for, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41], 79 [Pg. 79 includes portions of Doc. 45 and Doc. 46]-80 [Pg. 80 is part of Doc. 46], 93 [Pg. 93 includes portions of Doc. 53 and Doc. 54]

Mansfield’s policy suggestions, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]-3 [Pg. 3 includes portions of Doc. 2 and Doc. 3], 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40], 1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449]-1012 [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450] administration officials’ responses, 815 [Pg. 815 includes portions of Doc. 371 and Doc. 372]

objectives of, 10 [Pg. 10 is part of Doc. 8]-11 [Pg. 11 is part of Doc. 8], 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 84]

official visits to Vietnam, 67 [Pg. 67 includes portions of Doc. 39 and Doc. 40]-68 [Pg. 68 includes portions of Doc. 40 and Doc. 41]

options available without congressional resolution, 516 [Pg. 516 includes portions of Doc. 214 and Doc. 215]-518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]

political settlement, consideration of, 518 [Pg. 518 includes portions of Doc. 215 and Doc. 216]-520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia, 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432], 969 [Pg. 969 includes portions of Doc. 432 and Doc. 433]-974 [Pg. 974 includes portions of Doc. 433, Doc. 434, and Doc. 435], 984 [Pg. 984 includes portions of Doc. 439 and Doc. 440]

presidential letter to Khanh, 722 [Pg. 722 is part of Doc. 334], 728 729, 771 [Pg. 771 is part of Doc. 352]

sphere of influence issue, 555 [Pg. 555 is part of Doc. 237]

strategic importance of Vietnam, 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 227]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 227], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

Taylor’s courses of action reports, 689 [Pg. 689 is part of Doc. 319]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 733 [Pg. 733 is part of Doc. 339]-736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

U.S.-Soviet consultation re, 990 [Pg. 990 is part of Doc. 443]-993 [Pg. 993 includes portions of Doc. 443 and Doc. 444]

U.S. veterans of Vietnam, use of, 1040 [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 466]

Valenti, Jack, 781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 356]

Valeo, Frank, 2 [Pg. 2 includes portions of Doc. 1 and Doc. 2]

Van Tam, 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136]

Vance, Cyrus R., 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206], 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273], 607 [Pg. 607 includes portions of Doc. 275 and Doc. 276], 608 [Pg. 608 is part of Doc. 276], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 276], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307], 914n [Pg. 914 includes portions of Doc. 416 and Doc. 417], 1012n [Pg. 1012 includes portions of Doc. 449 and Doc. 450], 1044n [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469]

Vann, John, 1040 [Pg. 1040 is part of Doc. 466]

Vien. See Nguyen Luu Vien, Gen.

Viet Cong. See Communist insurgency.

Vietnam, Democratic Republic of (DRV) (see also Gulf of Tonkin events; Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against; Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts): China, People’s Republic of, relations with, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37], 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 47]-82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48], 157n [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84]

communist insurgency, relation to, 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 123 [Pg. 123 is part of Doc. 68], 156 [Pg. 156 is part of Doc. 84]-157 [Pg. 157 is part of Doc. 84], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120], 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145]-302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145]

goals re Vietnamese unity, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]

international conference on Vietnam, proposed, 573 [Pg. 573 includes portions of Doc. 246 and Doc. 247]

invasion of RVN, possible, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 143]

Khanh government, contacts with, 595n [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 368]-810 [Pg. 810 is part of Doc. 368]

military situation, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

neutral solution for Vietnam, 83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49], 229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109]-230 [Pg. 230 includes portions of Doc. 109 and Doc. 110]

U.S. broadcasts into, 173 [Pg. 173 includes portions of Doc. 87 and Doc. 88], 261 [Pg. 261 is part of Doc. 124], 269 [Pg. 269 is part of Doc. 127], 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 177], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 177], 453 [Pg. 453 is part of Doc. 197]

U.S.-RVN penetration of government, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against (see also Congressional resolution on Southeast Asia policy; Gulf of Tonkin resolution), 60 [Pg. 60 includes portions of Doc. 33 and Doc. 34], 62 [Pg. 62 is part of Doc. 35] accelerated program of actions, 692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319]-693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 714 [Pg. 714 is part of Doc. 331]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332], 734 [Pg. 734 is part of Doc. 339]-736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]

air strikes: administration discussions re, 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 342]-751 [Pg. 751 is part of Doc. 343], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

demonstrative strikes, 458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 199]

JCS position, 584 [Pg. 584 is part of Doc. 252]-585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253], 588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 254], 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 343]

Lodge’s recommendations, 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 148], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 148]-308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 326 [Pg. 326 is part of Doc. 154], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 157]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 157]

orchestrated air attack, 690 [Pg. 690 is part of Doc. 319], 691 [Pg. 691 is part of Doc. 319]-692 [Pg. 692 is part of Doc. 319]

single saturation raid, 182 [Pg. 182 includes portions of Doc. 90 and Doc. 91]-183 [Pg. 183 is part of Doc. 91]

Vietnamese (RVN) role in, 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 318], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 318]

application of power issue, 459 [Pg. 459 is part of Doc. 200]-461 [Pg. 461 includes portions of Doc. 200 and Doc. 201]

Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 393]-882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 402]-886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

Canadian positioon, 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183]

carrot-stick approach, 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 108]

cease-fire goal, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14]

civilian government’s role, 947 [Pg. 947 is part of Doc. 425]

communist insurgency, impact on, 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120], 252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 185]

contingency planning, 63 [Pg. 63 is part of Doc. 36], 75 [Pg. 75 is part of Doc. 44]-77 [Pg. 77 includes portions of Doc. 44 and Doc. 45], 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57]-99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 66]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 66], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 84], 167 [Pg. 167 includes portions of Doc. 84 and Doc. 85], 184 [Pg. 184 includes portions of Doc. 91 and Doc. 92]-185 [Pg. 185 includes portions of Doc. 92 and Doc. 93], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 101], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108]-229 [Pg. 229 includes portions of Doc. 108 and Doc. 109], 308 [Pg. 308 includes portions of Doc. 148 and Doc. 149], 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 201]

“controlled escalation” scenario, 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426]-957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]

covert operations, 154 [Pg. 154 is part of Doc. 84], 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 120], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 148], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 163], 372 [Pg. 372 is part of Doc. 172] Defense-CIA plan for, 4 [Pg. 4 includes portions of Doc. 3 and Doc. 4]-5 [Pg. 5 includes portions of Doc. 4 and Doc. 5]

JCS assessment of, 338 [Pg. 338 includes portions of Doc. 160 and Doc. 161]-340 [Pg. 340 includes portions of Doc. 161 and Doc. 162]

Lodge’s position, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94]

McNamara’s position, 152 [Pg. 152 is part of Doc. 83], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86]

overt acknowledgment of, possible, 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313]

resumption following Gulf of Tonkin events, 646 [Pg. 646 includes portions of Doc. 299 and Doc. 300]-647 [Pg. 647 includes portions of Doc. 300 and Doc. 301], 663 [Pg. 663 is part of Doc. 307], 693 [Pg. 693 includes portions of Doc. 319 and Doc. 320], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 342], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 345]

Taylor’s positron, 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 408]

cross-border operations and, 226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108]-227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108]

Cuban situation and, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 61]-106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62]

deniability issue, 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57]-98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 57], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 148]-307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 148], 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 149], 349 [Pg. 349 includes portions of Doc. 166 and Doc. 167]

DeSoto patrols. See Naval operations below.

destruction of DRV will and capabilities, 437 [Pg. 437 is part of Doc. 191]-440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192], 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 199], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 331]

economic initiatives, 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127]

“fast, unyielding pressure” option. See under NSC Working Group on Vietnam.

French position, 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115], 520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]-521 [Pg. 521 includes portions of Doc. 217 and Doc. 218] Ball-De Gaulle meeting, 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 193], 449 [Pg. 449 is part of Doc. 196]-450 [Pg. 450 includes portions of Doc. 196 and Doc. 197], 464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]-470 [Pg. 470 is part of Doc. 202]

governmental stability in RVN and, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]-839 [Pg. 839 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383], 895 [Pg. 895 is part of Doc. 407]-896 [Pg. 896 includes portions of Doc. 407 and Doc. 408], 899 [Pg. 899 includes portions of Doc. 408 and Doc. 409]-900 [Pg. 900 is part of Doc. 409]

graduated action plan, Sharp’s positron on, 930 [Pg. 930 is part of Doc. 419]-932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]

Gulf of Tonkin events, retaliation for. See under Gulf of Tonkin events.

harbors as targets, 599 [Pg. 599 is part of Doc. 266], 605 [Pg. 605 includes portions of Doc. 272 and Doc. 273]

Hilsman’s position, 181 [Pg. 181 is part of Doc. 90]

Humphrey’s positron, 483 [Pg. 483 is part of Doc. 208]

implications of, 782 [Pg. 782 is part of Doc. 357]-785 [Pg. 785 includes portions of Doc. 357 and Doc. 358], 880 [Pg. 880 is part of Doc. 398], 906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]-907 [Pg. 907 is part of Doc. 412]

infiltration lines, focus on, 962 [Pg. 962 is part of Doc. 430]-964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

islands, actions against, 598 [Pg. 598 is part of Doc. 266], 603 [Pg. 603 includes portions of Doc. 270 and Doc. 271]

JCS recommendations for actions, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]-850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 388], 854 [Pg. 854 is part of Doc. 388]-857 [Pg. 857 is part of Doc. 388], 882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401]-884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 401]

Johnson’s doubts about, 400 [Pg. 400 includes portions of Doc. 184 and Doc. 185]-401 [Pg. 401 is part of Doc. 185]

Laotian route, 369 [Pg. 369 is part of Doc. 172]-370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172], 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]

“live plan” status, 272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129]

McCone’s position, 125 [Pg. 125 is part of Doc. 68]-126 [Pg. 126 is part of Doc. 68], 127 [Pg. 127 is part of Doc. 68]

McNamara report recommendations, 158 [Pg. 158 is part of Doc. 84]-160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 84]

military options, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57]-98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 57], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 66], 116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 66]-118 [Pg. 118 is part of Doc. 66], 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 84], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86], 370 [Pg. 370 is part of Doc. 172]-371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172], 676 [Pg. 676 is part of Doc. 313]-678 [Pg. 678 is part of Doc. 313], 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317], 713 [Pg. 713 includes portions of Doc. 330 and Doc. 331]-717 [Pg. 717 includes portions of Doc. 331 and Doc. 332]

military pressures short of combat operations, 463 [Pg. 463 is part of Doc. 201]-464 [Pg. 464 includes portions of Doc. 201 and Doc. 202]

military timing factors, 444 [Pg. 444 is part of Doc. 193]

naval operations (DeSoto patrols), 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120]-253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127], 312 [Pg. 312 includes portions of Doc. 149 and Doc. 150], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 361], 812 [Pg. 812 includes portions of Doc. 369 and Doc. 370] resumption following Gulf of Tonkin events, 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 342], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 345], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]-781 [Pg. 781 is part of Doc. 356], 794 [Pg. 794 is part of Doc. 361]

suspension of, 669 [Pg. 669 is part of Doc. 310]

Taylor’s positron, 883 [Pg. 883 is part of Doc. 401]-884 [Pg. 884 is part of Doc. 401]

usefulness of, 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]

Vietnamese (RVN) forces for, 796 [Pg. 796 includes portions of Doc. 362 and Doc. 363]-797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364]

negotiations, relation to, 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 216]-520 [Pg. 520 includes portions of Doc. 216 and Doc. 217]

nuclear weapons issue, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118], 250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 174], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 186], 679 [Pg. 679 includes portions of Doc. 313 and Doc. 314]-680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315]

objectives and courses of action, 300 [Pg. 300 is part of Doc. 145] JCS position, 436 [Pg. 436 includes portions of Doc. 190 and Doc. 191]-440 [Pg. 440 includes portions of Doc. 191 and Doc. 192]

Taylor’s positron, 457 [Pg. 457 is part of Doc. 199]-458 [Pg. 458 is part of Doc. 199]

overt actions by U.S., political moves in support of, 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 102]-213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

political moves in support of military actions, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13]-28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14], 225 [Pg. 225 is part of Doc. 108]-226 [Pg. 226 is part of Doc. 108] Forrestal’s proposals, 206 [Pg. 206 includes portions of Doc. 101 and Doc. 102]-213 [Pg. 213 includes portions of Doc. 102 and Doc. 103]

JCS position, 214 [Pg. 214 is part of Doc. 103]

Lodge’s position, 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 148]

refinement of plans, 242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117]-243 [Pg. 243 is part of Doc. 117]

political objectives, 159 [Pg. 159 is part of Doc. 84]-160 [Pg. 160 is part of Doc. 84]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia statements on, 970 [Pg. 970 is part of Doc. 433]-971 [Pg. 971 is part of Doc. 433], 972 [Pg. 972 is part of Doc. 433]-973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 433]

positive inducements for DRV, 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194]-447 [Pg. 447 includes portions of Doc. 194 and Doc. 195]

“progressive action and talk” option. See under NSC Working Group on Vietnam.

provocative operations, 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 342]-749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]

psychological benefits, 318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156], 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178], 407 [Pg. 407 is part of Doc. 186], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187], 456 [Pg. 456 is part of Doc. 198], 897 [Pg. 897 is part of Doc. 408], 952 [Pg. 952 is part of Doc. 426]

public awareness issue, 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 163]

reaction times for operations, 150 [Pg. 150 is part of Doc. 82], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 84], 170 [Pg. 170 is part of Doc. 86], 171 [Pg. 171 is part of Doc. 86], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 101], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 169 [Pg. 169 is part of Doc. 85] Bien Hoa attack, 873 [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 393]-882 [Pg. 882 includes portions of Doc. 400 and Doc. 401], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 402]-886 [Pg. 886 includes portions of Doc. 402 and Doc. 403]

Brink Hotel bombing, 1038 [Pg. 1038 is part of Doc. 465], 1043 [Pg. 1043 includes portions of Doc. 467 and Doc. 468]-1044 [Pg. 1044 includes portions of Doc. 468 and Doc. 469], 1045 [Pg. 1045 is part of Doc. 469]-1046 [Pg. 1046 includes portions of Doc. 469 and Doc. 470], 1049 [Pg. 1049 is part of Doc. 472], 1050 [Pg. 1050 is part of Doc. 473], 1051 [Pg. 1051 is part of Doc. 474]-1053 [Pg. 1053 includes portions of Doc. 475 and Doc. 476], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477], 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]-1065 [Pg. 1065 is part of Doc. 479]

Johnson’s position, 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]-1059 [Pg. 1059 is part of Doc. 477]

Lodge’s position, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55]-95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 55]

Rostow’s position, 15 [Pg. 15 includes portions of Doc. 8 and Doc. 9]-16 [Pg. 16 includes portions of Doc. 9 and Doc. 10], 72 [Pg. 72 includes portions of Doc. 42 and Doc. 43]-74 [Pg. 74 is part of Doc. 43]

Rusk-Khanh consultation re, 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118]

scenarios for: basic recommended scenario, 374 [Pg. 374 includes portions of Doc. 172 and Doc. 173]-377 [Pg. 377 is part of Doc. 173]

Defense Department scenario, 363 [Pg. 363 is part of Doc. 171]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 171]

Soviet response, 105 [Pg. 105 is part of Doc. 61]-106 [Pg. 106 includes portions of Doc. 61 and Doc. 62], 117 [Pg. 117 is part of Doc. 66], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 171]-367 [Pg. 367 is part of Doc. 171], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]

surrender terms, 399 [Pg. 399 is part of Doc. 184]

target selection, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 57], 113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 66]-114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 66], 342 [Pg. 342 is part of Doc. 163], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172], 438 [Pg. 438 is part of Doc. 191], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 303]-650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 303], 715 [Pg. 715 is part of Doc. 331]

Taylor’s instructions re, 976 [Pg. 976 is part of Doc. 435]-977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 435]

tit-for-tat military actions, 186 [Pg. 186 includes portions of Doc. 93 and Doc. 94], 227 [Pg. 227 is part of Doc. 108], 241 [Pg. 241 is part of Doc. 116]-242 [Pg. 242 includes portions of Doc. 116 and Doc. 117], 271 [Pg. 271 is part of Doc. 128]-272 [Pg. 272 includes portions of Doc. 128 and Doc. 129], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313], 748 [Pg. 748 is part of Doc. 342], 755 [Pg. 755 includes portions of Doc. 343 and Doc. 344], 759 [Pg. 759 is part of Doc. 345], 784 [Pg. 784 is part of Doc. 357] Bien Hoa attack and, 874 [Pg. 874 is part of Doc. 394]-875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395], 877 [Pg. 877 is part of Doc. 396]

Khanh’s position, 577 [Pg. 577 is part of Doc. 249]-578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249]

Position Paper on Southeast Asia statements on, 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 433]

U.N. actions by U.S. re, 376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 173]

U.N. response, 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]

U.S. consultations with allies, 108 [Pg. 108 includes portions of Doc. 63 and Doc. 64]-109 [Pg. 109 is part of Doc. 64], 209 [Pg. 209 is part of Doc. 102], 394 [Pg. 394 includes portions of Doc. 181 and Doc. 182]-396 [Pg. 396 includes portions of Doc. 182 and Doc. 183], 445 [Pg. 445 is part of Doc. 193], 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]-981 [Pg. 981 includes portions of Doc. 437 and Doc. 438]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam and, 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 55], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]-1058 [Pg. 1058 is part of Doc. 477], 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 1065 [Pg. 1065 is part of Doc. 479]

U.S.-DRV contacts and, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 157]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 157], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 426]-954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 426]

U.S. presidential policies and, 174 [Pg. 174 is part of Doc. 89]-175 [Pg. 175 includes portions of Doc. 89 and Doc. 90], 878 [Pg. 878 includes portions of Doc. 396 and Doc. 397]

U.S. protection of RVN against reprisal, 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 152], 328 [Pg. 328 includes portions of Doc. 155 and Doc. 156], 334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 157], 403 [Pg. 403 is part of Doc. 185]-404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]

U.S. public statements on, 189 [Pg. 189 includes portions of Doc. 94 and Doc. 95]-190 [Pg. 190 is part of Doc. 95]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 27 [Pg. 27 is part of Doc. 13], 28 [Pg. 28 includes portions of Doc. 13 and Doc. 14]-31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 49 [Pg. 49 includes portions of Doc. 26 and Doc. 27], 519 [Pg. 519 is part of Doc. 216], 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 687 [Pg. 687 is part of Doc. 318], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 318], 977 [Pg. 977 is part of Doc. 435] Khanh’s attitude toward, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249], 595 [Pg. 595 is part of Doc. 263]

reports on, 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 303]-651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Taylor’s proposal for, 567 [Pg. 567 is part of Doc. 243]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 243], 570 [Pg. 570 is part of Doc. 245]

U.S. authorization of, 587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254]-588 [Pg. 588 is part of Doc. 254]

Vietnamese (DRV) air defenses, 421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187]-422 [Pg. 422 includes portions of Doc. 187 and Doc. 188]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic perception of U.S. intentions, 561 [Pg. 561 includes portions of Doc. 239 and Doc. 240]-562 [Pg. 562 includes portions of Doc. 240 and Doc. 241]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic relations and, 81 [Pg. 81 is part of Doc. 47]-82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14]-31 [Pg. 31 is part of Doc. 14], 34 [Pg. 34 is part of Doc. 16], 228 [Pg. 228 is part of Doc. 108], 329 [Pg. 329 is part of Doc. 156] Cline’s assessment of, 963 [Pg. 963 is part of Doc. 430]-964 [Pg. 964 includes portions of Doc. 430 and Doc. 431]

estimates re, 97 [Pg. 97 is part of Doc. 57], 112 [Pg. 112 is part of Doc. 66]-113 [Pg. 113 is part of Doc. 66], 350 [Pg. 350 is part of Doc. 167], 366 [Pg. 366 is part of Doc. 171]-368 [Pg. 368 is part of Doc. 171], 378 [Pg. 378 is part of Doc. 174]-380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175], 585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]-587 [Pg. 587 includes portions of Doc. 253 and Doc. 254], 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]-906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

Saigon, possible attack on, 409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186]

U.S. response to, 98 [Pg. 98 is part of Doc. 57]-99 [Pg. 99 includes portions of Doc. 57 and Doc. 58], 114 [Pg. 114 is part of Doc. 66]-116 [Pg. 116 is part of Doc. 66], 205 [Pg. 205 is part of Doc. 101], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172]

Vietnamese (DRV) concerns about, 82 [Pg. 82 includes portions of Doc. 47 and Doc. 48]-83 [Pg. 83 includes portions of Doc. 48 and Doc. 49]

Vietnamese (RVN) pressure on U.S. for, 558 [Pg. 558 includes portions of Doc. 238 and Doc. 239], 563 [Pg. 563 includes portions of Doc. 241 and Doc. 242]-568 [Pg. 568 is part of Doc. 243], 569 [Pg. 569 includes portions of Doc. 244 and Doc. 245]-571 [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 306]-659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 306]

war footing for Vietnam and, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 137], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 140], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 152]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152]

warnings of attacks, 343 [Pg. 343 is part of Doc. 163], 354 [Pg. 354 is part of Doc. 168]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 168], 375 [Pg. 375 is part of Doc. 173]-376 [Pg. 376 is part of Doc. 173], 410 [Pg. 410 is part of Doc. 186]

world reaction, 30 [Pg. 30 is part of Doc. 14]

Vietnam (DRV)-U.S. contacts, 9 [Pg. 9 is part of Doc. 8], 395n [Pg. 395 is part of Doc. 182], 1052 [Pg. 1052 includes portions of Doc. 474 and Doc. 475] Canadian intermediary, decision on, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124]

Gulf of Tonkin events, messages re, 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]-653 [Pg. 653 is part of Doc. 304]

instructions for intermediary, 281 [Pg. 281 is part of Doc. 134]-282 [Pg. 282 is part of Doc. 134], 348 [Pg. 348 includes portions of Doc. 165 and Doc. 166], 351 [Pg. 351 includes portions of Doc. 167 and Doc. 168]-355 [Pg. 355 is part of Doc. 168], 978 [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]-979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437]

Khanh not informed of, 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141]

Lodge’s recommendations, 249 [Pg. 249 is part of Doc. 120]-250 [Pg. 250 is part of Doc. 120], 306 [Pg. 306 is part of Doc. 148], 307 [Pg. 307 is part of Doc. 148], 327 [Pg. 327 includes portions of Doc. 154 and Doc. 155], 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 157]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 157], 335 [Pg. 335 is part of Doc. 158]

Pearson contacted about, 253 [Pg. 253 includes portions of Doc. 120 and Doc. 121], 270 [Pg. 270 is part of Doc. 127]

Seaborn’s meetings with DRV officials, 525 [Pg. 525 includes portions of Doc. 221 and Doc. 222]-526 [Pg. 526 includes portions of Doc. 222 and Doc. 223], 978n [Pg. 978 includes portions of Doc. 435 and Doc. 436]

Thant’s efforts re, 957 [Pg. 957 includes portions of Doc. 426 and Doc. 427]-958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

U.S.-Canadian consultations re, 543 [Pg. 543 is part of Doc. 230]-544 [Pg. 544 includes portions of Doc. 230 and Doc. 231], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 232]

U.S. operations against DRV and, 333 [Pg. 333 is part of Doc. 157]-334 [Pg. 334 is part of Doc. 157], 953 [Pg. 953 is part of Doc. 426]-954 [Pg. 954 is part of Doc. 426]

Vietnamese (DRV) interpretation of U.S. signals, 508 [Pg. 508 is part of Doc. 214]

war footing for Vietnam and, 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 140], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141]

Vietnam, Republic of: See also: Civil Guard

Civilian government of Vietnam

Communist insurgency

Counterinsurgency operations

High National Council

International conference on Vietnam, proposed

Khanh coup

Khanh government

Media coverage of Vietnam

Minh government

Montagnards

Neutral solution for Vietnam

Political situation in Vietnam

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces

Saigon headings

Self-Defense Corps

Third country assistance for Vietnam

U.S. economic assistance to Vietnam

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam

U.S. Mission in Vietnam

War footing for Vietnam

agricultural situation, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28], 501 [Pg. 501 is part of Doc. 214]-502 [Pg. 502 is part of Doc. 214]

alliance with Republic of China and Republic of Korea, proposed, 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120]

Amnesty (Chieu Hoi) program, 20 [Pg. 20 is part of Doc. 10]-21 [Pg. 21 is part of Doc. 10], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28]

anti-American sentiment in, 746 [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342], 804 [Pg. 804 is part of Doc. 366], 809 [Pg. 809 is part of Doc. 368]

anti-communist groups in, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187]

Buddhist-Catholic conflict, 315 [Pg. 315 is part of Doc. 152]-316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 152], 321 [Pg. 321 is part of Doc. 152], 324 [Pg. 324 is part of Doc. 154], 325 [Pg. 325 is part of Doc. 154], 347 [Pg. 347 is part of Doc. 165], 386 [Pg. 386 is part of Doc. 178], 413 [Pg. 413 is part of Doc. 187], 415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]-416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 229]-541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229], 658 [Pg. 658 is part of Doc. 306]

Catholics, 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187], 825 [Pg. 825 includes portions of Doc. 375 and Doc. 376]

Chinese minority, 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 448]-1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 448]

Civilian Irregular Defense Group (CIDG) program, 786 [Pg. 786 is part of Doc. 358]

communist victory, consequences of, 13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 8], 918 [Pg. 918 is part of Doc. 418]

Dai Viet party, 138 [Pg. 138 is part of Doc. 75], 719 [Pg. 719 is part of Doc. 333], 720 [Pg. 720 is part of Doc. 333], 725 [Pg. 725 is part of Doc. 336]-726 [Pg. 726 is part of Doc. 336]

economic situation, 19 [Pg. 19 is part of Doc. 10], 88 [Pg. 88 is part of Doc. 51], 659 [Pg. 659 is part of Doc. 306]

Flooding problem, 901 [Pg. 901 is part of Doc. 410]-902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411], 908 [Pg. 908 is part of Doc. 413]-909 [Pg. 909 includes portions of Doc. 413 and Doc. 414]

France, relations with, 46 [Pg. 46 is part of Doc. 24]-47 [Pg. 47 includes portions of Doc. 24 and Doc. 25], 53 [Pg. 53 is part of Doc. 29], 188 [Pg. 188 is part of Doc. 94], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112]-233 [Pg. 233 is part of Doc. 112], 239 [Pg. 239 is part of Doc. 115]-240 [Pg. 240 is part of Doc. 115], 245 [Pg. 245 is part of Doc. 119]-246 [Pg. 246 is part of Doc. 119], 319 [Pg. 319 is part of Doc. 152]

French actions against, alleged, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18]-38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 58 [Pg. 58 is part of Doc. 32], 264 [Pg. 264 is part of Doc. 125], 265 [Pg. 265 includes portions of Doc. 125 and Doc. 126], 285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145], 380 [Pg. 380 includes portions of Doc. 174 and Doc. 175]-381 [Pg. 381 includes portions of Doc. 175 and Doc. 176]

Hoa Hao party, 17n [Pg. 17 is part of Doc. 10], 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28], 1005 [Pg. 1005 is part of Doc. 448]

intelligentsia of, 238 [Pg. 238 is part of Doc. 114], 414 [Pg. 414 is part of Doc. 187]-415 [Pg. 415 is part of Doc. 187]

labor movement, 788 [Pg. 788 is part of Doc. 359], 1006 [Pg. 1006 is part of Doc. 448]-1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 448]

land reform, 52 [Pg. 52 is part of Doc. 28], 499 [Pg. 499 is part of Doc. 213]

partitioning of, proposed, 12 [Pg. 12 is part of Doc. 8]-13 [Pg. 13 is part of Doc. 8]

media of, 101 [Pg. 101 is part of Doc. 58], 316 [Pg. 316 is part of Doc. 152]

morale problem, 488 [Pg. 488 is part of Doc. 210]-489 [Pg. 489 is part of Doc. 210], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214]-505 [Pg. 505 is part of Doc. 214]

National Police, 162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84]-163 [Pg. 163 is part of Doc. 84]

National Service Act, 143 [Pg. 143 is part of Doc. 78]

state of emergency, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249], 651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

strategic importance to West, 148 [Pg. 148 is part of Doc. 81], 535 [Pg. 535 is part of Doc. 227]-536 [Pg. 536 is part of Doc. 227], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

students, 1007 [Pg. 1007 is part of Doc. 448]-1008 [Pg. 1008 is part of Doc. 448]

U.S.-communist mutual withdrawal, proposed, 128 [Pg. 128 is part of Doc. 69]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam, 94 [Pg. 94 includes portions of Doc. 54 and Doc. 55], 95 [Pg. 95 is part of Doc. 55], 96 [Pg. 96 is part of Doc. 56], 165 [Pg. 165 is part of Doc. 84]-166 [Pg. 166 is part of Doc. 84], 371 [Pg. 371 is part of Doc. 172], 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188], 503 [Pg. 503 is part of Doc. 214], 677 [Pg. 677 is part of Doc. 313], 973 [Pg. 973 is part of Doc. 433], 1057 [Pg. 1057 is part of Doc. 477]-1058 [Pg. 1058 is part of Doc. 477], 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479], 1065 [Pg. 1065 is part of Doc. 479]

Vietnamese (DRV) invasion of, possible, 296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]-297 [Pg. 297 is part of Doc. 143]

war game on Vietnam, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]

Vietnam Committee. See Sullivan Committee.

Vinh Cheo, fighting at, 549 [Pg. 549 is part of Doc. 234], 551 [Pg. 551 is part of Doc. 234]

Vinson, Carl, 615n [Pg. 615 is part of Doc. 280]

Vo Nguyen Giap, Gen., 296n [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143], 446 [Pg. 446 includes portions of Doc. 193 and Doc. 194], 546 [Pg. 546 is part of Doc. 232], 866 [Pg. 866 is part of Doc. 392]

Voice of America, 382 [Pg. 382 is part of Doc. 177], 383 [Pg. 383 is part of Doc. 177]

Vu Van Mau, 64 [Pg. 64 is part of Doc. 37], 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 694 [Pg. 694 is part of Doc. 320], 698 [Pg. 698 includes portions of Doc. 321 and Doc. 322], 704 [Pg. 704 is part of Doc. 325], 775n [Pg. 775 is part of Doc. 354], 797 [Pg. 797 includes portions of Doc. 363 and Doc. 364], 831 [Pg. 831 is part of Doc. 378], 833 [Pg. 833 is part of Doc. 379], 836 [Pg. 836 includes portions of Doc. 380 and Doc. 381], 841 [Pg. 841 includes portions of Doc. 384 and Doc. 385]

Vung Tau Charter, 671 [Pg. 671 is part of Doc. 312], 682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]-684 [Pg. 684 includes portions of Doc. 317 and Doc. 318], 703 [Pg. 703 includes portions of Doc. 324 and Doc. 325], 709 [Pg. 709 is part of Doc. 329], 711 [Pg. 711 is part of Doc. 330]

Walker, Gordon, 986 [Pg. 986 is part of Doc. 441]

Waller, John K., 979 [Pg. 979 includes portions of Doc. 436 and Doc. 437], 980 [Pg. 980 is part of Doc. 437]

War footing for Vietnam, 408 [Pg. 408 is part of Doc. 186]-409 [Pg. 409 is part of Doc. 186] administration discussions re, 287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137]-290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Diplomatic actions, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145]-302 [Pg. 302 is part of Doc. 145]

Felt’s position, 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 142]-296 [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

Khanh’s abandonment of, 578 [Pg. 578 is part of Doc. 249]-579 [Pg. 579 includes portions of Doc. 249 and Doc. 250]

Khanh’s proposal for, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-287 [Pg. 287 includes portions of Doc. 136 and Doc. 137], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 152]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152] clarification, U.S. request for, 291 [Pg. 291 includes portions of Doc. 139 and Doc. 140]-293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]

Lodge’s assessment of, 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141]-294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 305 [Pg. 305 includes portions of Doc. 147 and Doc. 148]

national mobilization proposal, 142 [Pg. 142 is part of Doc. 78]-145 [Pg. 145 includes portions of Doc. 78 and Doc. 79], 161 [Pg. 161 is part of Doc. 84]-162 [Pg. 162 is part of Doc. 84], 202 [Pg. 202 is part of Doc. 101]

partial mobilization, possible, 293 [Pg. 293 includes portions of Doc. 140 and Doc. 141], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141]

peasants, programs for, 289 [Pg. 289 is part of Doc. 138]-290 [Pg. 290 includes portions of Doc. 138 and Doc. 139]

Saigon evacuation plan, 284 [Pg. 284 includes portions of Doc. 135 and Doc. 136]-285 [Pg. 285 is part of Doc. 136], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 140], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 142]

urban centers, focus on, 301 [Pg. 301 is part of Doc. 145]

U.S. operations against DRV and, 288 [Pg. 288 is part of Doc. 137], 292 [Pg. 292 is part of Doc. 140], 294 [Pg. 294 is part of Doc. 141], 317 [Pg. 317 is part of Doc. 152]-318 [Pg. 318 is part of Doc. 152]

War game on Vietnam, 198 [Pg. 198 is part of Doc. 99]-199 [Pg. 199 includes portions of Doc. 99 and Doc. 100], 404 [Pg. 404 is part of Doc. 185]

Waters, Gen. John K., 295 [Pg. 295 is part of Doc. 142]

Westmoreland, Gen. William C., 55 [Pg. 55 is part of Doc. 30], 504 [Pg. 504 is part of Doc. 214], 668 [Pg. 668 is part of Doc. 309], 688 [Pg. 688 is part of Doc. 318], 728n [Pg. 728 is part of Doc. 337], 945 [Pg. 945 includes portions of Doc. 424 and Doc. 425], 959 [Pg. 959 is part of Doc. 428], 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420], 987 [Pg. 987 is part of Doc. 442], 1009 [Pg. 1009 includes portions of Doc. 448 and Doc. 449] Air Force, RVN, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

civilian government of Vietnam, “Young Turks” coup attempt against, 1023 [Pg. 1023 includes portions of Doc. 454 and Doc. 455], 1024 [Pg. 1024 is part of Doc. 455]

communist insurgency,: Bien Hoa airfield, attack on, 873n [Pg. 873 is part of Doc. 393]

victory in Vietnam, possible, 296n [Pg. 296 includes portions of Doc. 142 and Doc. 143]

counterinsurgency operations: airfield security, 680 [Pg. 680 includes portions of Doc. 314 and Doc. 315], 681n [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]

assessment of, 736 [Pg. 736 includes portions of Doc. 339 and Doc. 340]-742 [Pg. 742 includes portions of Doc. 340 and Doc. 341]

command and control system, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 187]

critical provinces, focus on, 424 [Pg. 424 is part of Doc. 188]-426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188], 443 [Pg. 443 is part of Doc. 193]

deterioration of RVN position, 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188]

National Pacification Plan, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187]

operational effectiveness, 418 [Pg. 418 is part of Doc. 187]

population control, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187]

Saigon-area initiative, 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 340]

Gulf of Tonkin events, 627 [Pg. 627 is part of Doc. 287], 628 [Pg. 628 includes portions of Doc. 287 and Doc. 288]

Honolulu meetings (June 1964), 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187]-421 [Pg. 421 is part of Doc. 187], 423 [Pg. 423 is part of Doc. 188], 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189], 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

U. A. Johnson’s assessment of, 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 422]

Khanh government: alternatives to Khanh, 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 764 [Pg. 764 is part of Doc. 347], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

reorganization program, 708 [Pg. 708 is part of Doc. 328]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into: intelligence operations, 428 [Pg. 428 includes portions of Doc. 188 and Doc. 189]

timetable for, 433 [Pg. 433 is part of Doc. 189]

McNamara-Taylor mission (May 1964), 313 [Pg. 313 includes portions of Doc. 150 and Doc. 151]

Military Assistance Command: appointment as commander, 59 [Pg. 59 is part of Doc. 33], 61 [Pg. 61 includes portions of Doc. 34 and Doc. 35], 200 [Pg. 200 is part of Doc. 100], 223 [Pg. 223 is part of Doc. 107]

coordination with U.S. agencies, 387 [Pg. 387 is part of Doc. 178]

Republic of Vietnam Armed Forces: housing problem, 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187]

intelligence organization, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

logistic system, 740 [Pg. 740 is part of Doc. 340]

manpower situation, 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 340]

morale problems, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 187], 420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187], 737 [Pg. 737 is part of Doc. 340]

recruiting for, 419 [Pg. 419 is part of Doc. 187]-420 [Pg. 420 is part of Doc. 187], 541 [Pg. 541 is part of Doc. 229]

resource management, 417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 187]

strategic hamlet program, 416 [Pg. 416 is part of Doc. 187]-417 [Pg. 417 is part of Doc. 187]

Taylor’s conflict with generals, 1041 [Pg. 1041 is part of Doc. 467]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam, 426 [Pg. 426 is part of Doc. 188]

U.S. governmental involvement in Vietnam, 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 170], 427 [Pg. 427 is part of Doc. 188], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192]

U.S. information programs and policies in Vietnam: communications czar, 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189]-431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189]

psychological warfare campaign, 429 [Pg. 429 is part of Doc. 189], 430 [Pg. 430 is part of Doc. 189]

U.S. military assistance to Vietnam, preconditions for, 861 [Pg. 861 includes portions of Doc. 390 and Doc. 391]-863 [Pg. 863 is part of Doc. 391]

U.S. military involvement in Vietnam: advisory effort, 738 [Pg. 738 is part of Doc. 340]

force increase to 22,000, 547 [Pg. 547 is part of Doc. 233]-548 [Pg. 548 includes portions of Doc. 233 and Doc. 234]

Special Forces, 739 [Pg. 739 is part of Doc. 340]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against: Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]

Governmental stability in RVN and, 309 [Pg. 309 is part of Doc. 149], 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]-839 [Pg. 839 includes portions of Doc. 382 and Doc. 383]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 1050 [Pg. 1050 is part of Doc. 473], 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]

target selection, 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 303]-650 [Pg. 650 is part of Doc. 303]

U.S.-RVN consultations re, 630 [Pg. 630 includes portions of Doc. 288 and Doc. 289], 649 [Pg. 649 is part of Doc. 303]-651 [Pg. 651 includes portions of Doc. 303 and Doc. 304]

Wheeler, Gen. Earle G., 134 [Pg. 134 includes portions of Doc. 74 and Doc. 75], 232 [Pg. 232 includes portions of Doc. 111 and Doc. 112], 244 [Pg. 244 is part of Doc. 118], 248 [Pg. 248 includes portions of Doc. 119 and Doc. 120], 251 [Pg. 251 is part of Doc. 120]-252 [Pg. 252 is part of Doc. 120], 259 [Pg. 259 is part of Doc. 124], 262 [Pg. 262 includes portions of Doc. 124 and Doc. 125], 475 [Pg. 475 is part of Doc. 206], 571n [Pg. 571 includes portions of Doc. 245 and Doc. 246], 662 [Pg. 662 includes portions of Doc. 306 and Doc. 307] civilian government of Vietnam, “Young Turks” coup attempt against, 1018 [Pg. 1018 includes portions of Doc. 452 and Doc. 453]

counterinsurgency operations: airfield security, 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400]

JCS recommendations for actions, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]-850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 388]

Taylor-Johnson meeting re, 967 [Pg. 967 is part of Doc. 432], 968 [Pg. 968 is part of Doc. 432]

Gulf of Tonkin events: congressional leaders, briefings for, 617 [Pg. 617 is part of Doc. 280]

Maddox, attack on (Aug. 2), 590 [Pg. 590 includes portions of Doc. 257 and Doc. 258], 602 [Pg. 602 includes portions of Doc. 269 and Doc. 270]

Maddox and C. Turner Joy, attack on (Aug. 4), 604 [Pg. 604 includes portions of Doc. 271 and Doc. 272]

Morton and Edwards, possible attack on (Sept. 18), 778 [Pg. 778 is part of Doc. 356], 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]

retaliations for attacks, 593 [Pg. 593 includes portions of Doc. 261 and Doc. 262], 606 [Pg. 606 includes portions of Doc. 273 and Doc. 274], 609 [Pg. 609 is part of Doc. 276], 624 [Pg. 624 is part of Doc. 284], 626 [Pg. 626 is part of Doc. 286]

U.S. patrols, resumption of (Aug. 2), 591 [Pg. 591 includes portions of Doc. 258 and Doc. 259]

Gulf of Tonkin resolution, 642 [Pg. 642 includes portions of Doc. 296 and Doc. 297]

Khanh government, coup attempt against (Sept. 13), 766n [Pg. 766 is part of Doc. 349], 769 [Pg. 769 includes portions of Doc. 350 and Doc. 351]

Laos, U.S.-RVN incursions into, 574n [Pg. 574 includes portions of Doc. 247 and Doc. 248], 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253]

National Security Action Memorandum 314, 749 [Pg. 749 includes portions of Doc. 342 and Doc. 343]-750 [Pg. 750 is part of Doc. 343], 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343], 754 [Pg. 754 is part of Doc. 343]

NSC Working Group on Vietnam, 938n [Pg. 938 includes portions of Doc. 422 and Doc. 423], 943 [Pg. 943 is part of Doc. 424], 958 [Pg. 958 includes portions of Doc. 427 and Doc. 428]

courses of action paper, 932 [Pg. 932 includes portions of Doc. 419 and Doc. 420]-935 [Pg. 935 includes portions of Doc. 420 and Doc. 421]

Taylor’s visits to Washington, 746n [Pg. 746 includes portions of Doc. 341 and Doc. 342]. 749, 965 [Pg. 965 includes portions of Doc. 431 and Doc. 432]

U.S. policy in Vietnam, 752 [Pg. 752 is part of Doc. 343]-753 [Pg. 753 is part of Doc. 343]

Vietnam (DRV), U.S.-RVN operations against, 583 [Pg. 583 includes portions of Doc. 251 and Doc. 252]-585 [Pg. 585 includes portions of Doc. 252 and Doc. 253] Bien Hoa attack, proposed retaliation for, 875 [Pg. 875 includes portions of Doc. 394 and Doc. 395]-876 [Pg. 876 includes portions of Doc. 395 and Doc. 396], 881 [Pg. 881 includes portions of Doc. 399 and Doc. 400], 885 [Pg. 885 is part of Doc. 402]

governmental stability in RVN and, 838 [Pg. 838 includes portions of Doc. 381 and Doc. 382]

graduated action plan, 930 [Pg. 930 is part of Doc. 419]

JCS recommendations for actions, 847 [Pg. 847 is part of Doc. 388]-850 [Pg. 850 is part of Doc. 388]

military options, 681 [Pg. 681 includes portions of Doc. 315 and Doc. 316]-682 [Pg. 682 includes portions of Doc. 316 and Doc. 317]

naval operations, 780 [Pg. 780 is part of Doc. 356]

retaliation for attacks on U.S. personnel, 1050 [Pg. 1050 is part of Doc. 473], 1063 [Pg. 1063 includes portions of Doc. 478 and Doc. 479]-1065 [Pg. 1065 is part of Doc. 479]

U.S. dependents in Vietnam and, 1065 [Pg. 1065 is part of Doc. 479]

Vietnamese (DRV)-Chinese People’s Republic response, 902 [Pg. 902 includes portions of Doc. 410 and Doc. 411]-906 [Pg. 906 includes portions of Doc. 411 and Doc. 412]

Wilson, Donald M., 25 [Pg. 25 is part of Doc. 12], 631 [Pg. 631 is part of Doc. 290]

Wilson, James

Wilson, Col. Jasper, 36 [Pg. 36 is part of Doc. 18], 38 [Pg. 38 is part of Doc. 19], 39 [Pg. 39 is part of Doc. 19], 40n [Pg. 40 is part of Doc. 20], 41n [Pg. 41 is part of Doc. 20]

Xuan. See Mai Huu Xuan, Maj. Gen.

Xung, Gen., 731 [Pg. 731 is part of Doc. 338]

“Young Turks” coup attempt. See under Civilian government of Vietnam.

Yuen Tse-kien, 552n [Pg. 552 includes portions of Doc. 234 and Doc. 235]

Zorthian, Barry, 255 [Pg. 255 is part of Doc. 122], 360 [Pg. 360 is part of Doc. 170], 384 [Pg. 384 is part of Doc. 177], 431 [Pg. 431 is part of Doc. 189], 441 [Pg. 441 is part of Doc. 192], 540 [Pg. 540 is part of Doc. 229], 1026 [Pg. 1026 includes portions of Doc. 456 and Doc. 457], 1039n [Pg. 1039 is part of Doc. 465] communications czar, appointment as, 454 [Pg. 454 is part of Doc. 197], 471 [Pg. 471 is part of Doc. 203]

U. A. Johnson’s assessment of, 937 [Pg. 937 is part of Doc. 422]
